Food Notes
Adding Butter and Creme Fraiche
Ronnybrook Dairy Farm, which sells milk and cream in bottles in the New York area, has introduced butter and creme fraiche.
The sweet butter is very delicate, and the lightly salted version takes the term "lightly" to heart.
Stephen James, an owner of the dairy in Ancramdale, N.Y., says that Ronnybrook uses half as much salt as most commercial butters.
The creme fraiche is thick and mildly tangy.
Both new products are $3 for 8 ounces and are sold at the Union Square Greenmarket; they will soon appear in stores that sell Ronnybrook milk.
At Your Service
Two groups are offering classes this month in restaurant service.
The Art of Restaurant Service, based in Manhattan, has a four-week seminar starting Tuesday, from 3 to 6 P.M., at the Four Seasons Hotel, 57 East 57th Street.
Classes cover many aspects of the restaurant business, including negotiating a lease.
The price for the course is $450.
For information, (212) 645-8303.
The Professional Wine and Service School run by Sterling Vineyards and sponsored by American Express will hold a one-day seminar in New York on March 29 at the Righa Royal Hotel, 151 West 54th Street, from 9 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.
The cost is $150 a student, $250 for two.
For information, (800) 955-5003.
Ethiopian Heat
Afri-Q is a distinctive newcomer among the millions of spicy sauces flooding the grocery shelves.
This ruddy, Ethiopian-style sauce, whose heat is tempered by ingredients at once tart and subtly sweet, has a thick, slightly coarse texture and rich aroma.
Rachel Yohannes, who grew up in Ethiopia, spent months trying to reproduce the flavors she loved.
Berbere, a seasoning that combines a dozen ingredients, including red chilies, rue seeds, bishops weed (ajwan) and black cumin (nigella), is the critical ingredient, but Ms.
Yohannes adds chives, lemon juice and maple syrup, as well as tarragon from her garden in Putnam County, New York.
Afri-Q is delicious brushed on grilled chicken, hamburgers or seafood.
It gives a wake-up call to tofu.
Afri-Q, $4.20 to $5.50 for 9 ounces, is sold at Positively 104th Street, 2725 Broadway (at 104th Street) and Whole Foods, 2421 Broadway (89th Street) in Manhattan.
It is available at Karen's Kitchen, 55 Main Street, Cold Spring, N.Y.; at Sprouts Towne, Route 22, Brewster, N.Y., and by mail from Adriana's Caravan in Brooklyn, (800) 316-0820, and Country Cottage Savories, Jefferson Valley, N.Y., (914) 228-1584.
Off the Menu Chef Celebration
A gaggle of top French chefs flew into town last weekend to put the icing on a yearlong celebration of Le Cirque's 20th anniversary.
On Sunday night, 110 people paid $1,000 each to join in and dine on Paul Bocuse's truffle soup, Roger Verge's scallops with mango, Gerard Boyer's lobster with fennel and Alain Ducasse's spit-roasted woodcook.
The guests, among them the talk-show host Rush Limbaugh, the San Francisco chef Jeremiah Tower and Philippe de Montebello, director of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, did not get to eat the roasted ortolans, though.
These tiny, greasy, crunchy, gamey-tasting songbirds, considered a delicacy, were served only at a preview lunch for the press on Saturday.
But the Sunday crowd drank far better wines, mostly magnums of 1982 Corton Charlemagne and Chateau Haut-Brion, because Sirio Maccioni, the owner of Le Cirque, saw to it that his co-host was Marvin Shanken, publisher of The Wine Spectator.
Leaning Toward Manhattan
Torre di Pisa, a restaurant that opened in Milan in 1959 and is a magnet for figures in fashion and the press, is opening in New York at 19-21 West 44th Street.
Paolo Meacci, the principal owner, will bring a chef from Italy to prepare many Tuscan specialties, like the tagliata steak, beef with mustard sauce and pastas for which Torre di Pisa is known.
David Rockwell will design the restaurant, which is scheduled to open in the fall.
Turkish but Not Turkish
Orhan Yegen, the owner of Deniz (pronounced den-EEZ), which opened last week at 400 East 57th Street, said the name means "ocean sea" in Turkish.
But Mr.
Yegen, who is the former owner of Turkish Kitchen in Murray Hill, said his new restaurant is not Turkish nor is it strictly seafood.
"It is food of the Mediterranean," he said.
"And because I am Turkish, from Istanbul, you could say there is 15 percent of my heritage in anything I make."
The restaurant is understated, suffused in gold-beige, and will seat 250 when a cafe area is opened in the front.
The main courses, $14.50 to $19.50, include simple grilled salmon, trout stuffed with creamy spinach in a dill and lemon sauce and succulent roast baby lamb with cracked wheat pilaf.


Pillowtex Corp.(PTX,N) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Olympic Steel Inc.(ZEUS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Court Ruling Restores Job For a Worker With Epilepsy
For Richard Granziel Jr., a long, hard lesson about discrimination started in 1987 when he had an epileptic seizure.
It was a rare daytime episode triggered, he said, by a flu virus.
Mr.
Granziel, a health inspector for the city of Plainfield, was taken by ambulance to a hospital, where doctors decided that he needed no treatment.
The city's physician, Dr.
Edwin Turner, also examined him and recommended that he be allowed to resume work.


Eating Well
TWO years ago, Dr.
Walter Mertz, a retired director of the Agriculture Department's Human Nutrition Research Center who has been prescient about more than one food trend, warned about the folly of concentrating on beta carotene to the exclusion of all the other carotenoids.
And once again Dr.
Mertz appears to have been ahead of the curve.
Other researchers are coming to the conclusion that beta carotene alone is not responsible for the health benefits with which it has been endowed.
Dr.
Mertz told an audience that picking out certain elements of food did not make sense.


Mayor Details Plan for Small Businesses
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani announced several measures yesterday intended to assist small businesses by providing working capital, financing and financial benefits.
The Mayor said his administration would establish a program under which manufacturers would be able to buy new machinery and equipment through tax-exempt financing at rates about 25 percent less than the prevailing borrowing rates.
The financing would be provided through the city's Industrial Development Agency.


Fed Backs Removing Bank Curb
The chairman of the Federal Reserve today joined the White House and key Congressional Republicans in calling for an end to the legal barriers that have separated the nation's commercial banks and securities firms since the 1930's.
But Alan Greenspan, the Fed's chairman, questioned some details of the Clinton Administration's plan for abolishing the Depression-era Glass-Steagall Act that established the barriers.
He also urged Congress not to move quickly on a proposal by Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, the New York Republican who heads the Senate Banking Committee, to allow nonfinancial companies to own banks.


Bochco Moving to CBS With 3-Year Contract
Steven Bochco, one of the most successful creators and producers of television dramas, including "N.Y.P.D. Blue," "L.A. Law," and "Hill Street Blues," announced yesterday that he would end his association with ABC and begin a new long-term deal with CBS.
He is to start working with CBS immediately, although he will continue to fulfill his current deal with ABC until his contract expires at the end of next year.
Until then, any shows he creates that ABC decides not to develop will go to CBS, Mr.
Bochco said.


Sports of The Times; Once Is Enough, Even for L.T.
IF everybody's dignity has a price, Lawrence Taylor's price apparently is $500,000.
In a black-and-blue leather jacket and black leather pants, his LT diamond earring sparkling, he was glaring through gold-rimmed glasses yesterday at the 390-pound Bam Bam Bigelow, a prelude to their WrestleMania XI grapple at the Hartford Civic Center on Sunday night, April 2.


Book Notes
Sister Act
Emily and Charlotte Bronte did passion and English weather.
Jackie and Joan Collins did passion and Hollywood glamour.
Now, a new sisters' duo, with their own take on passion, are on the book scene: Anne Rice, the veteran vampire chronicler, and Alice Borchardt, who shares her younger sister's fascination with dark fantasy but turns her focus to ninth-century France and Vikings.
In her first book, "Devoted" (Dutton) to be published in September, Ms.
Borchardt, a nurse, tells the story of a medieval French bishop and a mystical woman who wage bloody battles against Viking invaders.
The most breathless part of "Devoted," however, may not be the plot, but the three-page introduction written by Ms.
Borchardt's vampire-obsessed sister.


Giuliani's Panel on Police Gets Off to a Running Start
A new panel established by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani to monitor police corruption had its first meeting yesterday, even as City Council members and some lobbying groups sharpened their complaints that the Mayor had improperly obstructed the role of the Council by creating the commission.
Nicholas Scoppetta, the chairman of the panel announced by the Mayor on Monday, said the two-hour meeting in his law office dealt mainly with organizational concerns: selecting an executive director, staffing and moving into permanent office space.


CHRONICLE
For the first time in its 18-year history, the Simon Wiesenthal Center in Los Angeles will present a major award to the leader of a Muslim country: KING HUSSEIN of Jordan, who will receive its Museum of Tolerance Peace Award.
"We met with King Hussein and Queen Noor at the palace today," Rabbi MARVIN HIER, the dean and founder of the center, said from Amman yesterday.
"We discussed the Middle East and announced that he will receive the award."


Trimac Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


O'Neal Provides an Answer to Ewing's Prediction
It was another statement by the Magic, and this one moved Orlando closer to finishing with the best record in the Eastern Conference.
Patrick Ewing was better at playing basketball than he was at making predictions.
One day after Ewing made a guarantee that the Knicks would win, they did not.
They had no answer for Shaquille O'Neal (41 points, 10 rebounds), who dominated from start to finish tonight.
The Knicks dropped to 0-3 this season in Orlando, where they may need at least one victory to win a championship.


The Neediest Cases; Trusts and Estates Give To Neediest Cases Fund
The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund has issued a list of trusts and estates that contributed to its 83d annual campaign, which ends today.
Donations from those sources totaled $1,068,829,27, compared with $1,076,093.34 a year ago.
These are the trusts and estates that took part.
William Ewing Foundation Amy Frank Emanuel Frank Desiree L. Franklin Lilly J. Freeman Esther Friedenheit L.W.
Roberta Waxman Albert Louis Wechsler Weingarten Memorial Wilbur Trust Louis Wiley Henrietta S. Wolf Mabelle Allen Wood Anonymous (22) ESTATES Tillye B. Aaronson Eugene Bascho and Sophie L. Bascho Victoria Bitterman John L. Blackman Sr.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALBERTSON'S INC., Boise, Idaho, which owns and operates supermarkets, food stores and drugstores, said it would invest $3.37 billion in opening 351 stores during the next five years.
The expansion will increase the number of Albertson's stores to 1,013 by the end of 1999.
ALPHA HOSPITALITY CORP., Valhalla, N.Y., a casino and hotel operator, said its unit, Alpha Rising Sun, had reached an agreement with Bally Entertainment Corp., Chicago, to develop and manage a $100 million casino and resort complex in Indiana.


How Israel Can Regain the Road to Peace
To the Editor:
"Israeli Leftists Now Feel Frustration With Rabin" (news article, Feb. 21) is both accurate and concise, attributes not always conspicuous in American reporting about Israel.
However, when you define the differences between Foreign Minister Shimon Peres and me as "subtleties," you come close to British understatement.


Leaseway Transportation Corp.(LSWY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Donna Karan's new campaign stresses the ultra-glamorous look.
ENSCONCED next to an enormous movie camera, the improbably named Shalom Harlow is applying lipstick to an already richly rouged mouth.
The outfit says Hollywood unchained.
It is one of the more striking images in the designer Donna Karan's new $2.7 million advertising campaign, called DKNY Hollywood, which began appearing in magazines last week and is appearing this week on the sides of buses, phone booths, and billboards in New York, Chicago, and Los Angeles.


No Headline
"And then I had nightmares. People I was here in Vietnam with would appear and say: 'You came here on a bicycle ride? Don't you remember how we all suffered in this place? You came here to have fun?' " WILSON HUBBELL, a veteran, back in Vietnam.  [ A10:3. ]


Base Closings Listed
The military announced its final plan to close 33 major installations.
The program will cut 34,200 civilian jobs but still faces opposition in Congress, including a move by New York's two Senators that could delay the naming of members of a commission to make the final choices.
Article, page B6.


Koppers Industries Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Moving on Schedule, G.O.P. Stops Short
All was moving on the Republican schedule in the Senate as members from both parties made their closing statements about the proposed constitutional amendment to require a balanced budget.
Then the Republican train stopped short, one vote shy of the 67 needed for approval.


Foster Wheeler Corp.(FWC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


FEDERATED DEPARTMENT STORES INC. (FD,N)
A variety of one-time charges related to the acquisition of R. H. Macy &amp; Company and the consolidation of divisions muddied fourth-quarter results at Federated Department Stores Inc., which operates Bloomingdale's, Macy's and several other department store chains.
But analysts were pleased with the retailer's performance during the quarter that ended Jan. 28.
Most analysts chose to focus on the numbers as they would have been had Federated not acquired Macy's, which was not combined with Federated until Dec. 19.


HOUSE APPROVES SWEEPING CHANGES ON REGULATIONS
The House of Representatives today approved far-reaching changes in how Federal agencies enforce health, safety and environmental laws.
It directed regulatory agencies to base rules primarily on economic calculations of costs and benefits.
Statistics and finances would override the health-based standards at the heart of many existing environmental laws.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL REPORT
CUNY Conference
Hunter College won an unprecedented fourth consecutive City University of New York Athletic Conference title, but the Hawks are only part of the league's big news this season.


Alexander Julian Licensee Liquidated as Rescue Falters
The company that owned the license for Colours by Alexander Julian, a moderately priced line of men's sportswear that is a staple in department stores, has been forced into liquidation.
The Collection Clothing Corporation, a company formed about a year ago by Harvard Law School's endowment fund to hold the Colours license, was dissolved on Monday after the fund and the company's primary lender, the Bank of New York, failed to reach an agreement with the designer Alexander Julian to reorganize the company, according tohigh-level company executives who lost their jobs on Monday.


Renewal Built on Used Cars
In 1911, the Johns-Manville Corporation built a 1.8-million-square-foot roofing-products plant in a 216-acre field and lent its company name to the town that sprang up nearby.
But in 1986, beset by asbestos-lawsuit problems and filing for bankruptcy protection, Johns-Manville closed the plant and dealt a huge blow to the town's economy.
Late Monday, the Town Council voted 4-3 to allow the Indianapolis-based Adesa Corporation to open an 82-acre automobile auction business on the site, where used-car dealers will bid on vehicles no longer of use to fleet owners.
Adesa also agreed to develop 26 acres as general retail space for shops and stores.


WAL-MART STORES INC. (WMT,N)
As usual, Wal-Mart Stores Inc., the country's largest retail company, has met analysts' expectations for fourth-quarter earnings to the penny.
Wal-Mart, based in Bentonville, Ark., said yesterday that net income was $1.03 billion, or 45 cents a share, in the quarter ended Jan. 31, up 19 percent from $868 million, or 38 cents a share, in the corresponding period a year earlier.
Sales rose 20 percent, to $24.45 billion.


'Megan's Law' Suffers Setback In Court Ruling
A New Jersey law to monitor sex offenders was dealt a new legal blow today when a Federal judge ruled that its central tenet -- notifying a community of a sex offender's presence -- could not be applied in cases of crimes committed before the law was passed.
Judge Nicholas H. Politan of Federal District Court in Newark likened the measure -- "Megan's Law" -- to the ancient practice of branding criminals.


Jets Investing A Lot in Carter And Expecting Bigger Returns
After two years of hiring some hoary famous free agents who failed to move the Jets above .500, the team yesterday plucked a player in his prime: Dexter Carter, the dangerous returner and third-down back.
A month ago, Carter was cavorting in the Super Bowl for the San Francisco 49ers.
But the reality of free agency is that many players follow the money trail and Carter, 27, agreed to a three-year contract worth about $1.7 million.


Market Place; Penny stock prospectus notes: for entertainment purposes only.
THE penny stock universe often seems to be a parallel one to the market for real stocks.
Prices rise without any evident reason and then -- often after insiders have cashed out -- fall back.
Those who read prospectuses from penny stock issues -- sometimes defined as securities priced under $5 -- often find it hard to figure out why the stocks were bought to begin with.
But reading them can be entertaining.


A Rebound, and Now a Tribute
More than a decade ago, Thomas V. Karaban, a Wall Street stockbroker, suffered a financial calamity and lost his house.
He bounced back, and the experience so moved him that he started the Rainbow Foundation to aid families caring for seriously ill children.
More than 4,000 families have been helped.
On March 28, Mr.
Karaban will receive the Madeline Worthy Williams Youth Advocacy Award from Governor Whitman.


Bean Pies Have Grand New Home
In a style as grand and audacious as its leader, the Nation of Islam opened a new $5 million restaurant complex on Chicago's South Side today.
The opening marked a return to the food service business that helped establish the Nation, the black Muslim religious sect, as a steady economic presence in African-American neighborhoods across the country in the 1960's and 1970's.
Unlike the Nation's earlier restaurants -- small places with Formica-topped tables and tiled floors -- the new Salaam Restaurants and Bakery is a lavish two-story, 15,000-square-foot mosque-like structure.


ADC Telecommunications Inc.(ADCT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Bonilla Makes a Pitch to Minor League Players
Bobby Bonilla is spending this week traveling to three spring training sites -- Tampa, West Palm Beach and Phoenix -- to answer questions from minor league players, many of whom are faced with the difficult choice of whether to play in spring training games.
He has his answers ready.
Asked today what he would tell confused minor leaguers, Bonilla had a simple response: If you believe in your heart that you will one day be a major league player, he said, then support the union and don't use replacement games -- even in spring training -- to advance your career.
If you don't, and you think this spring might represent your last or only hope of salvaging a baseball career, then do whatever you wish.


Mr. Giuliani's Police Ploy
The Giuliani administration has a well-developed knack for undermining confidence in New York City's Police Department.
First Mayor Giuliani said he would ignore a new law, passed by the City Council, that established an independent agency to monitor police corruption.
Soon after, the administration dismissed Walter S. Mack Jr., the department's top corruption official -- the first civilian ever to head the post -- and replaced him with an insider.
Then Mr.
Giuliani seized control of the Public Affairs Department, in a clear attempt to manipulate the flow of police information.
As if all that weren't worrisome enough, Mr.
Giuliani has now deepened public distrust by naming his own panel to monitor corruption.
It will be accountable to him alone, and thus more susceptible to political pressure than the independent corruption commission created by the Council.
It will also be significantly weaker than the independent commission.


Devils Send Down Three
The Devils announced three demotions last night to shore up their Albany farm team in the American Hockey League for a six-games-in-nine-days stretch.
Sent down were center Sergei Brylin and defensemen Jaroslav Modry and Kevin Dean.


CUNY Doesn't Burden New York Taxpayers
To the Editor:
Re "Sure, Cut New York's Fat. But Cut It Fairly, and Wisely" (Op-Ed, Feb. 22):


New Directors Series To Present 22 Films
This year's New Directors/New Films series, presented by the Film Society of Lincoln Center and the Museum of Modern Art, opens on March 17 with "Living in Oblivion," a comedy directed by Tom DiCillo about low-budget film making in downtown Manhattan.
The series, now in its 24th year, is to present 22 films from 15 countries.
The films will be shown at the Museum of Modern Art.
A highlights of this year's series is "Red Firecracker, Green Firecracker," a Chinese film directed by He Ping.
The film, which is on the opening-night program, tells the story of a love affair between an itinerant artist and a wealthy young woman whose family owns a fireworks factory.


Alleghany Corp.(Y,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Spiegel Inc.(SPGLA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Neediest Cases; Neediest Cases Fund Trails by $208,000
Just $208,000 behind last year's total, The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund ends its 83d annual campaign today.
As 11th-hour donations continue to arrive, there is still hope of surpassing the $4.59 million collected in 1994.


Top Quark Remains a Mystery, but Only for One More Day
Scientists at the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory in Illinois said yesterday that they had definitely found and measured the top quark, a fundamental but elusive building block of matter.
A spokesman for the laboratory said details of the landmark discovery would be disclosed in a scientific symposium scheduled tomorrow in Batavia, Ill., when the mass and other important characteristics of the top quark would be announced.


Oneidas Seeking Casino at Monticello Raceway
The Oneida Indian Nation wants to establish a casino at Monticello Raceway in Sullivan County, just 90 miles from New York City.
But Gov.
George E. Pataki pledged yesterday to block the plan.
The tribe's proposal would place casino gambling closer to New York City than Atlantic City or the Foxwoods Resorts Casino, operated by the tiny Mashantucket Pequot tribe near Groton, Conn.


Washington Talk; Christopher Drops Hint: Is Yeltsin Essential?
It was just one line in an otherwise unremarkable meeting on Monday, but it surprised the officials in the room: Secretary of State Warren Christopher suggested that the West should begin to think about a Russia without Boris N. Yeltsin.
Mr.
Christopher's declaration came in response to a question by Italy's Foreign Minister, Susanna Agnelli, who expressed concern about the Russian President's leadership.
She bluntly asked Mr.
Christopher whether the West should "go on supporting" him, according to participants in the meeting.


YPF to Buy Maxus for $740 Million
The Maxus Energy Corporation of Dallas, one of the largest independent oil companies in the United States, has agreed to be bought by YPF S.A., Argentina's biggest oil company, in a $740 million transaction.
Maxus, struggling with a burden of about $1 billion in debt and high interest costs, has been seeking a suitor for some time.


Fast-Moving Fire Kills 4, Including a Baby, in Brooklyn
A fire that started in a basement spread quickly throughout a two-story apartment building in Brooklyn yesterday afternoon and killed four people, including an 8-month-old baby.
The two-alarm blaze in the Bushwick section also injured four others, including a firefighter, and gutted the tan brick building at 1497 Bushwick Avenue between Granite Street and Furman Avenue.


Doomed Plane Wasn't Told It Was Flying in Ice-Prone Area
Air traffic controllers failed to warn American Eagle 4184 that they were directing it to fly a holding pattern in an area prone to ice formation, investigators demonstrated today in close questioning of several air traffic officials.
But testimony on Monday and today seemed to establish that even if the plane, an ATR-72 turboprop, had been warned, the pilots were unlikely to have done anything differently.
They could have asked to go to a different altitude or site if they had thought the conditions at the assigned location were bad enough, but they did not; in fact, the icing that they observed in the 35 minutes of holding before the crash was not sufficient to prompt them even to report the condition to controllers.


Lawyers Title Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Value Health Inc.(VH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Salinas's Brother Charged In Mexican Assassination
The elder brother of former President Carlos Salinas de Gortari was arrested today on charges of having ordered the assassination of a senior official of the governing party.
The arrest of Raul Salinas de Gortari, 48, sent powerful new shock waves through a country racked by political and economic turmoil.
It shattered an immunity that has long been taken for granted by the families of former leaders of the political system that Mr.
Salinas's Institutional Revolutionary Party, called the PRI, has dominated for almost 66 years.


S.I. Carjacking Victim's Condition Has Improved
The 43-year-old Brooklyn woman who was shot through the heart and lung on Monday when her car was stolen in the Staten Island Mall's parking lot had "dramatic improvement" in her condition yesterday, hospital officials said.
"It's remarkable," said Brian Morris, spokesman for Staten Island University Hospital.
"Less than 24 hours after she was shot in the heart, she's sitting up in bed and talking."


A Rise, a Fall and a Birthday in Hiding
Nicholas W. Leeson, who rose from a working-class background in a dreary London suburb to wealth and power in the macho, ego-laden world of financial trading, celebrated his 28th birthday last Saturday in hiding, presumably somewhere in Asia.
Two days earlier, Mr.
Leeson and his 23-year-old wife, Lisa, had abruptly left their luxury apartment in Singapore, where he headed the derivatives trading operation of Barings P.L.C., the British investment firm that had employed him since 1989.
He left behind a financial disaster that would bring down his employer within days and set off a wave of panic in world markets -- a crisis that judging by the evidence made public so far he had created.


Meggett Gets Patriots' Offer
David Meggett received an offer from the New England Patriots yesterday that is believed to be slightly better than the one offered to him by the Giants on Monday.
How much better is not certain since neither the lawyers for Meggett nor the Patriots had much to say.
But the offer might include a slightly higher base than the Giants' offer and more money up front.


No. 9 Wake Forest Topples No. 2 North Carolina
Wake Forest last finished in first place in the Atlantic Coast Conference in 1962, when Dean Smith was in his first year as head coach at North Carolina.
Tonight, on Smith's 64th birthday, the Demon Deacons moved within reach of repeating that achievement by defeating second-ranked North Carolina, 79-70.
The victory by ninth-ranked Wake Forest, its first in Chapel Hill since 1982, raised its record to 20-5, 11-4 in the A.C.C.
North Carolina and Virginia also are 11-4, and also have one league game remaining.
Maryland is on top at 11-3 with two games left.


Presidential Candidate


Toll Brothers Inc.(TOL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Personal Health; Living with the mysteries of Tourette syndrome.
JIM EISENREICH, now a star outfielder for the Philadelphia Phillies, was a 6-year-old Little Leaguer when he began having tics and twitches and suddenly snorting and sniffing.
But not until he was 23, trying to play major league baseball with the Minnesota Twins, did he learn that the abnormal movements and sounds he could not control had a name and a physical cause -- Tourette syndrome.
Even then, the Twins' management insisted that his problem was really stage fright and forbade him to take the medication prescribed to curb the symptoms caused by this inherited neurological disorder.
Likewise with Dr.
Carl Bennett, a Canadian surgeon who began having tics at 7.
They were soon followed by movements that were either involuntary or compulsive, strange hoots and utterances and sudden rages during which he could not help throwing things.
Yet, Dr.
Bennett, now 54, whose remarkable life is described in Dr.
Oliver Sacks's new book, "An Anthropologist on Mars" (Alfred A. Knopf, $24), did not receive a diagnosis of Tourette syndrome until he was 37.


Roy Lubove, 60, Social Historian At U. of Pittsburgh
Dr.
Roy Lubove, a social historian and author of seven books in that field, died on Feb. 17 at Montefiore Hospital in Pittsburgh.
He was 60 and lived in Pittsburgh.
The cause was respiratory failure, said Prof.
Arden Meltzer, a colleague at the University of Pittsburgh.


CHRONICLE
NANCY REAGAN has videotaped public service announcements for the Alzheimer's Association and the National Institute of Aging, her office announced yesterday.
Her husband, former President Reagan, disclosed in November that he had Alzheimer's, the progressive, irreversible neurological disorder that affects four million Americans.


Tennessean Begins Down-Home Bid for Republican Presidential Nomination
Favoring a red-and-black lumberjack shirt over his standard-issue blue suit, Lamar Alexander returned today to his hometown at the edge of the Great Smoky Mountains to declare his candidacy for President with a blistering indictment of the "arrogant empire" in Washington.
In words and symbols, Mr.
Alexander, a former two-term Governor of Tennessee, sought to stand out from the other Republican contenders for the 1996 nomination by casting himself as a down-home outsider who would put states in charge of more than $200 billion in Federal programs, from welfare to schools to Medicaid to job training.


In America; A Nation of Nitwits
According to a new poll, 60 percent of Americans are unable to name the President who ordered the nuclear attack on Japan, and 35 percent do not know that the first atomic bomb was dropped on Hiroshima.
One out of every four people surveyed for the America's Talking/ Gallup Poll did not even know that Japan was the target of the first atomic bomb.
Four percent of the 1,020 adult respondents thought the first bomb had been dropped on some other country.
Twenty-two percent knew virtually nothing about an atomic bomb attack.
They didn't know where -- or, in some cases, even if -- such an attack had occurred.


Use of Drugs to Lower Cholesterol Is Tied to a Higher Depression Risk
HEART disease patients who are taking medicine to lower their cholesterol are at a heightened risk for depression, according to research being reported today at a meeting of the American Psychosomatic Society in New Orleans.
Men being treated for heart disease with lipid-lowering drugs reported signs of depression like being guilt-ridden and crying more frequently than did heart disease patients who were not on the drugs.
The men on medication also reported higher levels of anxiety and worry and more frequent thoughts of suicide.


Omnicom Group Inc.(OMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Earnings at Morgan Stanley Fell Sharply in 4th Quarter
Reflecting the effects of the worst bond market in a generation, the Morgan Stanley Group reported yesterday that profits tumbled nearly 79 percent for the fourth quarter.
Morgan Stanley, the country's fourth-largest securities firm, said that net income for the quarter, which ended Jan. 31, fell to $39 million, or 29 cents a share, from $181 million, or $2.18 a share, a year earlier.
Revenue dropped about 15 percent, to $790 million from $925 million.


Metropolitan Diary
THE scene is a small foyer outside the Grand Ballroom of the Waldorf-Astoria.
The occasion is the American Heart Association's annual benefit dinner-dance.
Man in formal dinner suit, puffing on a cigarette: You know what I did when they prohibited smoking in planes?


Tibetan New Year: meditation and cookies. C3.


Class Notes
Back in the 1920's, the literature teachers and professors of America were in an uproar.
The burning issue was the fear that standards would deteriorate if teachers began using contemporary literature by novelists like Henry James, Theodore Dreiser, Upton Sinclair and Sinclair Lewis and by poets like Carl Sandburg, Amy Lowell and Ezra Pound.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Optimism ran high within Barings P.L.C. that the failed merchant bank could be sold within days, probably in pieces, despite a trader's $1 billion loss.
Rumored suitors included Merrill Lynch, Bankers Trust, GE Capital, National Westminster Bank and other institutions from several countries.  [ D1. ]


Islanders' Battered Defense Does the Job
Shortage of defensemen? What shortage of defensemen?
In their first game since Scott Lachance was lost for six to eight weeks because of a broken left ankle, and their second game since it was revealed that Darius Kasparaitis is out for the season because of a torn anterior cruciate ligament in his right knee, the Islanders' depleted defense rallied around another spectacular performance by goaltender Tommy Soderstrom.


Drug Trade Imperils Aid To Colombia
Bulkier than most courtroom evidence, two Boeing 727 jets impounded at the international airport here symbolize the push and pull between the United States and Colombia over its rampant cocaine exports.
Last month, Colombia angrily denied reports that refitted jets were carrying tons of cocaine to Mexico.
But in a reversal two weeks ago, officials reassigned air traffic controllers and impounded the jets.


Placer Dome Inc.(PDG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Interactive Enthusiasts Seen Tuning Out Cable
If the television viewing public is willing to be led into the interactive age, many would apparently prefer to be led there by a telephone or satellite company rather than their cable providers.
A new survey of 4,000 United States households, scheduled for release tomorrow, finds that more than half of cable-television homes are so unhappy with their existing cable service that if telephone or satellite carriers offered comparable services, they would switch. .


Psychiatric Care at St. Luke's Yields to Cost
To the Editor:
Did you hear about the deceased psychiatrist who, trying to get into Heaven, tells St.
Peter he worked for a managed care agency?
"Of course you may enter," St.
Peter replies, "but you may only stay five days."


Camelot's Seamy Side, Brazenly Reconstructed
AMERICAN TABLOID  By James Ellroy  576 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $25.
"I'm saying it's so big and audacious that we'll most likely never be suspected," says a character in James Ellroy's densely malevolent new novel, "American Tabloid," as he proposes a plot to assassinate President John F. Kennedy.
"I'm saying that even if we are, the powers that be will realize that it can never be conclusively proven. I'm saying that a consensus of denial will build off of it. I'm saying that people will want to remember the man as something he wasn't. I'm saying that we'll present them with an explanation and the powers that be will prefer it to the truth, even though they know better."


INSIDE
Denver Airport Opens
Covering 53 square miles and costing $4.9 billion, Denver's new airport opened with its first flights with passengers, 16 months after the opening was first scheduled and $2 billion over the budget.
Page A12.
Clinton Ally Is Indicted
A former Arkansas banker who lent Bill Clinton money for his 1990 campaign for governor was indicted for violations in a scheme that involved campaign officials.
Page A12.
Suitors Are Seen for Barings
Barings executives are optimistic that pieces of the failed firm can be sold, despite a trader's $1 billion loss.
Merrill Lynch and Bankers Trust are among those named.
Page D1.
Gang Leader Tells of Killings
A Bronx gang leader offered a rare glimpse of how he ran a murderous drug operation, testifying in detail about how he ordered killings and kept a stranglehold on a sophisticated cocaine business.
Page B1.


Rutgers Wins in an Upset
The good news for Rutgers came in two ways tonight.
The men's basketball team held off a furious comeback by George Washington and upset the Colonials, 91-87, and there were no demonstrations by protesting students.
Rutgers built an 81-65 lead with 2 minutes 1 second left.
George Washington, led by Kwame Evans, closed the deficit to 88-84 with 18.5 seconds left.
But when Rutgers seemed in trouble, Jamal Phillips broke George Washington's fullcourt trap and laid the ball in with 14.2 seconds left.


Alienation, AIDS and Murder, But Keeping a Sense of Humor
When the audience at the Vineyard Theater files out for intermission after the first act of Nicky Silver's "Raised in Captivity," it is with a stunned silence seldom associated with comedies of manners.
And that is, improbably enough, what this extraordinary new play is.
What the audience has just seen is two men, framed by isolating spotlights, describing two very different deaths.
One of them has watched his lover die of AIDS; the other talks about committing a murder.
As the two monologues build, in an exquisite counterpoint of simple, almost clinical language, it is as if a pane of glass has descended for both men, cutting them off from any emotional engagement with the world beyond.
For those watching the play, however, the response is anything but detached.


Fugitive Returned to Spain
A former Civil Guard chief accused of embezzling millions of dollars from the Government was flown to Spain today after a 10-month manhunt that ended in Laos, the authorities said.
The former official, Luis Roldan, who directed the paramilitary guard from 1986 to 1993, had fled Spain in April after a newspaper reported that he had embezzled about $40 million in state funds.


Southland Corp.(SLCMC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Topics of The Times; Mr. Gramm's Candor
The Washington Post recently reported that just before the November elections, with control of the Senate in the balance, the National Republican Senatorial Committee, then headed by Senator Phil Gramm of Texas, made a $175,000 contribution to the National Right to Life Committee.
Mr.
Gramm, who is running for his party's Presidential nomination, explained that he had decided to make the unusual donation in order to "help activate pro-life voters in some key states where they would be pivotal to the election."
Senator Gramm quickly regretted his candor, and for good reason.
Running the Senatorial Committee's contribution through the nonprofit organization could amount to an evasion of the maximum spending ceilings for party committees or an improper use of party "soft money," which is not supposed to be used to influence Federal elections.


Slocan Forest reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


At the Jefferson Courthouse, the Bell Finally Tolls, and Rings Out History
FOR 20 minutes on Monday evening, the two-ton bell in the tower of the old Jefferson Market Courthouse rang over Greenwich Village, breaking a virtual silence of 97 years.
Except for throat clearings of a few bongs now and again, the bell, said to be the second largest in New York City, after one at Riverside Church, had not tolled seriously since sounding Adm.
George Dewey's victory at Manila Bay during the Spanish-American War.


U.S. Must Lead to Curb Global Warming
To the Editor:
"Nations to Consider Toughening Curbs on Global Warming" (Science Times, Feb. 21), on the coming Berlin climate summit, notes that global temperatures and public concern with global warming have dipped in the past three years.


Prosecutor for the Breach
Deputy Attorney General Charles R. Buckley, 61, has been appointed interim Bergen County Prosecutor until Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman chooses a successor to Prosecutor John J. Fahy, a Democrat who leaves office today.
Aides to the Governor have interviewed four Republicans for the permanent position.


A Search Across Asia For a Missing Trader
Police departments across Asia were alerted today to look for Nicholas W. Leeson, the English financial trader who was reported to have jumped into his Porsche and fled this city last Thursday after making disastrous futures trades that lost $1 billion and toppled England's oldest merchant bank, Barings P.L.C.
About noon today, four plainclothes officers with two locksmiths in tow entered Mr.
Leeson's fifth-floor apartment in a luxury building in the stylish and leafy Orchard neighborhood here.
The investigators spent about 40 minutes inside the apartment and declined to speak to reporters when they emerged.
Two neatly covered mountain bikes and two racks of drying laundry were evident on a back balcony of Mr.
Leeson's apartment.


Paying and Paying for a Prank
It may have started as a prank, but it went well beyond that, and the consequences are big-time.
One night last August, some boys found a set of keys at Sayreville War Memorial High School.
They started a backhoe and used it to wreck six goal posts on the football field and practice area, two baseball backstops, two soccer goals, bleachers -- on and on to the tune of $120,000 in damage.


High Court Rebuffs S.E.C. On Stock Buyer Protection
Rejecting the Securities and Exchange Commission's position, the Supreme Court ruled today that the protections of a potentially powerful securities law extend only to those investors who buy stock in an initial public offering, and not to those who buy shares in subsequent trading.
The 5-to-4 decision interpreted Section 12(2) of the Securities Act of 1933, which gives stock buyers the right to get their money back if they can show they were misled by a prospectus or "oral communication."


General Host Corp.(GH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Communities Fear the Pain Base Closings Will Cause
New Jersey would suffer the heaviest blow in the metropolitan region under the list of military base closings released yesterday by the Pentagon, though New York and Connecticut face hard losses, too.
Under the proposal, which is not final, New Jersey stands to lose a naval center in Lakehurst and a marine terminal in Bayonne that sent much of the military hardware to operations in Haiti, Somalia and the Persian Gulf.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.13
5.99
3.31
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.74
5.73
3.49
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.88
5.90
3.70
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.20
7.21
6.28
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.44
7.47
6.77
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.31
8.34
7.60
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.42
6.42
5.83
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Executive Changes
APPLE COMPUTER INC., Cupertino, Calif., named Marco Landi president of its European operations; he will be responsible for Apple's businesses in Europe, Africa and the Middle East.
BOWATER INC., Greenville, S.C., named Arnold M. Nemirow chief executive, succeeding Anthony P. Gammie, who will continue as chairman until March 1996.


Ecolab Inc.(ECL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


John Melser; Principal, 73, Was Innovator
John Melser, an innovative educator and retired principal of an alternative elementary public school in Greenwich Village, died on Friday at his home in Englewood, N.J.
He was 73.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


Republicans Modify Parts of Their Overhaul
In response to Democratic criticism, House Republicans today modified some of the most contentious provisions of their welfare bill, including one that would have permanently denied cash assistance to children born to unmarried women under the age of 18.
In a major new addition to the bill, the Republicans instead proposed to pay a cash bonus to states that reduce the proportion of babies born out of wedlock.
The formula they proposed would also reward states that reduced the number of abortions.


AptarGroup Inc.(ATR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Marines Dig In in Somalia
The American-led operation to provide security for the withdrawal of United Nations troops from Somalia went smoothly today, with American and Italian marines digging into their positions and catching up on sleep after their arrival overnight.


Tibetan New Year: Offerings and Feasts
TOMORROW morning, Nima Dorjee, a 56-year-old Tibetan who lives in Manhattan, will rise at 5, two hours earlier than usual.
He will dress, not in his usual Western-style clothes, but in a black cotton chuba, a Tibetan robe that fastens on the side.
He will go to the altar in his living room, in front of a picture of the Dalai Lama and three portable shrines; light incense, and pour water into seven silver bowls.
He will make offerings of tea and a special rice beer that has been fermenting in his kitchen for the last week, to celebrate Losar, the Tibetan New Year.


Foreign Affairs; The Global Casino
So I decided to put a little money into global markets last year.
I brushed up on Spanish and invested in Argentina.
Took a Berlitz course in Japanese and bought a few Tokyo bonds.
Lavishly tipped the waiters at the House of Hunan Chinese restaurant and picked up some stock tips in Shanghai.
I even learned the difference between G.N.P., G.D.P., DDT and AT&amp;T and invested in equities from Paris to Istanbul.
For old times' sake my broker suggested I buy some Lebanese bonds, but I told him our house already had wallpaper.
At the end of the year, I looked over my dismal balance sheet and realized that with all my multilingual, multicultural, multinational research there were two little words I forgot to learn: "Alan Greenspan."


Revco D.S. (RXR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 4


NBC Sits Atop the February Ratings
Powered by two new programs and an established favorite, "Seinfeld," NBC climbed to the top of the prime-time ratings for the February "sweep" period, finishing first among all households and first among the 18- to 49-year-old group that advertisers covet.
But ABC noted that it was still leading over all in the ratings race for the TV season since September, and CBS noted that the sweep period did not end officially until tonight.


AT WORK WITH: Representative Sonny Bono; I Got Washington, Babe
Keeping up with Sonny Bono -- make that Representative Sonny Bono, the California Republican -- is no easy task.
He's quick.
Fellow members of Congress who want a word with him as he hustles to the House floor to vote must jog alongside.
He just keeps on walking.
Mr.
Bono has to be fast.
The trip from his fifth-floor office in the Cannon House Office Building to the House chamber requires two elevator trips and a scramble through labyrinthine basement hallways.


Topics of The Times; The Geography of Nowhere
The cultural historian George Steiner describes Anglo-American culture as a "blanket" that could one day cover the world, extinguishing all that is local and culturally unique.
The creeping sameness is clearly evident in multinational advertising, with golden arches and Coca-Cola logos multiplying across the globe.
But now comes a backlash, provoked by the Benetton apparel company's advertising in Germany.
Benetton licensees there have obliterated the franchise name from their shops and sued to sever relations with the parent company.
The ad that did it shows a man's arm tattooed with the words "H.I.V. positive." It reminded many Germans of tattoos placed on holocaust victims during World War II.
A poll last year by the German weekly magazine Der Spiegel found that 84 percent of Germans surveyed found Benetton's ads distasteful.


Crimes of the Mighty Poison the Public Well
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 23 news article reporting that former Interior Secretary James G. Watt has been indicted in the Department of Housing and Urban Development scandal lacks a dimension that is routinely lacking in press reports of crimes of the high and mighty: Mr.
Watt, like other figures in the H.U.D. scandal, is no common criminal, and the alleged crimes are no common crimes.


Just Deserts for Hacker
To the Editor:
The punishment for Kevin D. Mitnick, the computer security breaker, should not be a jail sentence, which would do no good.
Rather, his penalty while in confinement should be to try to break into every computer-secured position in the United States, from the White House on down.
If he is successful, it would alert the Government to possible security flaws.


METRO DIGEST
BISHOPS ASSAIL PATAKI'S BUDGET CUTS
New York State's Roman Catholic bishops harshly criticized Gov.
George E. Pataki's proposed budget, saying its deep cuts would be devastating for the poor.
A1. 'MEGAN'S LAW' IS DEALT A LEGAL SETBACK&gt;
A New Jersey law to monitor sex offenders, "Megan's Law," was dealt a legal blow when a Federal judge ruled that its central tenet -- notifying a community of a sex offender's presence -- could not be applied in cases of crimes committed before the law was passed.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  FAST-SPREADING FIRE CLAIMS 4 LIVES
A fire that started in a basement spread quickly throughout a two-story apartment building in Brooklyn and killed four people, including an 8-month-old baby.
B3.
MORE SCHOOL CORRUPTION CHARGES FILED
Initially, prosecutors had charged only that Stuart Possner, the former principal of Public School 100 in Coney Island, was a corrupt administrator who stole money from the school system and forced teachers to do his political bidding.
As bad as that was, prosecutors now say, Mr.
Possner did even more: like stealing money from his young students.
B3.
POLICE REVIEW PANEL OFF TO FLYING START
A new panel established by Mayor Giuliani to monitor police corruption had its first meeting, even as City Council members and some lobbying groups sharpened their complaints that the Mayor had improperly obstructed the role of the Council by creating the commission.
B3.
JURY HEARS SERMON ON GUERRILLA WAR
Jurors in the sedition trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and 10 others were shown one of the cleric's sermons in which he encouraged devout Muslims to fight a guerrilla war against all enemies of Islam, including the United States.
B2.
The condition of a woman shot in a Staten Island carjacking has improved.
B4.
REGION  COURT RESTORES JOB TO EPILEPTIC
For Richard Granziel Jr., a long, hard lesson about discrimination started in 1987 when he had an epileptic seizure.
Mr.
Granziel, a health inspector for the city of Plainfield, N.J., was taken by ambulance to a hospital, where doctors decided that he needed no treatment.
The city's physician, Dr.
Edwin Turner, also examined him and recommended that he be allowed to resume work.
But city officials, who had been unaware of his condition, placed Mr.
Granziel on involuntary leave, and when the Division of Motor Vehicles temporarily suspended his license, an action that is routine after a seizure, the city dismissed him.
B5.
SENECAS GIVE UP CONTROL OF FINANCES
Feuding factions of the Seneca Indian Nation agreed to turn over control of their hefty bank account to the tribe's treasurer until they resolve the bigger issue of who runs their government.
B5.
NEW JERSEY HIT HARD BY BASE CLOSINGS
New Jersey would suffer the heaviest blow in the metropolitan region under the list of base closings released by the Pentagon.
The state stands to lose a naval center in Lakehurst and a marine terminal in Bayonne that sent much of the military hardware to operations in Haiti, Somalia and the Persian Gulf.
B6.
Chronicle B2
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman B3


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Feb. 24
Feb. 17
Feb. 25
1995
1995
1994
Gasoline production, daily
7.3
7.2
7.0
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.0
3.2
Gasoline stocks
220.6
221.1
228.5
Distillate stocks
123.4
125.8
106.2
Crude imports, daily
5.7
6.7
6.1
Product imports, daily
1.7
1.8
2.0
Crude stocks
323.0
327.4
325.7
Crude production, daily
6.6
6.6
6.7
Refinery utilization (%)
88.9
88.9
87.0
Source: American Petroleum Institute


City Ballet Shows Off Its Dancers in New Roles
The New York City Ballet, trying out talent in new roles up to the last minute, offered a spate of debuts in George Balanchine's "Jewels" on Saturday afternoon and then closed its winter season on Sunday afternoon at the New York State Theater with some new faces in Jerome Robbins's "Gershwin Concerto."
Even for a choreographer who did more than anyone to promote the storyless ballet, Balanchine outdid himself in the 1967 "Jewels," the only three-act plotless ballet in existence.
Some will always see it as three separate works, but it has an ingenious unifying motif: the qualities of different gems (emeralds, rubies and diamonds).


Smithfield Foods Inc.(SFDS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


NATO Disputes U.N. Reports of Possible Arms Airlift to Bosnia
NATO has issued a report suggesting that United Nations officers were confused and inept in their accounts this month of a possible covert air operation delivering arms to the Bosnian Government, Western officials said today.
Such an airlift would violate the Security Council embargo on the shipment of weapons to the warring parties in the former Yugoslavia.


'Megan's Law' Sees a Setback
Terming its provisions a "lifelong albatross," a Federal judge has ruled that it was unconstitutional to apply "Megan's Law," which calls for notifying communities of a sex offender's presence, in cases of crimes committed before the law took effect in 1994.
A1.


Gensia Inc.(GNSA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Beard Is Ready to Stop Talking And Start Benching Anderson
The teacher was tolerant at first, because he was new, and he was willing to give his troubled pupils the benefit of the doubt.
Even when things bottomed out, when they stopped listening and started whining, Butch Beard defended the Nets and their franchise players, Kenny Anderson and Derrick Coleman.
But lately, they have appeared to overstep their bounds with the first-year coach.
They will not take responsibility for their own shortcomings.


Steve Howe Attends Union Meeting
Steve Howe, relief pitcher and Yankee player representative, attended the union meeting for minor league players tonight in West Palm Beach but had little to say afterward.
Howe became the first striking major league player to walk into a replacement camp last Saturday when he accepted a job in the Yankees' ticket office, but he has maintained his support of the union.


A Special Place in History for Mr. Bush
The night before George Bush turned over the White House to Bill Clinton he made a deal with the National Archives that gave him control over his Administration's computerized records.
That deal, made in the teeth of a law declaring that all official records are public property, was smelly on its face.
It looked even worse when Don Wilson, head of the National Archives, was hired as director of the George Bush Center at Texas A &amp; M University.
Now Federal Judge Charles Richey in Washington has ruled, correctly, that Mr.
Bush had no legal right to those records and that Archives had no right to surrender control, either.


Prosecutor Contends That Witness for Simpson Was Coached
Mired for days over a maid named Rosa Lopez, O. J. Simpson's murder trial ground to a halt this afternoon as prosecutors asked for and received a day to digest documents about her that the defense had dumped belatedly into their laps.
Another day of wrangling, name-calling and finger-pointing between the lawyers in the Simpson case unfolded, this time without a word of testimony.
Mrs.
Lopez did not retake the stand and will not do so until Thursday.
By the time she steps down, presumably Friday, an entire week in Judge Lance A. Ito's court will have been devoted to her testimony, not one word of which the jurors will hear for a month or more.


The Neediest Cases; Another Chance to Extend a Hand
Just $208,000 behind last year's total, The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund ends its 83d annual campaign today.
As 11th-hour donations continue to arrive, there is still hope of surpassing the $4.59 million collected in 1994.
Contributions dated no later than today and received by March 8 will be included in this year's appeal.
The money, which will go to seven private charities, will be essential as steep government budget cuts hinder efforts to fight poverty in New York City.


U.S. Plans More Phone Competition
The Justice Department's top antitrust official outlined a new policy today that could make it easier for the regional Bell companies to invade the long-distance telephone market and compete against the likes of AT&amp;T, MCI and Sprint.
The new policy, disclosed in a speech at the National Press Club here by Anne K. Bingaman, Assistant Attorney General in charge of the antitrust division, provides the clearest signal so far that the Clinton Administration is eager to relax restrictions created by the court settlement that broke up the old Bell System in 1984.


Genesco Inc.(GCO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Vietnam Bike Tour Challenges Western Hearts and Minds
The man lying in the hammock remembered the supply trucks rumbling past his house at night.
"Yes," he said through an interpreter, gesturing out at the road before him.
"This was the Ho Chi Minh Trail."


Longs Drug Stores Corp.(LDG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 26


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  MEXICO ARRESTS A SALINAS  The Mexican police arrested the elder brother of former President Carlos Salinas de Gortari on charges of having ordered and paid for the killing of a governing party official last year.
A1  Raul Salinas's presence has been felt in other illicit deals.
A9


Surgical Discovery Brings Drug Charge
A 59-year-old woman who arrived at Bronx-Lebanon Hospital Center complaining of stomach pains was charged with drug possession last night, after surgery revealed that she had ingested 109 small bags of what appeared to be narcotics, a police spokesman said.
"The bags were the cut-off fingertips of a latex glove, like a surgical glove," said the spokesman, Officer Scott Bloch.


Houston Industries(HOU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A brief report in the Music Notes column on Saturday about the decision of the London Philharmonic to cancel its concerts in New York City and San Francisco this month misstated the Lincoln Center telephone number for ticket refunds and exchanges.
It is (212) 799-1521.


Sports of The Times; Ludicrous Sightings Continue
YOU see a lot of goofy stuff on television.
Our itty-bitty attention spans get overloaded and we click the channel-changer to our hearts' content.
Talk shows.
Leopards eating zebras.
Phony documentaries.
Sitcoms.
Bad movies.
Games.
Trials.
Chuckleheads on the 11 o'clock news.
A cabbie hugging a man in a bear costume on Letterman.
Tomorrow, from an exhibition game in Florida, we're going to get a glimpse of replacement New York Yankees -- impostors wearing the uniform once worn by Tommy Henrich and Elston Howard and Ron Guidry.
Makes me sick, to tell you the truth.
But that's tomorrow.


Corrections
An obituary on Feb. 8 about the actor Willard Waterman misidentified the role he played in the 1958 film "Auntie Mame." He was Mr.
Upson; the role of Mr.
Babcock was played by Fred Clark.


A Challenge Staying Dry


As World Sees Gingrich: Hurrah Here, Hoot There
The Speaker of the Iranian Parliament called Newt Gingrich, the Speaker of the House, an imbecile.
The Foreign Affairs Committee of the Jordanian Parliament passed a resolution condemning him for "inappropriate" remarks about the need to move the American Embassy in Israel to Jerusalem.


Wilpon Labels Himself 'Moderate'
Ever the diplomat, Fred Wilpon today defended ownership's decision to hire replacement players while at the same time saying that he was dragged into accepting replacement baseball in the first place.
"I was very dubious and it certainly was not the first choice," said Wilpon, one of the Mets' majority owners.
"The first choice was making a deal. I guess you could say I came kicking and screaming."


CHRONICLE
Once again, the show must go on, and never mind that a leading actor is bleeding all over the floor.
CHRISTOPHER DUVA, one of three actors who spoof the works of Shakespeare in "The Compleat Works of Wllm Shkspr (Abridged)," which opened Sunday at the Westside Theater, gave himself a deep gash above the nose at the final preview on Saturday.
He continued acting even as he bled.


System Software Associates Inc.(SSAX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Monteverdi and Purcell
It is a common fallacy to equate the recently revived art of the countertenor with the presumably unrevivable art of the castrato.
Certain of today's star countertenors, it's true, have essayed castrato roles, particularly in Handel operas.
But the core of their repertory remains music from the Renaissance to the present day written expressly for male falsetto, rather than male soprano.
Michael Chance ended his splendid recital on Sunday afternoon at the Frick Collection with perhaps the finest examples of the countertenor's art, the songs of Henry Purcell.
The function of a very high male voice in Purcell is not to provide any hint of the unnatural or bizarre.
At their best -- and Mr.
Chance is as good as they get -- countertenors can delineate the musical line with remarkable purity and directness.
This singer has sensationally exact diction, and he connects the words with a striking range of expressive devices, occasionally letting "real" tenor tone well up in his voice for comic or tragic effect.
The high points were "In the Black Dungeon of Despair," "Sweeter Than Roses," "O Solitude," "Music for a While" and the celestial "Evening Hymn."


Mexican Family's Black Sheep Was Often Out of the Picture
When his younger brother was President of Mexico, Raul Salinas de Gortari was seldom seen, but his presence was often felt in questionable private business deals.
When he was arrested this afternoon in connection with the assassination of a leading member of the governing party, the PRI, the only surprise many Mexicans expressed was that he was captured at all.


New Round of Base Closings Hits 34,200 Civilian Jobs
In what may be the last round of military base closings, the Defense Department said today that about 34,200 civilians would lose their jobs as it shuts down 33 big installations and shrinks or consolidates 86 smaller sites.
Although Defense Secretary William J. Perry said this year's list is smaller than once expected, most legislators predictably howled in anger over the choices -- none louder than Senators Alfonse M. D'Amato and Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York.


Being Born Too Soon Is Worse Than Being Born Too Small
A NEW study of more than 7.5 million births has challenged the assumption that low birth weights per se are the cause of the high infant mortality rate in the United States.
Rather, the new findings indicate, prematurity is the principal culprit.
Being born too soon, rather than too small, is the main underlying cause of stillbirth and infant deaths within four weeks of birth.
Each year in the United States about 31,000 fetuses die before delivery and 22,000 newborns die during the first 27 days of life.
The United States has a higher infant mortality rate than those in 19 other countries, and this poor standing has long been attributed mainly to the large number of babies in this country who are born too small, including a large proportion who are born "small for date," or weighing less than they should for the length of time they were in the womb.


For Moscow's Soldiers, Some Respite Amid the Ruins


Transatlantic Holdings Inc.(TRH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Festival of Mexican Culture
A festival celebrating Mexican culture is to take place through this month at the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts at Lincoln Center.
This series, a Festival of Mexican Performing Arts, is to begin at 4:30 P.M. on Saturday with a piano recital by Maria Teresa Rodriguez playing works by Carlos Chavez.


Coffee-Bar Tipping? The Jury Is Still Out
THE coffee of the day is usually hazelnut, and the question of the day is whether to tip for it.
All over Manhattan, coffee-bar patrons are being confronted by jars and bowls with signs like "Tips create incredibly desirable karma!" and "Out of pity, out of generosity, whatever! We don't care. Tips!" And many New Yorkers, only recently having mastered the art of ordering espresso and lattes, are confounded by this facet of coffee-bar culture.


PHH Corp.(PHH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Oneida Ltd. (OCQ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Port-au-Prince Journal; Carnival's Theme: Let Lent Come, Haiti Has Hope
With the country living under a military dictatorship and harsh economic sanctions, Haitians did not feel much like celebrating the annual pre-Lenten Carnival last year.
No wonder, then, that with President Jean-Bertrand Aristide back in power, this year's celebration was quickly baptized "the Carnival of Hope."
Signs of Haiti's newly relaxed political atmosphere have been everywhere during the 72 hours of nationwide festivities, which end early on Wednesday.
Here in the capital, a few participants have dressed as roosters, the symbol of the Lavalas movement of Mr.
Aristide, or worn Uncle Sam costumes -- masquerades that would have earned them a beating, or much worse, just last year.


Editors' Note
An article in Business Day on Nov. 21 discussed a battle over the ownership of the Union Bank of Switzerland.
It recounted recent moves to permit more foreign investment in Swiss companies, including banks, after years of tight restrictions.
Recalling the evolution of the banking law over the last 20 years, the article referred to what legislators and bankers perceived as a threat from "Arab investors and drug cartels."
In referring to Arab investors, the article should have made it clear that in the 1970's, as the Swiss were drawing up the legislation, it was aimed at Middle Eastern countries that had just acquired huge amounts of money from oil and were investing around the world.


Gang Leader Details Crimes Of Drug Ring
In a chilling monotone, the leader of a $16-million-a-year-drug ring called the Wild Cowboys testified yesterday how he and fellow gang members terrorized the South Bronx and upper Manhattan.
He detailed how gang members assassinated their rivals and even recounted his own murder of a man he said had tried to cheat him.
Nelson Sepulveda's testimony was a rare instance of a gang leader describing how he ran a murderous criminal enterprise, in this case one that has been tied to at least 10 killings in three boroughs.
At one point, he described exacting revenge against a "regular customer" who had apparently crossed him while buying a large amount of crack cocaine.


A Big Push to Sway Just One Vote
The night ended not with a bang, nor with a whimper, but with a remarkable legislative stall.
All was moving according to schedule as the Senate wrapped up debate on the constitutional amendment to require a balanced budget.
Closing statements were made by both sides, all the preliminary voting was done.
House Republicans had wandered across the Capitol to watch the great victory.
And then, after Senator Bob Dole, the Republican leader, wrapped up his final remarks, he suggested the absence of a quorum.
Suddenly, what had been increasingly apparent all day long was clear: The Republicans lacked the votes.


New Look at a Mexican Murder
President Ernesto Zedillo, already reeling from the consequences of two inherited crises -- an overvalued peso and the armed conflict with peasant rebels in Chiapas -- has courageously taken on a third, the unsolved assassination of Luis Donaldo Colosio.
Mr.
Colosio was the front-running presidential candidate when he was shot at a campaign rally last March.
Mr.
Zedillo, his campaign manager, was chosen by the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party, or PRI, to take his place.
The new investigation is not yet complete.
But it has already brought two new arrests and some preliminary findings by the new Attorney General, Antonio Lozano Gracia, a temperate lawyer chosen by Mr.
Zedillo from the conservative opposition.
Mr.
Lozano contends that the man imprisoned as the gunman could not have acted alone.
Instead, he points to a conspiracy that allegedly reaches into the ranks of the ruling party and involves employees of the private security firm hired to protect Mr.
Colosio.
The Attorney General also finds that previous investigators during the presidency of Carlos Salinas de Gortari ignored critical evidence and deliberately manipulated the crime scene.


Eastex Energy (ETEX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Transactions
Baseball  Northern League
SIOUX CITY EXPLORERS -- Signed Stephen Lukas, pitcher.


The Case of the Missing Ivories
Officials of a moving company here know where their truck was when thieves got it -- a motel parking lot in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
And they know where the truck was found, in the Florida community of Miramar.
What they don't know is what happened to the contents: five pianos, including two costly concert grands en route to a national competition.


Excerpts From Byrd and Dole Remarks on Balanced-Budget Amendment
Following are excerpts from today's Senate debate on the constitutional amendment requiring a balanced Federal budget, as transcribed by The New York Times.
Speaking were Senators Robert C. Byrd, Democrat of West Virginia; Bob Dole, Republican of Kansas, and Olympia J. Snowe, Republican of Maine and acting president pro tem of the Senate.
SENATOR BYRD Madame President, I think this is a sad spectacle.
We've had 30 days of debate, both sides have poured out their hearts, have worked hard and we came to the moment that we felt we -- we were going to have a roll call vote.
We entered into an agreement to that effect.
Now if we would -- if we had known that we were going to reach this kind of a travesty, this Senator would never have agreed to that unanimous consent agreement.


After 102 Years, a Closing
Deeply in debt and with its accreditation about to run out, Upsala College is expected to announce today that after 102 years of educating students, it will close May 31.
The school owes $12.5 million, said Paul DeLomba, who has been president of Upsala for five months.
About 500 full-time and 200 part-time students are enrolled.
In November 1994, the trustees decided to vote by the end of February on whether to close the school.
In December, they saw a glimmer of hope.


Homestake Mining Co.  (HM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tennis Group Narrows Its Review
The Tennis Industry Association, a trade organization in North Palm Beach, Fla., has narrowed a review on its account to 6 agencies from 11.
Billings were estimated at $7.5 million.
Brad Patterson, executive director, who confirmed a report this week in Adweek, identified the finalists as the Leo Burnett Company in Chicago; Chiat/Day, Grey Entertainment and Media, and Warwick Baker &amp; Fiore, all of New York; Wieden &amp; Kennedy in Portland, Ore., and Young &amp; Rubicam Miami.
A decision is expected at the end of April, he said.


Developments in Washington
SENATE -- Senate Republicans -- one Democrat short of the 67 senators they need to pass a balanced-budget amendment -- reneged on a promise to vote on the measure and abruptly threw the chamber into recess instead.
The move by Senator Bob Dole, the majority leader, drew a bitter rebuke from the chief opponent of the amendment, Senator Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia, who damned it as "a sleazy, tawdry effort to win a victory." Asked later when the Senate might vote on the amendment, Mr.
Dole replied with a half-smile, "Maybe this week."  HOUSE -- The House approved far-reaching changes in how Federal agencies enforce health, safety and environmental laws, directing regulatory agencies to address the most serious risks first and to base rules primarily on economic considerations, not on the health standards that underpin many existing laws.
The bill, backed by industry groups and opposed by environmentalists, is the most comprehensive of several anti-regulatory initiatives being debated in the House.


Netscape Knows Fame And Aspires to Fortune
It would seem to be a bonanza for the Netscape Communications Corporation.
Only a few months after releasing its first software, the company seems to be the runaway leader in a field with growth rates not seen since the early, heady days of the personal computer business.
The frenzy involves "browser" software -- programs that enable Internet users to navigate the phenomenally popular multimedia service known as the World Wide Web.
And although other browsers are available, Netscape's Navigator software has emerged as many people's browser of choice.


Kim Sang Hyup; South Korean Educator, 74
Kim Sang Hyup, a former Cabinet minister and president of Korea University in Seoul, died on Feb. 21 at his home in the South Korean capital.
He was 74.
The cause was a heart attack, press reports from Seoul said.


From Ulysses Dove's Mind to Dancers' Feet
The "Dance in America" series of public television's "Great Performances" is once again focusing on the work of a noted black choreographer.
A couple of weeks ago, Garth Fagan was given an elegant showcase.
Tonight it's Ulysses Dove, whose gift for making dances was initially nurtured by the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater.
"Two by Dove," from the BBC, features two different dances connected by the theme of death and having to let the spirits go.
In "Vespers," six female dancers from the Ailey company evoke different aspects of Mr.
Dove's grandmother as she tries to come to terms with her mother's death.


Vanbiesbrouck and Richter Simply Pull Out All Stops
There is a big difference between the World Cup soccer tournament, held last summer in the United States, and the Rangers-Panthers hockey game, held last night in Madison Square Garden.
The soccer games had more scoring and some of them were more entertaining.
And the soccer tournament, the championship game at least, allowed for a shootout to settle a tie.


When the Table Matters More Than the Meal
EVERY restaurant has it, though practically every restaurateur denies it: a best table, the one that, all at once, confers and confirms a customer's status.
In a secluded corner or in full view of everyone who comes in the door, with a heavy marble top or spindly legs, it can be a deuce, where a mogul and a power broker can go fork to fork at lunch time, or a booth for four with a velvety banquette.
What makes a table sought after varies from restaurant to restaurant and even from noon to night.
Consider the Four Seasons, at 99 East 52d Street: some of the most powerful people in the world sit in the Grill Room during lunch, but never, ever at dinner time.


Stant Corp.(STNT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Haitians Remember Carter's Role Bitterly
To the Editor:
While it is true former President Jimmy Carter's visit to Haiti produced skepticism and public scorn, it is inaccurate to suggest that the Haitian reaction is due to ingratitude and "the turmoil of Haitian domestic politics" (front page, Feb. 24).


Troubled By Deficit, Persistent In Populism
When Kent Conrad arrived in Washington as a freshman Senator in 1987, he staked his political career on the quixotic goal of reducing the Federal budget deficit by 80 percent in his first term.
The deficit grew instead, and after six years in office Mr.
Conrad declined to run for re-election.
Now the tough-talking North Dakota Democrat not only is still in Washington -- a result of what he describes as "a fluke of fate" -- but indeed finds himself the focus of attention in an imminent historic moment.


Wine Talk
EVERY year at this time, Americans find out how much wine they drank last year, what kind it was, and what their vinous intake for the year ahead is likely to be.
And it looks like wine drinking is going up.
"The wine business has finally turned the corner," said Jon Fredrikson, a wine industry consultant in San Francisco.
"Last year was a good year, and we expect 1995 to be the same."


Treasuries Rally to End Day Mixed
Fresh economic news yesterday left investors unsure whether the economy was slowing down as much as the Federal Reserve would like, and therefore whether the Fed would find it necessary to raise short-term interest rates once again.
Nevertheless, prices of Treasury securities staged a late rally to finish mixed, after dropping in early trading as investors sold on worries that interest rates would rise and erode the value of their fixed-income holdings.
Buyers re-entered the market, lowering yields of the longer maturities while helping the short and intermediate part of the market bounce off the day's lows in the afternoon on news that retail sales were off.


Simon Property Group Inc.(SPG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


PrimaDonna Resorts (PRMA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Republicans Postpone a Balanced-Budget Vote
Senate Republicans, a lone Democrat short of the 67 legislators they need to adopt a balanced-budget amendment, reneged tonight on a promise to vote on the measure and abruptly threw the chamber into recess instead.
Asked later when the Senate might vote on the amendment, the majority leader, Bob Dole, replied with a half-smile, "Maybe this week." A second Republican who is leading the amendment debate, Senator Larry E. Craig of Idaho, predicted a vote on Wednesday.


Bindley Western Indus.(BIND,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Abortion Pill Issue Creates a Clash for Some Republicans
The politics of abortion ran into the Contract With America today, and Representative Thomas J. Bliley Jr. of Virginia and more than a dozen other Republicans seem caught in the collision.
As chairman of the House Commerce Committee, Mr.
Bliley is a leading Republican in the effort to ease regulatory burdens on businesses, particularly drug companies seeking quick approval from the Food and Drug Administration for new products.


NATO Secretary General Questioned in Belgian Scandal
A corruption scandal in Belgium involving kickbacks and bribes in the purchase of helicopters from an Italian company has led to the investigation of the Secretary General of NATO.
Willy Claes, the NATO Secretary General and a leader of the Flemish Socialist Party, was Belgium's Economics Minister when Brussels agreed to purchase 46 helicopters from Agusta, an Italian manufacturer, in the late 1980's.
State prosecutors now want to question him about what he knew of a reported $1.7 million "gift" Agusta made to the Flemish Socialist Party in 1989, after the Italian company sold the helicopters to Belgium for $267 million.


Toro Co. (TTC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 3


The Grumbling Gets Louder Over Voting on the Grammys
In this week's issue of Billboard, the leading music-industry trade magazine, a full-page ad bought by Geffen Records lists the many magazines, newspapers, critics' polls and readers' polls that have selected "Live Through This," the latest album by Courtney Love's band, Hole, as the best record of 1994.
In large yellow print at the bottom of the ad is this sentence: "Recognized by everyone but Naras."
"Naras" is the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences, the organization responsible for the Grammy Awards ceremony, contemporary music's most prestigious annual event, which is to be held tonight in Los Angeles at the Shrine Auditorium and broadcast live on CBS.
Hole, to the chagrin of Geffen and other Grammy critics, did not receive a single nomination.


Tangerines or Oranges Atop Pork
PORK tenderloin with tangerine sauce somehow sounds more exotic than pork tenderloin with orange sauce, but lack of a tangerine should not stop you from making this simple and simply delicious dish: use an orange instead.


Teacher's Absent. Now What?; New York Schools Face a Chronic Lack of Substitutes
On paper, everything was in order.
The substitute teacher had the required license and had taught at other schools.
But the lesson she gave the sixth graders last November at Public School 64 in the High Bridge section of the Bronx shocked even the children.
In the middle of a poetry lesson, the 45-year-old woman wrote on the blackboard an obscene verse about boys, girls and sexual intercourse.


A Fresh Wind Is Blowing at Talks
The effort may fall short, but negotiators in baseball's labor dispute made it clear today they are earnestly trying to make a deal that would enable legitimate major leaguers to replace the replacement players.
On the 201st day of the strike and the second day of this round of talks, neither side could point to concrete progress on the central economic issues of payroll tax, revenue sharing and salary arbitration/free agency.
Nevertheless, their relationship remained peaceful and their work positive.


Carrying On in a Master's Steps: Erick Hawkins's Muse and Mate
Lucia Dlugoszewski has been looked upon for years, at least in the dance world, as the favorite composer of Erick Hawkins.
Small, round and occasionally excitable, she was the longtime companion who provided the modern-dance master with sounds -- sometimes frenzied and propulsive, sometimes filled with meditative clarity, but always gutsy -- that set his dances into motion.
Together, she said, they created work that allowed him to "revise metaphor."
When Hawkins died suddenly last November, it was revealed that Ms.
Dlugoszewski (pronounced dlu-go-SHEFF-skee) and Hawkins were married.
Why did they keep it a secret for more than three decades?
Ms.
Dlugoszewski would say only that it was for "professional reasons." Despite their many collaborations, the two did maintain separate artistic identities.


Dow and Hoechst Set Value For Marion at $7.2 Billion
Hoechst A.G. of Germany and the Dow Chemical Company, the main participants in the slow takeover minuet being danced around Marion Merrell Dow, Dow's drug subsidiary, have agreed with Marion on one thing: the drug company's value is $25.75 a share, or a little more than $7.2 billion.
The announcement yesterday by the three companies stopped just short of saying a final deal had been struck.
Hoechst, which is one of the world's largest chemical and drug companies but a bit player in the American pharmaceutical market, has been an on-again, off-again suitor for several months.
Marion's products include Cardizem, a leading heart drug; Seldane, an antihistamine, and Nicoderm skin patches for people trying to quit smoking.


Arkansas Banker Is Indicted in Transactions Tied to Clinton's 1990 Campaign for Governor
A former Arkansas banker who lent Bill Clinton money for his 1990 race for governor was indicted today on charges that he conspired to violate Federal banking laws in a scheme that involved campaign officials.
Although the indictment did not identify by name any others involved in the reported conspiracy, it referred to the participation of a representative of the 1990 campaign who was identified by lawyers in the case as Bruce Lindsey, the deputy White House counsel and one of the President's closest confidants.


At Last, Lessons in Defense Are Sinking In at St. John's
When the college basketball season began last November, one of the problems Coach Brian Mahoney admitted his St.
John's team would have was learning how to play aggressive, tight defense consistently.
Most of his players were young and still operating with the scorer's mentality learned in high school.
Selling them on the attention to detail needed to play defense in the Big East has proved to be a slow process.
Only in the last month, and particularly over the last five games, has St.
John's played the type of defense Mahoney has been looking for all season.
In its last eight Big East games, the Red Storm has given up an average of 78 points per game, a drastic improvement over its first eight Big East games, when St.
John's allowed an average of 87.6.


Sidney Cowell, 92, Ethnomusicologist And Teacher
Sidney Robertson Cowell, an ethnomusicologist, writer and the widow of the composer Henry Cowell, died on Thursday at her home in Shady, N.Y., said Sean Hartnett, her executor.
She was 92.
In her extensive travels from 1937 to 1957, Mrs.
Cowell recorded American, Finnish, Irish, Portuguese, Iranian and Turkish folk music, among other types.
Her collection, housed in the Library of Congress, is among the most extensive ever gathered and includes some of the earliest documentation of ethnic music in the United States.
It holds not only field recordings, but also correspondence, field notes, photographs, articles and other materials.


U.S. Is Wary As Iran Adds Troops in Gulf
Iran has sharply increased its military forces on three islands at the mouth of the Persian Gulf in recent months, provoking alarm at the Pentagon and among America's gulf allies, senior military officials said today.
Gen.
John M. Shalikashvili, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told reporters today that Iran had placed Hawk antiaircraft missiles on an island in the Strait of Hormuz, heightening fears that Teheran could cut off oil shipping in the waterway that handles 20 percent of the world's oil production.
"The other day they started putting missiles on their launchers, which they had not done before," General Shalikashvili said.


Numac Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
The Spurs Remain Hot  David Robinson's 18 points helped the San Antonio Spurs close out an 11-2 month with their sixth straight victory, a 100-83 decision over the visiting Cleveland Cavaliers last night.
The Spurs are the hottest team in the National Basketball Association since Dennis Rodman returned from the suspended list on Dec. 10, winning 30 of 37 games.


U.S. Can (USCN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Barings Officials Optimistic on Finding a Buyer
Optimism ran high within Barings P.L.C. today that the failed firm could be sold within days, probably in pieces, despite the $1 billion loss sitting on its books.
Two days after Barings was brought down by a single trader's enormous losing bet on the direction of Japanese stocks and interest rates, Barings executives said representatives of banks and investment houses from around the world were discussing possible deals with a court-appointed administrator.


Finally, 16 Months Late, Denver Has a New Airport
Denver International Airport finally opened today, hailed by its proponents as a mighty catalyst for the economy of the Rocky Mountain region and ridiculed by detractors as a $4.9 billion monument to boosterism and boondoggling.
At 6 A.M., United Flight 1062 pushed back from Gate 38 and headed off for Kansas City, soaring steeply into a snowy sky to inaugurate the first full day of operations.
Not since the Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport opened 21 years ago had a major new airport been opened in the United States.


Sheik's Talk at Issue in Trial
Jurors in the sedition trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and 10 others were shown one of the cleric's sermons yesterday in which he encouraged devout Muslims to fight a guerrilla war against all enemies of Islam, including the United States.
By entering the speech in evidence, the prosecutors were trying to give a glimpse of Mr.
Abdel Rahman's militant interpretation of the Islamic duty to perform Jihad, an Arab word for struggle.
The prosecutors argue that such speeches inspired his co-defendants to plan terrorist attacks in the United States.


Bishops Assail Pataki's Budget, Calling It Devastating to the Poor
New York State's Roman Catholic bishops harshly criticized Gov.
George E. Pataki's proposed budget today, saying its deep cuts would be devastating for the poor.
The bishops, including Bishop Howard Hubbard of Albany and John Cardinal O'Connor of New York, met with Mr.
Pataki for three hours today to discuss the impact of the cuts, but the Governor said the session failed to change his mind.


Maalox Account Is Moved to Grey
Angotti, Thomas, Hedge in New York has experienced a "Maalox moment" as the Ciba-Geigy Corporation, which recently acquired the Maalox line of antacids, shifted the brand's account to Grey Advertising Inc. in New York.
Billings were estimated at $15 million.
Eric Jackson, a spokesman for Ciba-Geigy in Ardsley, N.Y., confirmed a report of the change this week in Adweek.
Grey, which created the "Maalox moment" theme when it previously handled the account, was awarded the brand again after a review, he said, adding that Ciba-Geigy had formerly worked with the agency on a project for the Habitrol smoking patch.


More Corruption Charges Against Former Principal
Until yesterday, prosecutors had charged only that Stuart Possner, the former principal of Public School 100 in Coney Island, was a corrupt administrator who stole money from the city's school system and coerced teachers into doing his political bidding.
But the prosecutors held yesterday that as bad as that was, Mr.
Possner had done even more: like stealing money from his young students.


Guards Argue and 1 Dies
A private security guard at the King's County Department of Juvenile Probation was shot and killed about 7:30 last night after an altercation with a second guard, said a police spokesman, Officer Scott Bloch.


Allegheny &amp; Western Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Developments in Washington
SENATE -- Still looking for just one more vote to win passage, Senate Republicans agreed to a showdown today on the balanced budget amendment.
The vote is scheduled for 2 P.M., and the Republican majority leader, Bob Dole, pledged that if it failed, he would revive the issue at the height of the 1996 election campaign.
He attacked several Democratic opponents for what he called a "stunning flipflop" on a measure they voted for a year ago, and other Republican senators criticized President Clinton's opposition, as well.
On Tuesday, Mr.
Dole suddenly postponed the vote on the amendment when it became clear that he had just 66 of the 67 votes needed.
The decision to have the final vote today came after apparently unsuccessful attempts to reach a compromise that would keep Social Security trust funds off limits to budget cutters.
"There is no reason a balanced budget amendment could not pass with nearly 80 votes in a matter of a few minutes -- if they're willing to protect Social Security," said Senator Harry Reid, a Nevada Democrat.
The latest New York Times/CBS News Poll found that 79 percent of Americans said they favored a constitutional amendment that would require the Federal Government to balance the budget 2002, but only 32 percent said they were in favor if it would require cuts in Social Security.


Somalia: Not a Total Failure
Little fanfare attends the efforts this week of United States Marines helping to evacuate the last United Nations forces from Somalia.
Two years ago and one beach away, 26,000 Americans troops waded ashore in a televised spectacular meant to symbolize a new humanitarian vocation for the United States military after the end of the cold war.
Nobody wants to talk about that symbolism now.
Somalia, including the death of 30 Americans, has become a cautionary example of a mercy mission gone wrong, cited mainly by those who would keep Americans out of future peacekeeping.


Writer Expressed Remorse on Tragedy
To the Editor:
Your profile of the mystery writer Anne Perry (Arts pages, Feb. 14) unfairly maligns this author.
As Ms.
Perry's literary agent in North America, I wish to correct your errors.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; State Control Over Trash Urged
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman told a Senate subcommittee yesterday that New Jersey could stop exporting garbage by the year 2000 if Congress granted states the authority to control waste disposal -- a power state and local governments lost last year, when the Supreme Court ruled they could not tell haulers where to send their trash.


Fall in Auto Sales Raises New Fears of Slowdown
Sales of cars and light trucks fell in February, in contrast to a robust period a year ago, according to company sales reports released today and estimates by analysts.
The results were below the expectations of Wall Street analysts, heightening fears of an economic slowdown and sending auto stocks falling on the New York Stock Exchange.


Volt Information Sciences Inc.(VOLT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 27


Mr. Rubin's Sensible Bank Reform
The timing was atrocious -- coming the same week that reckless trades by a junior employee bankrupted the oldest investment bank in Britain.
Yet the regulatory relaxation proposed as a banking reform by Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin makes good sense.
Mr.
Rubin would wipe away rules dating back to the Depression that are unsuited for modern financial markets.
He would allow banks to join forces with insurance and securities companies, creating a competitive mix that should benefit customers.
The plan would, by diversifying investment opportunities, make banks less risky -- the best way to avoid a taxpayer-financed bailout of depositors.
Had banks been allowed to sell insurance and stock, they would not have been bankrupted by the collapse of real estate markets in the 1980's.


TJX Cos.(TJX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


New York Can Do Better by Its Stray Animals
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 26 news article on the new Center for Animal Care and Control confirms the fears of animal-welfare proponents at the prospect of a New York City-financed animal shelter.
At two months, the center's destiny is to be an irresponsibly managed black hole into which lost pets, stray animals and blameless offspring fall, never to emerge.
In addition to criticism from animal care coalitions and health professionals, the center is drawing low marks from the animal rescue community.
One individual who sought to rescue an elderly cocker spaniel was met with a series of Mad Hatter-like responses to her inquiries and rude treatment by the staff.


Despite Crowd at Finish Line, Pettengill Edges Ahead Into 2d
A fresh southerly breeze off Punta del Este, Uruguay, yesterday created a bottleneck near the finish line in Leg 3 of the BOC single-handed yacht race around the world.
Leading a pack of five solo racers into port was Steve Pettengill of Middletown, R.I.
Pettengill beat his closest rival, Jean Luc Van den Heede, by 31 minutes, a slim margin considering the 7,100 miles the two competitors had sailed across the Pacific Ocean from Sydney, Australia.


Ellis Island Footbridge Gives Access to History
To the Editor:
"Ban the Span" (Topics item, Feb. 21) attacks the $15 million in Federal support I sponsored to build a footbridge from Liberty State Park to Ellis Island so that visitors can walk to this important national landmark.


2 Big Travel Agencies In a Merger
US Travel and IVI Business Travel International, two of the biggest travel companies in the country, said yesterday that they had merged to form BTI Americas Inc.
Officials of the new company said it would be the third-largest travel agency in the United States, behind American Express/Thomas Cook and Carlson Wagonlit.
They said the combined company had $3.2 billion in domestic sales and almost $20 billion internationally.


A Russian Rarity Visits Brooklyn
In Rimsky-Korsakov's opera "The Legend of the Invisible City of Kitezh," which arrived amid great expectations at the Brooklyn Academy of Music on Tuesday night, a Russian city is miraculously lifted out of history into a heavenly realm of light and peace.
It would have been nice to report that the opera shared a similar fate in this performance by the Kirov Opera, that under the musical direction of Valery Gergiyev this work, nearly unknown in the West, had been rescued from history's detritus, that it stood gleaming in a new light, an unheralded masterpiece.


House Votes to Request Clinton Data on Mexico
As members of Congress stepped up their criticism of President Clinton's $20 billion loan program to prop up the Mexican peso, the House of Representatives voted overwhelmingly this evening to approve a resolution asking that the Administration turn over all its files on Mexico's economy, debts and financial dealings with the United States.
An unusual coalition of liberal Democrats and conservative Republicans, particularly freshman Republicans, forced the vote, which was 407 to 21.


Officer Indicted For a Shooting Of a Colleague
The New York City police officer who opened fire on a black plainclothes transit officer during a moment of rush-hour chaos on a subway platform last summer has been indicted by a grand jury for first-degree assault, a person close to the indicted officer's family said yesterday.
Officer Peter Del-Debbio, 31, was off duty and traveling home on the evening of Aug. 22 when he said he mistook an undercover officer, Desmond Robinson, 31, for a criminal and emptied his five-shot revolver at him.
He could face a maximum sentence of 5 to 15 years if convicted of first-degree assault.
The grand jury also indicted Officer Del-Debbio for second-degree assault.


Lone Panelist Opens Base-Closing Reviews
An independent base-closing commission got off to an awkward start today -- minus seven of its eight members -- in a four-month review of the nearly 120 installations the Pentagon recommends closing, shrinking or consolidating.
"I feel a little like the Maytag repairman up here all by myself," said the panel's chairman and lone member, Alan J. Dixon, a former Democratic senator from Illinois.


A Voice In Pursuit Of Its Niche
Marietta Simpson, a gifted mezzo-soprano, who gave a recital on Friday night at Weill Recital Hall, has the kind of voice that is given to very few: warm, velvety smooth, laden with an inborn dusky expressivity.
Something in the quality of her tone immediately entrances the ear.
There are, however, limitations: she is marvelous in the lower and middle registers, but she has some difficulty toward the top.
Here the tone turns less alluring, though never harsh, and there are moments of unsteadiness.
In addition, she does not seem to have much expressive range beyond a sort of rapturous melancholy.
Yet what wonderful music she makes within those limitations.
Four Brahms lieder -- "Dein blaues Auge," "Immer leiser wird mein Schlummer," "Auf dem Kirchhofe" and "Verzagen" -- had the proper tone of sad repose, broken at times by piercing anguish.
Three famous Tchaikovsky songs -- "Again, as Before, Alone," "None but the Lonely Heart" and "Was I Not a Little Blade of Grass" -- profited from the singer's plush legato.
Songs of Chausson and Duparc, including "Extase" and "L'invitation au voyage," were more hesitant, with some wayward French vowels, but caressingly done.
Three songs by John Musto fit the voice ideally.


Corrections
A brief report by Reuters in the Company News column of Business Day yesterday about an offering planned by the Nynex Corporation involving a British subsidiary, Nynex Cablecomms Ltd., misstated the securities to be offered.
Cablecomms plans to offer as much as 270 million units, with each unit consisting of one ordinary share of Nynex Cablecomms P.L.C. and one common share of Nynex Cablecomms Inc., two intermediate holding companies, not a common share of the Nynex Corporation.


Comeback for a Chinese?
Unbowed by throat surgery and injuries received in an auto accident, MA JUNREN, the ousted trainer of China's vaunted Ma Family Army running team, is planning a comeback, the Xinmin Wanbao newspaper reported yesterday.
The coach plans a return to top-level athletics with a new crop of seven middle- and long-distance runners along with QU YUNXIA -- the world 1,500-meter record holder -- the newspaper said.


Panpipes in the Decor And Proud of It
WHEN Guillermo Guerrero thinks of home, he thinks about a small adobe house with a red tile roof and earthen floors in Ayabaca, a tiny Andean village in Peru near the Ecuador border.
He remembers the domed clay oven in a courtyard filled with animals, where his family ran the only bakery in town, and the way the rains transformed the village footpaths into rivulets that required stilts to cross.
He was sitting on a yellow folding chair in his kitchen in Astoria, Queens, one morning recently, in a modern apartment building where his window looks out onto the Triboro Bridge.
In the refrigerator, wrapped in a Woolworth's bag, were dried llama meat and bocadillo, sweet cubes made from peanuts and sugar cane.
On the windowsill was a jar of chicken fat that Mr.
Guerrero, a musician who specializes in the traditional Incan music of the Andes, uses to oil his drums on chilly New York days.


Body Found in Grave May Be Missing Child
Police officials said yesterday that they had found a skeleton in a shallow grave in the Bronx that they believe is the body of a missing 4-year-old Queens girl, Raychelle Ortiz.
But they said they were still waiting for the Medical Examiner's autopsy to determine whether the body is indeed that of Raychelle and to establish a cause of death.


Husband Backs Death for Wife in Slayings
The husband of a woman accused of murdering their two sons said today that he wanted his wife put to death if she was convicted.
"I'm backing him 100 percent," the husband, David Smith, said of the decision by Tommy Pope, the prosecutor, to seek the death penalty for Susan V. Smith.


Singapore Defends Itself Over Barings
Breaking silence for the first time since the collapse of the British investment bank Barings P.L.C. -- a result of catastrophic losses by a Barings trader here -- the Singapore Government defended the integrity of its trading markets today.
But it also announced a sweeping review of the futures exchange and promised to enact tight new rules over trading companies.
Singapore's Finance Minister, Richard Hu, told this city-state's Parliament that the Singapore International Monetary Exchange Ltd., where the trading originated, was not at risk because of the Barings losses, which now exceed $1 billion.


Japanese Citizenship Sought
CHAD ROWAN of Hawaii, a sumo wrestling grand champion, plans to apply for Japanese citizenship, a sports newspaper in Japan reported yesterday.


An Ally of Giuliani Is Again Investigated
The Manhattan District Attorney's office and the city's Department of Investigation are investigating whether a real-estate executive who was one of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's largest fund-raisers pressured tenants to make contributions to Mr.
Giuliani's 1993 campaign, officials said yesterday.
It is the second investigation in the last year of the fund-raiser, William W. Koeppel, who was appointed by Mr.
Giuliani to serve on the board of the Offtrack Betting Corporation.
The Department of Investigation is still looking into whether there were any ethical or legal violations in Giuliani administration officials paying no rent for several weeks in apartments owned by Mr.
Koeppel.


THE 104th CONGRESS: NEWS ANALYSIS Budgetary Posturing; Substance Losing Ground to Politics
The impasse in the Senate over the balanced-budget amendment can be explained by this finding in the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll: 79 percent of Americans said they favored a constitutional amendment that would require the Federal Government to balance its books by 2002; but only 32 percent said they were in favor if it would require cuts in Social Security.
With an eye toward those numbers, the proponents of the amendment portray themselves as the champions of fiscal responsibility and their opponents as spendthrifts.
Those against the amendment accuse the proponents of planning to raid Social Security and picture themselves as the guardians of retirement benefits.


Two Charged in Fatal Arson Are Suspects in 1989 Killing
Prosecutors said last night that two men arrested on Monday in a 1992 fatal Queens arson fire in which a firefighter died were the principal suspects in the 1989 slaying of a tenant advocate in Manhattan.
The advocate's dismembered body parts were found in plastic bags in the Bronx the day after he disappeared.
The two suspects, a landlord with a long history of building violations and his brother, were named in court papers as the suspects in the killing, in which the police said the victim, Bruce Bailey of Morningside Heights, had been shot or bludgeoned to death.


Wellpoint Health Networks (WLP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Where to Find It: Screens
FEW furnishings combine glamour and practicality as flawlessly as decorative screens, the exuberant zigzags that can shield the Stairmaster, create pockets of privacy for children and effortlessly evoke mystery, history and more than a whiff of romance. (Imagine the dressing room of a screen diva or Diaghilev dancer without one, draped with a fringed silk scarf, of course).
Though never long out of style, screens are suddenly everywhere, from cheap chic versions in mail-order catalogues to custom creations that look like gigantic pieces of jewelry.
Designers can't seem to get enough of them.


On the Angry Airwaves, the Response to the Budget Vote Is Underwhelming
Having come up one short of the 67 votes he needed to pass a balanced-budget amendment, Senator Bob Dole, the majority leader, turned yesterday to Rush Limbaugh, the talk radio figure who has served as an electronic precinct captain for Republicans in Congress.
But a cursory sampling of radio talk response around the country showed no great tidal wave of outrage, as Mr.
Dole had hoped.
Indeed, many of the callers turned on him, questioning his leadership and the depth of his conservatism.


Love to Hate Those Flower Shows
I HAVE this love-hate relationship with flower shows, particularly the Philadelphia Flower Show, which has been running since 1829 and will open on Sunday.
I hope it pours until then, and stays gloomy and cold, because I'll get a bigger bang from the bulbs when I go down the elevator into the Philadelphia Civic Center to bury my nose in six acres of forced flowers.
This year's theme (you have to have a theme) is "Moments in Time . . . A Galaxy of Gardens," which leaps from a Roman emperor's villa to a 1940's Victory Garden to a space station garden set in 2095.
Don't worry, the usual Waldor orchids dripping from fake trees are back.


Defending Affirmative Action, Liberals Try to Place the Debate's Focus on Women
Trying to counter pressure from the right, a coalition of liberal groups said today that the White House's review of Federal affirmative action programs should not lead to any cutback in them.
At a news conference, the affirmative action advocates also said they were trying to recast the growing debate over the issue so that it focused on the way such programs benefit women.
The more that affirmative action is described as an effort intended primarily to help blacks, they fear, the worse its political prospects.


Coffee, Tea or Statistics On Plane Crashes
Tuning into a program titled "Is Flying Safe?" is not a risky adventure.
You can be pretty sure the answer will not be an unnerving negative.
Usually, as in tonight's edition of "48 Hours," such a report focuses on a possible danger or two, already if belatedly or insufficiently publicized.
The hope is that prime-time attention may jolt a buggy-age bureaucracy into takeoff.
Tonight's targets are commuter planes, seven of which crashed last year, killing 262 people.
But before and after the program lands at the reasons, it pauses for interviews with survivors and relatives of those who died.
You can't help feeling sorry for them, but you may also sympathize with Richard Schlesinger, a good CBS reporter, for being assigned the job of getting people to grieve in public.
It's the standard television-magazine human-interest squeeze.


Horse Trader Admits Crimes Over 20 Years
A horse trader and stable owner pleaded guilty in Federal District Court here today to a 20-year crime spree within the wealthy world of show horses but denied the most serious act with which he is charged: soliciting the long-unsolved killing of the candy heiress Helen Vorhees Brach.
Mrs.
Brach, a horse lover, disappeared in 1977, leaving a fortune now worth $75 million.
Her body has never been found.


Doral Gets Nod For Its New Look
Golf professionals ordinarily like surprises as much as they like a buried lie in a bunker or a drive into a divot in the fairways.
But when the field of 144 touring pros arrived here for the Doral-Ryder Open, the opening event on the Florida swing of the PGA Tour, they were greeted by some changes that even they -- meticulous and demanding fellows that they are -- could not fault.
A major renovation of the grounds, part of a $30 million project undertaken by the new owners of the Doral Resort and Spa, the KSL Recreation Corporation, has brought the place back to its glory days.
They have gussied up the old dowager of a hotel, breathed new life into the spa and promised to put the teeth back into the Blue Monster course.


Grey Advertising Inc.(GREY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
Want to live in FRANK SINATRA'S house?
The singer and his wife, BARBARA, have put their Rancho Mirage, Calif., desert compound on the market, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
"I find Barbara and I are spending more time at our homes in Malibu and Beverly Hills and are not using the desert house as often as we used to," the 79-year-old singer said in a statement yesterday.


Merisel Inc.(MSEL,NNM) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Meggett Weighs the Options
While David Meggett decides if he will finish his career with the Giants, the team is contemplating some changes on its defensive line.
There seems to be a lull in the Meggett bidding as the free agent running back tries to decide what he wants to do.
Meggett got an offer from the New England Patriots on Tuesday night that was slightly better than the Giants' offer.
But the question is: Was it enough to sway Meggett to play again for his former coach, Bill Parcells?


Nordstrom Inc.(NOBE,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


COMPANY BRIEFS
GREAT WESTERN FINANCIAL CORP., Chatsworth, Calif., a holding company, said it was seeking to convert to a commercial bank from a savings and loan institution.
HARRIS COMPUTER SYSTEMS, Fort Lauderdale, Fla., said its $29.6 million offer to acquire Concurrent Computer Corp.
Oceanport, N.J., had been rejected by Concurrent's board.


Prudential's Capital Base Declined 11% Last Year
Putting the final point on a horrible year, the Prudential Insurance Company of America said yesterday that losses in a number of businesses, primarily its securities and mortgage subsidiaries, caused its capital base to decline in 1994 by $1.2 billion, or 11 percent, to $9.5 billion.
Prudential, one of the world's largest financial services companies, also said that after dividends and taxes it lost $907 million last year, compared with net income of $645 million in 1993.


Osaka, a Venue for Making Big Bets
The Osaka Securities Exchange found itself in the middle of a billion-dollar crisis this week started by a brash young British trader many hundreds of miles away in Singapore.
With more details emerging of how the vanished trader, Nicholas W. Leeson, was able to bring down the venerable British house of Barings P.L.C., financial professionals have pointed to a lack of monitoring not just inside Barings but perhaps also at the Osaka exchange, in a nation that in most areas never lacks for regulations.


Warnaco Group (WAC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 7


Long Bonds Push a Rally For 2d Day
The long end of the government securities market rallied yesterday for the second consecutive day, as new economic reports suggesting that growth was slowing and the threat of inflation was easing helped to keep the bullish sentiment intact.
In early trading all maturities came under pressure, as investors sold because of concerns that included a postponement of the Senate's vote on the balanced budget amendment and the weakness of the dollar in the currency markets, though it rebounded in the afternoon.


No Headline
"We really win if we win. But we may even win if we lose." -- SENATOR BOB DOLE, anticipating the vote on a balanced-budget amendment.  [ A1:6. ]


INSIDE
U.S. Will Cut Nuclear Stocks
In an appeal to lands opposing a ban on the spread of nuclear arms, President Clinton ordered cuts in American plutonium stocks.
Page A6.
Dole Denounces Yeltsin
The Senate majority leader asserted that the Clinton Administration was backing Russia's leader even as he retreated from reforms.
Page A10.
Mexico Hunts for Motive
Mexican officials gave conflicting accounts of why the brother of a former President may have ordered a party leader's death.
Page A3.
Grammys Old and New
The veteran Bruce Springsteen and the newcomer Sheryl Crow were the big Grammy winners.
Page C13.


CHRONICLE
Rabbi PETER J. RUBINSTEIN, the senior rabbi of Central Synagogue on Lexington Avenue, and KERRY BRADFORD, a management consultant, will be married on Sunday, and they have found a solution to the classic wedding quandary: whom to invite.
In their case, it's everyone.
The 1,800 invitations they sent out for their wedding at the synagogue went to the 1,300 members of the Reform congregation, all the boards that the rabbi belongs to, public officials, leaders of Jewish organizations and, of course, family and friends.
Responses were not requested, so "we have no idea how many people to expect or how to plan the food," Rabbi Rubinstein said.


Isis in Alliance With German Drug Maker
Isis Pharmaceuticals Inc. has agreed to collaborate with Boehringer Ingelheim International G.m.b.H. of Germany in the development of new drugs, the companies said yesterday.
The deal has a potential value for Isis of more than $100 million.
Following the announcement, shares of Isis jumped 15.5 percent in Nasdaq trading, gaining 87.5 cents, to $6.50.
Analysts said the deal not only insured the financial viability of Isis, which had a total market capitalization of about $125 million before the arrangement, but was also a significant validation of the company's leadership in the biotechnology field.


Simpson Judge Removes Juror, Shifting the Balance for the Fourth Time
The racial, sexual and perhaps the philosophical composition of the O. J. Simpson jury changed again today, as Judge Lance A. Ito removed the 46-year-old black man the defense lawyers considered their favorite.
His replacement, chosen by lot from a manila envelope, was a 38-year-old white woman who, unlike most other people, can say what the letters DNA stand for.


McClellan Is Still Sedated
Doctors kept GERALD MCCLELLAN heavily sedated for the fourth day in a row after a battering in a world title fight in London left him in critical condition with a brain injury.


Corrections
A sports picture in some editions on Tuesday, with an article about Alvin Harper of the Dallas Cowboys, was published in error.
It showed another Cowboy, Michael Irvin.
A corrected picture, in other editions, showed a smiling Alvin Harper in a jersey bearing his number.


In Pursuit of Memory, And a Double Agent
OUR GAME  By John le Carre  302 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $24.
For Timothy Cranmer, the self-loathing protagonist of John le Carre's brooding new espionage novel, "Our Game," the cold war is over.
At the age of 47, he has been let go by the British Secret Service and has retired to Honeybrook, his inherited manor house in rural Somerset, there to tend his vineyard and his beautiful young mistress, Emma Manzini.


In Privatizing City Services, It's Now 'Indy-a-First-Place'
Except for one day a year, when cars race at breakneck speed for 500 miles around an oval track, this unpretentious Midwestern city is so unaccustomed to the national limelight that it mockingly calls itself "Indy-a-no-place."
But as Indianapolis pursues the nation's most daring experiment in transforming local government into a business-like enterprise, this city of about 800,000 people is anything but obscure among urban experts and politicians around the country.


Mass Grave Uncovered in Chechnya


Trouble on the Mountain, Week After Week
Now that hospital dramas have been revived via the enormous success of "E.R.," ABC is betting the time is ripe to bring back the adventure genre.
The network is so hot about "Extreme," which makes its official debut tonight, that it offered a preview of the series in January right after the Super Bowl, television's most coveted spot for sampling new shows.
Well, guys, don't cash in your chips just yet.
Call it "Son (or Daughter) of 'Emergency,' " or as Alan Barnette, one of the executive producers, distilled it for an easy sound bite: 'Cliffhanger" meets Generation X. What we have here, wrapped in blather about rugged individualism and cutting-edge attitudes and personal demons, is the old concept that audiences cannot resist a last-minute rescue, especially if it involves someone clinging to side of a mountain while loud helicopters approach with help.


Hawkins's Harmony Lives On
In many ways, the best tribute to major artists is found in their own work.
There was no exception to this rule when the Erick Hawkins Dance Company opened its first season since Hawkins's death in November at the age of 85.
The program's three pieces on Tuesday night at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea) were created from 1961 to 1988 and defined Hawkins's distinctiveness as a choreographer.
His superb bare-legged dancers might shoot upward in the energetic eruptions of "Cantilever Two," flow like paint on canvas in "Early Floating" or jump with joy in "Heyoka." Never, however, did they move like other dancers.
Whether Hawkins's choreography is serene or exuberant, his idiom has a special purity, a fluid seamlessness combined with an animal alertness.


Market Place; Customer Accounts Tied Up At Some Small Stock Firms
For many small brokerage firms specializing in low-priced stocks, it has been a bad week.
They cannot take customer orders, and their customers cannot get at their money or securities.
And for one of the firms, Stratton Oakmont, the news got worse yesterday with word that a Federal judge had ordered it to install a taping system to protect its customers.
Stratton and about 40 other firms have been unable to trade because the firm that cleared their trades, Adler Coleman &amp; Company, went broke last week.
It was a victim of the collapse of another of its clients, Hanover Sterling, a penny stock firm.
A clearing firm acts as a broker's broker, guaranteeing that cash will be paid to the seller in a trade and that shares will be sent to the buyer.


Winnie Mandela's Fortunes Buffeted Anew by Graft Case
Police officers acting with the blessing of President Nelson Mandela today raided the home of his estranged wife, Winnie Mandela, searching for evidence to support charges she defrauded a Government program that builds houses for the poor.
A police spokesman said a monthlong investigation had already uncovered documents showing Mrs.
Mandela used her influence as a junior Cabinet member to steer Government contracts to a construction company, which repaid her with cash bribes and a controlling interest in the company.


Holy Bull's Successor? Cigar to Give It a Shot
The race to succeed Holy Bull as the dominant handicap horse in America is about to begin.
It may have started, in fact, on Feb. 11, when the great gray superhorse was eased up while racing down the backstretch of the Donn Handicap at Gulfstream Park.
He strained the tendons and ligaments in his left foreleg, and was retired to stallion duty at Jonabell Farm in Kentucky, where he is waiting out the 28-day quarantine period.


War and Memory
To the Editor:
In response to Moriyuki Motono's "Isn't It Time to Speak Openly of Hiroshima?" (letter, Feb. 25): Yes, it is time.
The Smithsonian Institution's decision to shield the public from the vast atrocities of Hiroshima "deprives the public of making a fair assessment of one of the most momentous happenings of the 20th century." Yes, the world has the right and needs to be exposed to the story in its entirety.


Novell Inc.(NOVL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


From Dust to Dust: The Lenten Season Begins


Beyond the Shaq, a Hardaway Attack
On a team with fewer offensive options, Anfernee Hardaway could well be averaging 30 points a game.
"He's definitely got that kind of offensive ability," Pat Williams, the general manager of the Orlando Magic, said today.
"But thank God he doesn't have that big of an ego."
On the Magic, Hardaway usually thrives as a sort of benevolent conduit.
But this 6-foot-7-inch point guard can be a chameleon, changing his game abruptly to whatever is needed at the moment.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; Mob Juror Charged With Lying
A juror in a 1990 racketeering trial was charged yesterday with lying to conceal her brother's business ties to a defendant, then trying to get her fellow jurors to return an acquittal.


Officer in 30th Precinct Is Acquitted of Corruption
In the first trial arising from the corruption scandal in the 30th Precinct, a Federal jury in Manhattan yesterday acquitted a police officer of charges that he distributed drugs, took payments to protect drug dealers and conducted illegal searches and seizures.
The case against the officer, John Arena, centered on the testimony of the Government's crucial witness, George Nova, a former police officer and admitted perjurer who pleaded guilty to drug trafficking and civil rights violations.
He agreed to testify against his former partner in a bid for leniency.


Bowing to I.M.F., Yeltsin Takes New Steps to Fight Spending and Corruption
In a concession to the International Monetary Fund, President Boris N. Yeltsin has signed a series of decrees intended to increase fiscal discipline and reduce widespread corruption, Russian officials said today.
The monetary fund is in the last stage of negotiating a $6.2 billion standby loan that is contingent on Moscow's commitment to stabilize its economy and keep its budget deficit within agreed limits in an effort to cut inflation here.


From Nike, a real world ad with a runner who is H.I.V.-positive.
THE world according to Madison Avenue is a beautiful, hopeful place with little room for imperfection of any kind, much less something like AIDS.
For instance, soon after Magic Johnson disclosed that he had tested positive for H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, he vanished from the ranks of celebrity endorsers.
But as AIDS continues to ravage the real world into a second decade, the issues evoked by the disease are slowly, gingerly beginning to be addressed in mainstream advertising.
The most visible sign is a television commercial for Nike Inc., the nation's largest athletic footwear marketer, focusing on a runner named Ric Munoz.


Varity Corp.(VAT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Southwest Airlines Co., Dallas, is selling $100 million of notes due in 2005 through Salomon Brothers Inc.
The issue is noncallable and priced at 99.461 to yield 8.08 percent.


Think of School Lunch Program as Business; More Money, Not Less
To the Editor:
"The Return of Ketchup" (editorial, Feb. 24), on Republican efforts to reform Federal food and nutrition programs as part of our welfare reform proposal, is so inaccurate I can only conclude that it was written without reading the legislation.


Bridge
A player who is on lead with two aces can reasonably expect to defeat a grand slam.
But if he picks the wrong one, the cost can be enormous.
An example is the diagramed deal, played in January at the Grand Club in Franklin Square, L.I.
It was reported by Mel Colchamiro of Merrick, L.I., who sat North.
His partner was Stan Green of Muttontown, L.I.
A direct raise to the six level is rare when an opening bid is doubled, but was entirely reasonable for North here.
He knew that his partnership had at least 12 hearts, and that one or both opponents was void.
That it made it very likely that East-West could make a contract or had a cheap save available.


Bob Evans Farms Inc.(BOBE,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 27


A Forgetful Jeweler Is Saved By a Cabby's Precious Find
Lois Foster's nightmare had a fairy-tale ending yesterday, complete with a bag full of gold and diamonds.
Ms.
Foster, 44, is a jeweler.
All Tuesday night, she wept in her home in Ocean Grove, N.J., thinking that her brown attache case with roughly $35,000 in jewelry and precious stones had been stolen.
She figured it was taken in the Port Authority Bus Terminal in mid-Manhattan during a moment of inattention while she was waiting to board a bus home from a day in New York.


CHRONICLE
DAVID GUNN JR. was a student at the University of Alabama in Birmingham, hoping to be a college English professor, when his father, Dr.
David Gunn, was killed two years ago at an abortion clinic in Pensacola, Fla.
Mr.
Gunn received his bachelor's degree last year and had begun studying for a master's degree, but found his life too altered to continue.
"Activism is taking 100 percent of my time," he said yesterday from Albany, where he had gone to lobby for a bill barring harassment or violence at centers that provide abortions and reproductive health care.


Court Sets Aside Requirement For 'Megan's Law' Hearings
One of the two recent legal setbacks to New Jersey's "Megan's Law" was softened today when a state appeals court set aside a judge's order for a court hearing before community notification of a sex offender's presence.
While the State Attorney General, Deborah T. Poritz, called the ruling "very important," it did not disturb a Federal judge's finding on Tuesday that the community notification provisions were unconstitutional for offenders convicted before the law took effect on Oct. 31.


British Trader Whose Big Losses Ruined Bank Is Held in Germany
Barings P.L.C. trader Nicholas W. Leeson and his wife, sought since the Sunday collapse of the British investment bank, were detained by German border police at Frankfurt airport this morning after arriving on a Royal Brunei Airlines flight, a spokesman for the local police said today.
"Mr Leeson and his wife were found on board the flight and are currently in the rooms of the German border police," the spokesman told Reuters.
He said Mr.
Leeson had not been officially arrested but he could give no further details.


Executive Changes
HELENE CURTIS INDUSTRIES, Chicago, promoted Gilbert P. Smith, its executive vice president and president of Helene Curtis U.S.A., to president of Helene Curtis North America.
Eugene Zeffren, vice president for research and development, was promoted to senior vice president and president of Helene Curtis U.S.A.
MANUFACTURED HOMES COMMUNITIES INC., Chicago, named Thomas P. Heneghan vice president and chief financial officer.


U.S. Says Colombia Refuses To Cooperate in Drug War
The Administration severely criticized the Government of Colombia today, calling it "the world's primary cocaine production center" and saying it was not doing enough to crack down on the drug trade.
But the Administration stopped short of cutting off economic aid.
In its annual drug report, the State Department accused Colombia of prosecuting few traffickers, giving light prison sentences and having no laws against money laundering.


U.S. and China in a Clash Over Human Rights
In a blunt diplomatic exchange, China today asked the State Department's top diplomat for Asian affairs to withdraw American support for a United Nations resolution criticizing China's human rights record.
But the State Department official, Winston Lord, told the Chinese Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen, that Washington would continue to press for the resolution, which could come to a vote in Geneva next week.


Magna Intl.(MGA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Reed Ties Anderson's Complaints to Injury
Willis Reed said today that Kenny Anderson's criticism of Coach Butch Beard was the result of an "an injury thing" and compared it to something Reed experienced as a Knick.
Reed recalled his own frustration when he missed the sixth game of the 1969-70 championship final against the Los Angeles Lakers.
"I hated it," the general manager said.
"I was happy for my teammates, but I wanted to be on the floor. I wasn't used to watching. I think that is what Kenny's going through right now. He's always been at the top of his game, physically. This is all new to him."


Score Now, Ask Questions Later
With a smile, Caryn Schoff, New York State's career leading scorer in high school basketball, recalled some of the silliest questions she has had to answer.
She is approaching the end of a brilliant career at St.
Johnsville, a tiny school in Canajoharie, N.Y., a small town of 1,500 people 60 miles west of Albany.
"I've been asked: Do I sign autographs? Do I sleep with my basketball? Have I ever named my basketball? Why did I decide to play basketball?"


I.M.F. Loan Is Expected for Ukraine
In a development that could have important implications for economic change in neighboring Russia, Ukraine is expected to borrow close to $1.5 billion from the International Monetary Fund later this month.
Ukraine's representative at the I.M.F. in Washington, Oleh Havrylyshyn, and Anders Aslund, a Swedish economic adviser to President Leonid Kuchma of Ukraine, confirmed in separate interviews yesterday that the Ukranian Government would sign a letter this week accepting the I.M.F.'s terms for the loan, which would be by far the largest the institution has given to any country of the former Soviet Union.
Ukraine has 52 million people.


Coach Out, but Smith Is On As Terps Survive Scare
Maryland 94, Duke 92
Joe Smith scored a career-high 40 points, including the game-winning follow at the buzzer last night, as sixth-ranked Maryland survived the absence of Coach Gary Williams to post a 94-92 victory over Duke in Durham, N.C.
The Terrapins (23-5, 12-3 Atlantic Coast Conference) moved within one victory of their first regular-season league crown since 1980.
A victory Sunday at No. 11 Virginia would clinch the title and give Maryland the No. 1 seeding in next week's A.C.C. tournament at Greensboro, N.C.


Younkers Inc.(YONK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


A World Bleak and Growing Bleaker
The spiritual world of Giya Kancheli, which was explored in a concert by Continuum on Saturday evening at Alice Tully Hall, is evidently a bleak place, and getting bleaker.
Mr.
Kancheli, who turns 60 this year, has gained acclaim in the West along with other East European mystical Minimalist composers since he fled the post-Soviet uproar in his homeland of Georgia in 1992 to live in Berlin.
"There haven't been any particular changes in my life," he said through a translator in an onstage conversation with Joel Sachs, one of Continuum's directors.
"Things are more difficult," he added cryptically after allowing that he could now at least count on amenities like heat and electricity.
"My music has become sadder and more tragic."


Elek-Tek Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


London Journal; Oh-So-Courtly Justice: Honor Your Mum, or Else!
The details of the case before the Camberwell Youth Court were straightforward.
A 15-year-old with a criminal file as thick as a small telephone book had just been found guilty of stealing a portable telephone and sentenced to pay restitution and court costs equivalent to about $550.
Only when the boy angrily pushed his way out of the courtroom ahead of his mother did Donald Coombe, the presiding magistrate, raise his voice.
"You come back in here!" bellowed Mr.
Coombe, a 67-year-old former boxer.
As the youth's face bobbed into view again, the magistrate leveled an accusing finger.


Garden Q.&amp;A.
The Velcro Plant
Q.  Is it true that teasel inspired the creation of Velcro? -- Joseph Newman, New York


House Leaders and Republican Governors Agree on an Alternative to Food Stamps
Under intense pressure from Republican governors, House Republican leaders partly reversed themselves today and agreed to let some states use Federal food stamp money to feed poor people in any way that state officials wanted.
Under the agreement, these states could set their own eligibility criteria and benefit levels, replacing the uniform national standards in the food stamp program.
Low-income people now entitled to food stamps would not necessarily be entitled to food assistance under the new programs.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 2 about a questionnaire sent by Senator Larry Pressler, Republican of South Dakota, to employees of National Public Radio misstated the scope of his inquiry.
The questionnaire sought information about ethnic backgrounds, sexes and previous employment at religious-affiliated broadcasting companies, but it did not ask about religious affiliation.


Calendar: Lectures, Exhibitions
Shaker Prints  Museum of American Folk Art, Columbus Avenue at 65th Street; (212) 977-7298.
An exhibition of Shaker drawings, hymn books and family record books will be on display through April 2.
On Tuesday at 6 P.M., Gerard C. Wertkin, the director of the museum, will speak about the centerpiece of the exhibition, a series of 1840's drawings given as gifts.
Open Tuesday through Sunday, 11:30 A.M. to 7:30 P.M.
No charge.
Architects on Architecture  Architectural League of New York, Urban Center, 457 Madison Avenue (51st Street); (212) 753-1722.
A series of four lecture programs starts tonight with three New York-based architects: Mojgan Hariri and Gisue Hariri, of Hariri &amp; Hariri, and Chuck Hoberman of Hoberman Associates.
Programs, which continue March 9, 16 and 23, start at 6:30 P.M.
Tickets, $7, at the door.


Westvaco Corp.(W,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
Mr.
Salinas also withdrew his bid to head the World Trade Organization.  [ D1. ]


Electronic Ads On Phone Kiosks
Transportation Displays Inc. is introducing outdoor advertising displays called TDI Vision to present electronically transmitted ads on telephone kiosks.
The displays, which were tested in Manhattan last summer, are being set up on Nynex kiosks; they resemble the screens in sports bars and restaurants that present scores and ad messages using a light-emitting display, or L.E.D., format.


Parking Rules
Because of the Id al-Fitr holiday, alternate-side street cleaning regulations are suspended in New York City today, tomorrow and Saturday.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Urging Students to Read With a Little Cash
Channon Robinson, a 12-year-old at Moten Elementary School, said he liked Speaker Newt Gingrich "because he's coming to our school for no reason but to talk to us while he could be at work making some money."
Actually, Mr.
Gingrich had a purpose, but he would have appreciated Channon's understanding of making money.


Russian Journalist Is Slain; Profits May Be the Motive
One of Russia's best-known television journalists, Vladislav Listyev, was killed tonight in a gangland-style murder in the entryway of his Moscow apartment building, the police said.
Mr.
Listyev, 38, made his reputation in the glasnost period when he often sparred on the air with Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet President, who was striving to remove the stifling cloak of official lies that surrounded everything here.


Salinas Blames Successor for Peso Crisis
Speaking publicly for the first time about the nation's severe economic crisis that many Mexicans believe he caused, former President Carlos Salinas de Gortari has tried to shift blame to his successor, contending that President Ernesto Zedillo bungled the peso's devaluation in December a few weeks after taking office.
In a telephone call on Tuesday afternoon to a national television news program, "24 Hours," Mr.
Salinas said the decisions by President Zedillo and his administration had cost Mexico billions of dollars "in a single day" and led directly to the financial turmoil that now engulfs the country.


Uneasy Crossroads -- A special report.; Discontent Seethes in Once-Stable Turkey
For years a strategic ally in the containment of Soviet Communism, Turkey has now become a bulwark against dictators, terrorists and Islamic radicals.
In this it is aided by geography.
With neighbors like Iraq, Syria and Iran, it seems an enclave of relative stability in a zone of political earthquakes.


BUDGET MEASURE IS DELAYED AGAIN IN ANGRY SENATE
Republicans shut down the Senate chamber again today to avert a certain defeat of the proposed balanced-budget amendment, and both parties took the fight over the measure -- now more a political guerrilla war than a debate -- to the Capitol's corridors and television studios.
By the end of the day, both sides agreed that the final vote on the amendment, which the majority leader, Bob Dole, had promised but abruptly postponed on Tuesday, would occur on Thursday.
Mr.
Dole insisted, in passing, that supporters still yearn for a lone Democrat to provide the 67th vote they need to push the amendment past Senate foes.


Hills Are Alive With Late-Night Activity
In a farming community about an hour's drive from Louisville, Ky., the locals are burning the midnight oil.
Actually, the illumination is more like stadium lights that brighten the hills of Paoli, Ind., until dawn.
This is night skiing at its ultimate.
"It is entertainment," said Felix Kagi, president of Paoli Peaks.
"It is the only place to go at night. We have a very short ski season here."


Top Honors For Ogilvy Direct
For the fourth consecutive year, Ogilvy &amp; Mather Direct took top honors, receiving the most awards from the judges of the John Caples International Awards for excellence in direct marketing.
At the 17th annual ceremony last week in New York, Ogilvy Direct's offices in Los Angeles, New York, Singapore and Toronto won 8 of the 57 prizes in 22 categories.
Rapp Collins Worldwide followed with 5 awards.


CITY REVIVES PLAN FOR E.M.S. MERGER
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has revived a plan to merge New York City's Emergency Medical Service into the Fire Department as part of his effort to reduce the size of the city's public hospital system and to reduce the time it takes to respond to medical emergencies, officials said yesterday.
Under the Mayor's plan, the ambulance service would ultimately become a division within the Fire Department, with at least some crews stationed in the city's 221 firehouses, the officials said.


For Striking Mets, Nothing to See
Ask a regular Met to name a replacement Met and a long pause often follows.
Some know that Doug Sisk, a former Met, is in camp.
Others have heard about Stanley Jefferson.
For the most part, though, they are quick to turn the channel when replacement baseball appears on their television screens.
"I peeked the first day, but I can't stand to look anymore," said outfielder Ryan Thompson in a telephone interview from Hokessin, Del.
"These guys are stepping on people's toes and it will be remembered. But I'm not keeping track of who is there. I don't want to."


GS Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Indians Offer Part of Profit From Casino
As they unveiled a plan to build a casino 90 miles from New York City, leaders of the Oneida Indian Nation said today that they would discuss giving New York State a share of their profits in exchange for Gov.
George E. Pataki's approval.
Mr.
Pataki, who wields virtual veto power over such proposals, has said he opposes the plan to build a casino at Monticello Raceway in the Catskill Mountains of Sullivan County, and his aides reiterated his opposition today.
Republican legislators close to the Governor said they would try to block the plan, arguing that it would enrich the Oneidas but not the state or taxpayers.


Carter: Jets' New Happy Warrior
There was one Super Bowl ring, and the promise of another, and the glory of wearing the uniform of the San Francisco 49ers.
But for Dexter Carter, there was also the longing to be something more than the fellow who returned the kicks and then went to the bench.


Postponing the Fare Hike, and the Blame
QUESTION: What do the Yankees and the subway fare have in common?
Answer: A friend at the top.
Because if you're the man in charge, you don't want to be blamed for losing a team or raising the cost of a subway ride.


Journal; Bait And Switch
Unnoticed by much of the public and unchallenged by much of the press, a remarkably effective bait-and-switch campaign is now remaking American politics.
The campaign's perpetrator is Pat Robertson, president of the Christian Coalition, the far-right political organization that rose from the ashes of his 1988 Presidential bid to become the most conspicuous king-maker within the ascendant G.O.P.


Coca-Cola Bottling Co. Consolidated (COKE,NNM) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Pataki Proposes Speeding Plan to Cut 85,000 From Welfare Rolls
Gov.
George E. Pataki tonight proposed speeding up a key part of his plan for deep welfare cuts, saving an additional $34 million by dropping more than 85,000 able-bodied adults from the welfare rolls all at once, rather than removing them gradually during the year.
In announcing several modifications to his budget, however, Mr.
Pataki stopped well short of making the even greater cuts to welfare and Medicaid that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani had requested.
As part of his own austere spending plan, Mr.
Giuliani wanted the Governor to make cuts in state social spending that would have translated into $400 million in savings to the city for the fiscal year that begins in July.


A Charmer of the 1870's Faces Cataclysmic Tuttis
Has 100 years changed the way we live?
No platitudes or pronouncements were needed for listeners at Carnegie Hall on Sunday afternoon.
The artifacts being held up by the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra under James Levine were Dvorak's Romance in F minor for Violin and Orchestra, then "Of Reminiscences and Reflections," a five-movement piece by Gunther Schuller.
The first is from the 1870's and evolved from a string quartet that Dvorak himself never pushed into publication.
Next to Mr.
Schuller's two-year-old and thoroughly up-to-date music, the Romance proceeds with astonishing calm.
Lovely gestures unfold without urgency; nothing seems in any hurry to get anywhere.
Not a hint of lapel-grabbing oratory or public theater here.


A Russian's Notable Reading Of the Shostakovich Fifth
The Royal Philharmonic of London, with Vladimir Ashkenazy as music director until recently and Yuri Temirkanov as a longtime guest conductor, has developed a distinctive sideline in Russian music.
Under Mr.
Temirkanov on Friday evening at Avery Fisher Hall, the orchestra put both of its national specialties on display.
In Elgar's quintessentially English concert overture "Cockaigne," Mr.
Temirkanov had the good sense to stand aside and let the musicians play, though the big climax amid well gauged dynamic gradations seemed to owe much to his generally sure instinct for the long line.
But in Shostakovich's Fifth Symphony, there was no doubt that the striking interpretation emanated from the podium.


Fleetwood Enterprises Inc.(FLE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Picking the Remains of Peacekeeping


Great Lakes Power reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Republicans Agree On Food Stamp Plan
House Republican leaders partly reversed themselves under pressure from governors in their party and agreed to let states that meet certain requirements use Federal food stamp money to feed poor people in any way that state officials wanted.
The states could set their own eligibility criteria and benefit levels.
Low-income people now entitled to food stamps would not necessarily be entitled to food assistance.


METRO DIGEST
FIRE DEPT.
MAY RUN AMBULANCE CORPS Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has revived a plan to merge New York City's Emergency Medical Service into the Fire Department as part of his effort to reduce the size of the city's public hospital system and to reduce the time it takes to respond to medical emergencies, officials said.
A1.
OFFICER INDICTED IN SUBWAY SHOOTING The New York City police officer who opened fire on a black plainclothes transit officer during a moment of rush-hour chaos on a subway platform last summer has been indicted by a grand jury for first-degree assault, a person close to the indicted officer's family said.
A1.


Thou Shalt Not Traffic in the Demon Gossip; In a World of Envy and Talk Show Values, a Pacifist Sect Takes a Higher, Harder Way
The rest of America may be feeding on modern gossip as an industrial-size staple of the gross national product, but not Christoph Arnold and his fellow Christian pacifists, who live quietly as the Hutterian Brethren here on the banks of the Wallkill River.
"It would tear us to pieces," Mr. Arnold said.


Corrections
A table in Science Times on Feb. 21 with an article about global warming, showing developed nations' 1990 levels of carbon dioxide emissions and projections for the year 2000, omitted three final zeros from the figures, thus understating them.
The levels are in millions of tons.
The figure for Australia's estimate of emissions for the year 2000, also understated, included an additional error.
It should have read 370,491,000 tons.


Justice Dept. Initiates Review Regarding Transportation Chief
The Justice Department has begun an initial review to determine whether an independent prosecutor should investigate Transportation Secretary Federico F. Pena in connection with a contract awarded in 1993 to an investment firm he had just left, Government officials said today.
During the monthlong review, the department will decide whether there is any specific and credible information indicating that Mr.
Pena may have committed a crime.
If so, the department would begin a 90-day fact-finding inquiry to determine whether to ask an special panel of judges to appoint an outside prosecutor to conduct a full-scale investigation.


Today's The Day: New Players In Pinstripes
Buck Showalter did not want to manage exhibition replacement games, but he will Thursday.
Showalter does not want to accept a 10 percent salary cut, but he probably will soon.
Replacement fever, catch it.


Red Storm's Victory Brightens N.I.T. Hopes
At last, something to smile about.
A season of ups and downs finally reached a peak St.
John's could be proud of last night when it came up with a victory in a game that probably salvaged its season.
With a post-season bid hanging in the balance, St.
John's outlasted 22d-ranked Syracuse, 82-78, before 14,678 at Madison Square Garden.


U.N.L.V. Suspends 2 Players Over Accepting Sneakers
Nevada-Las Vegas suspended KEBU STEWART, its leading scorer and rebounder, for the remainder of the season yesterday after he admitted receiving a free pair of shoes from an agent's representative.
The university also declared guard JERMAINE SMITH ineligible for the same violation, but said it would appeal to the N.C.A.A. to immediately make him eligible again.


Salinas's Accused Brother: Mexico Searches for a Motive
Government officials gave conflicting accounts today about why the elder brother of former President Carlos Salinas de Gortari might have ordered the assassination last year of a governing-party leader who had long been a friend and ally of Mr.
Salinas.
Laying out the evidence on which the Government arrested Mr.
Salinas's brother on Tuesday for plotting the killing, the chief investigator in the case said the brother, Raul Salinas de Gortari, apparently had both personal and political reasons to want the party leader dead.


New Chamber Series Starts
The inaugural concert of Music of the Americas, a chamber-music series, is to take place tonight at 8 P.M. at the Americas Society, 680 Park Avenue, at 68th Street.
The concert is to feature the Mexican cellist Carlos Prieto and the American pianist Ursula Oppens playing two premieres, Samuel Zyman's Fantasy for Cello and Piano and Silvestre Rivueltas's Three Pieces for Cello and Piano.
Future concerts in the series will focus on the works of noted Latin American composers.


Justices Hear Campus Religion Case
Wrestling with a case at the intersection of religion and free speech, the Supreme Court heard arguments today on whether a state university must provide financial support for a student-run religious magazine on the same basis as other student publications and activities.
The University of Virginia's refusal to subsidize a magazine called Wide Awake, which a group of students published in 1991 to give a "Christian perspective on both personal and community issues," was upheld last year by a Federal appeals court in Richmond.
The appeals court said the university could not give money to the students without violating the constitutional separation between church and state.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; Ex-Cook Held in Robbery Death
A former dishwasher-cook at the International House of Pancakes has been charged with fatally shooting the restaurant's manager, Robert Hess, in a futile robbery attempt early Monday.


For an Investment Club, Homespun Success
The sign outside town reads "Welcome to Beardstown, Site of Lincoln's Almanac Trial." (A key witness said he'd seen a murder by moonlight. A young lawyer named Abe Lincoln pulled out an almanac: no moon that night.)
The way things are going, the sign could well be changed to "Home of the Beardstown Ladies." All because of some local women who formed an investment club a decade ago, beat the pants off the Wall Street pros, hit "Donahue" and "20/ 20," made a video ("Cookin' Up Profits on Wall Street") and wrote a book about their triumphs.
In short, things are really buzzing in this out-of-the-way corner of central Illinois.


The Talk of Hollywood; Writers Claw Their Way Past Producers
If money is the driving force in Hollywood, credits on a movie screen are a close runner-up.
The placement and size of a credit can be the subject of intense warfare that's really all about ego, posturing, vulnerability and a hunger for recognition.
Which are what Hollywood is all about, too.
The issue of credits has now taken a new turn.
Two groups especially hungry for recognition, producers and writers, are engaged in a sharp, public dispute over a recent agreement that the producers say reduces their prestige.
The writers, on the other hand, are delighted with it.


Standard Motor Products Inc.(SMP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Louganis Coverage Gets It Wrong
To the Editor:
Surely, it is a major story when an Olympic gold medalist who won the hearts of millions of Americans with his brilliant acrobatics announces that he has AIDS.
Yet rather than report Greg Louganis's revelation as a tragedy and a reminder of the depth of the AIDS epidemic, your Feb. 23 article began with Louganis's announcement last year that he is gay, with the implication that gay and AIDS are a natural pair.


Acquittal in Corruption Case
A police officer was acquitted of all charges in the first trial arising from the corruption scandal in the 30th Precinct in Harlem.
Page B3.


Time to Wake Up and Sense the Magic
The Orlando Magic has become to the Knicks what the Chicago Bulls had been for years: their biggest obstacle in the path to a championship.
The Knicks continue to insist they are better than Orlando, yet the Magic continues to beat them.
That could change in the playoffs.
But for the Knicks to advance to the National Basketball Association finals, they must come to grips with a Magic act that won't vanish into thin air.


Holyfield Set for Ring Return
Evander Holyfield's return to the ring is imminent.
Holyfield retired when he lost his heavyweight championship 15 months ago and it was then discovered that he had a heart problem.
Holyfield has signed to fight Ray Mercer on May 20 in Atlantic City.
Holyfield lost his crown to Michael Moorer in November 1993.
A spokesman for Holyfield's promoter, Dan Duva, said yesterday that Holyfield was then given an inordinate amount of fluids at a Las Vegas, Nev., hospital because of dehydration.
This led to the diagnosis of a noncompliant left ventricle, allowing a buildup of fluids.
That diagnosis was confirmed when he went to a second hospital, at Emory University in Atlanta.


Block (H&amp;R) Inc.(HRB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Rio Algom Ltd.(ROM,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


And the Winners Are. . . .
Here are the winners at the 37th annual Grammy Awards ceremony last night in Los Angeles:
Single Record: "All I Wanna Do," Sheryl Crow


Peru and Ecuador Sign Truce In Effort to Halt Border War
Peru and Ecuador signed a new cease-fire today, seeking to end a monthlong Amazon border war that has claimed 73 lives and left at least 200 wounded.
Last week, the heaviest fighting of the conflict broke the first cease-fire, forcing diplomats to negotiate the new one, which was signed in Montevideo, Uruguay.
Under this accord, military observers from the United States, Brazil, Argentina and Chile are to travel to the contested jungle area next week to supervise troop withdrawals.
But the Clinton Administration, apparently cautious about involvement in new peacekeeping missions, has yet to formally agree to send observers.


American Stores Co.(ASC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Economic Scene; Supply-side recipe: restore Mexico's old exchange rate.
WITH the wounded Mexican peso trading at roughly six to the dollar, why are influential Congressional Republicans still talking about a return to the pre-crisis exchange rate of 3.5 pesos to the dollar?
A plausible explanation is that the talk is a political freebie, a way to capitalize on the White House's embarrassment over the collapse of the peso without appearing to sabotage efforts to cope with Mexico's financial meltdown.
But like many ideas from "supply side" conservatives, there is just enough common sense to give a life of its own to the notion that currency devaluation only worsens badly managed economies.


Think of School Lunch Program as Business; Feeding Discontent
To the Editor:
In "Inflicting Pain on Children" (column, Feb. 25), Bob Herbert points to measures in the House that would reduce or eliminate, among others, Federal aid to the school lunch program, to foster care and adoption, to the fight against drug abuse in the schools and to summer job programs.
Midnight basketball isn't even on the table anymore.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; Town Wants Exit Kept Open
Township officials will meet with the New Jersey Department of Transportation on March 15 to discuss a problem linked to the widening of a 21-mile stretch of Interstate 287 south from two lanes to three.
The problem, the township says, is that the Transportation Department plans to block access from southbound I-287 to Parsippany Road, which is home to many businesses.
Drivers switching from westbound Interstate 80 to southbound I-287 can now exit at Parsippany Road, but a concrete barrier is to block that exit by 1997.


Risking Everything for Amendment
From the beginning, Republicans pursued a take-no-prisoners legislative strategy on the constitutional amendment to require a balanced budget.
But the Senate, unlike the House, operates as much on personal relations and its own arcane folkways and traditions as on raw partisan power.
The result has been a clash of fiercely modern political imperatives with 18th-century legislative mores that will be resolved -- at least for the time being -- in a vote at 2 P.M. on Thursday.


Cutting Mass Transit, Carefully
The New York City Transit Authority has a rational plan to save $113 million this year, avoiding the need for a midsummer fare increase.
Painful as some of the contemplated cuts are, still more cuts are coming, or higher fares, or both, probably before year's end.
All concerned -- City Hall, Albany and the transit agency's parent, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority -- need to agree on a new overall plan for the next several years, rather than ripping the system apart mile by mile.
The immediate plan has the M.T.A.'s go-ahead for everything but the proposed cuts in service, which must go through public hearings.
The Transit Authority sensibly seeks the biggest savings from trimming bureaucracy and increasing productivity.
Less than one-fifth of the total would come from reduced bus and subway service, mostly at night or on lightly used or duplicative routes.


A Miracle to Smile About


Gustavo Correa, Professor of Spanish Poetry, 80
Gustavo Correa, a scholar of Spanish poetry and a professor emeritus at Yale University, died on Feb. 18 in Bogota, Colombia.
He was 80.
The cause of death was cancer, the family said.


Wendy's International Inc.(WEN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Veterans of War and Prejudice


Celebrating a Child's Own Decisions
JANOVIC/PLAZA likes to boast that it offers 5,000 shades of paint, but the last time I trolled the racks of chips it was for a single color: pink.
I found peony and Pepto-Bismol, grandmotherly corals, the fuchsias of gaping orchids.
I found pinks tinged with blue, as if their oxygen had been diverted, and blush pinks with drippings of melon stirred in.
I plucked them all and brought them home.
My 5-year-old son, Ari, was ecstatic.


AT HOME WITH: Michael Murphy; Divine Reinvention
ONE of the first things that Michael Murphy did after he bought his Victorian house in San Rafael in Marin County, Calif., seven years ago, was to destroy the hot tub in the garden.
That may seem rash for a founding father of the Esalen Institute, which is almost as renowned for its clothing-optional mineral baths as it is for being the birthplace of the human-potential movement that gave rise to the New Age.
But that hot tub had to go.


Justices Validate Seizure Based on Error on Warrant
The Supreme Court ruled today that evidence seized by police officers who had relied on the erroneous computer report of a valid arrest warrant could be used in court, as long as the computer error was made by a court employee and not by a law-enforcement official.
The 7-to-2 decision overturned a ruling by the Arizona Supreme Court, which held that the rule requiring the exclusion of illegally seized evidence must apply to computer errors to protect against the "potential for Orwellian mischief" in government's increasing use of computers.


Britain's Premier Survives Challenge On European Policy
Narrowly surviving another challenge to his leadership, John Major, the Conservative Prime Minister, beat back an opposition motion in Parliament tonight to censure his Government's policy toward integration with the rest of Europe.
The vote, 319 to 314, came after a day of lively debate in which Mr.
Major sought to bridge a schism in his party between those who want to move deeper into the European Union and those who abhor the idea.


Abortion Clinic Faces Eviction With Eight Years Left on Lease
An abortion clinic here that was the target of death threats in January is now facing eviction, though it still has 8 years left on its 11-year lease.
The clinic's landlord issued "new rules and regulations" on Jan. 11 for the three-story building at 1103 Stewart Avenue, stating that tenants could no longer perform "any abortions or other medical services in any way related to pregnancy terminations." The notice came within days of a wave of anti-abortion violence at clinics around the nation, including the murders of two people at a Brookline, Mass., clinic.


Is New York Ready for Nice?
CRATE AND BARREL, the home furnishings chain that is known for wholesome-looking stores that are filled to the rafters with nice merchandise and pleasant salespeople, is opening in New York on Wednesday.
So how will New Yorkers take to the Crate's brand of small-town ambiance, straightforward attitude and good values?
Will a store that sets its tone with acres of knotty pine, goods packed with biodegradable cornstarch pellets and a "don't worry if you break something" approach be too . . . well . . . earnest for denizens of this attitudinal town?


Hayes Wheels Intl.(HAY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Negotiating Teams Move To Night Round of Talks
For a sport that hasn't had a game for 202 days, baseball experienced a flurry of activity today.
There were developments in several cities in two countries, but most attention was focused on possible developments in this city.
Nothing concrete was reported after a six-hour meeting between five-person negotiating teams at the golf club on Gainey Ranch, but from the comments made by the leaders for both sides, they seemed to be telegraphing grudging willingness to change what have been inflexible positions on the central economic issues.


WCI Steel Inc.(WRN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Signed Brett Boretti, catcher, to a minor-league contract.
National League
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Released Pat Fetty, pitcher.


Dole Hammers on Yeltsin As U.S. Frustration Grows
The Senate majority leader, Bob Dole, lashed out against Boris N. Yeltsin today, likening the Clinton Administration's embrace of the Russian leader to the Bush Administration's refusal to abandon his predecessor, Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
The remarks by Mr.
Dole, a leading contender for the Republican presidential nomination, reflect a growing frustration with Mr.
Yeltsin by Republicans and Democrats in Congress, and even by the Administration.


Sports of The Times; Holding That Line Versus Crossing It
JIM MORRIS had a contingency plan that he thought he would never have to use.
In December, the University of Miami's second-year baseball coach figured that by the time March rolled around, the strike would be settled, players would be in camp and his Hurricanes could play the Florida Marlins in peace.
Last season, the Marlins had agreed to play Florida's top college team this spring.
Last year, they played Florida State; this year it would be Miami, which is also the nation's No. 1-ranked team.


Hotel Fire Sends Guests Into Street and St. Patrick's


A Furry, White Persimmon Pucker?


Waban Inc.(WBN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


French Aircraft Official Suggests Crew Is to Blame for Fatal Crash
The manufacturer of a commuter plane that crashed in Indiana last Oct. 31 today defended the safety of its design and suggested that the crew had been inattentive, contributing to the accident that killed all 68 people aboard.
The company, Avions de Transport Regional, or ATR, insisted that the plane, an ATR-72, had met all existing American standards for flying in icing weather.
The company also said it was the pilots' responsibility to change their plane's altitude or location if conditions grew too severe.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.00
6.10
3.24
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.73
5.74
3.46
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.89
5.88
3.66
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.21
7.20
6.25
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.44
7.44
6.76
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.33
8.31
7.58
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.35
6.42
5.94
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Accounts
*
Dolphin Cruise Line and Majesty Cruise Line, Miami, to Henderson Advertising, Atlanta, to handle the account, previously at Wright &amp; Co., Miami.
The combined billings were estimated at $5 million. *
People Soft Inc., Walnut Creek, Calif., to W. B. Doner &amp; Co., Baltimore, to handle the computer software company's account, previously at Winkler McManus, San Francisco.
The billings were estimated at $2 million for the first year and $4 million for the second year.


DDB Needham Shop Out of F.T.D. Review
DDB Needham Chicago said yesterday that because of the amount of business from current clients, it had withdrawn from the review of the Florists' Transworld Delivery account, with billings estimated at more than $20 million.
The withdrawal leaves four finalists: Bates U.S.A. in New York; Campbell Mithun Esty in Minneapolis; Grey Advertising in New York, and J. Walter Thompson Detroit.
A decision is expected in April.


Hoyas Slam Home Big Conference Victory
Fast as an Allen Iverson breakaway dash, Georgetown washed away Seton Hall's near-perfect first half tonight, foiling the Pirates' hopes of an upset and damaging their already slim possibility of gaining a bid to the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.
Riding a career-high 27-point performance by Jerome Williams, who shot 11 for 14 and pulled down 10 rebounds, the Hoyas topped Seton Hall, 96-92, at USAir Arena.
It was the fourth straight victory for the Hoyas (18-7 over all, 11-6 in the Big East) and the third consecutive defeat for Seton Hall (16-11, 7-10).


Gingrich Sister, AIDS Lobbyist
When gay and lesbian lobbyists take to Capitol Hill on Monday to press the case for AIDS programs, a newly active supporter will be among them: Candace Gingrich, sister of Speaker Newt Gingrich.
Ms.
Gingrich, 27, whose homosexuality became public after the elections last fall when her older brother was assured of becoming Speaker, plans to attend the Human Rights Campaign Fund leadership conference in Washington this weekend.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-10  WINNIE MANDELA'S HOME IS RAIDED
Police officers acting with the blessing of President Nelson Mandela searched the home of his estranged wife, Winnie.
They were looking for evidence that she defrauded a Government program that builds houses for the poor.
A1


New Jersey Daily Briefing; No More Ash Distribution
Yesterday was Ash Wednesday, but for the first time in some three decades it was a day like any other day in the Hudson County Administration Building.
In past years, ashes were distributed at noon outside the sheriff's office.
This year, the American Civil Liberties Union told Sheriff Edward Webster that some county employees had complained that the action illegally mixed church and state.
Saying he didn't want a lawsuit, Mr.
Webster ordered the distribution of ashes stopped.


Threat to School Board Doesn't Faze Candidates
Last week, in a display of resistance and faith, 23 Newark residents signed up to run for the Board of Education even as the state intensified its efforts to seize the district and abolish the board.
Charles Bell, a board member for 25 years, said he could not recall such a large field -- and he thinks it says a lot about the Newark district's response to state efforts to take it over.


A Gender-Neutral Tragedy
Last October an F-14A Tomcat warplane stalled as it approached the aircraft carrier Abraham Lincoln to land.
The pilot had four seconds to eject, reacted too late, and was killed.
Then came the innuendo campaign.
Anonymous callers to talk radio shows suggested the pilot was not competent, had been rushed into a combat role for political reasons, had failed to handle the emergency properly, had been given below-average grades in flight school.


The Grammys: A Blend of Old and New
A newcomer, Sheryl Crow, and a pop trouper, Tony Bennett, won the top awards at the 37th annual Grammy Awards, which were presented last night at the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles and telecast on CBS.
Tony Bennett's "MTV Unplugged," an album of standards featuring duets with such singers as K. D. Lang, was named album of the year.
"This is the greatest moment in my whole musical career and the greatest moment in my life," Mr.
Bennett said.
"It's such a victorious feeling to sing good American music and have this happen."


USLife Corp.(USH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


American Safety Razor Co.  (RAZR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


People
*
Derek Bowden, joint managing director at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Europe, London, was promoted to chief executive, succeeding Jeremy Sinclair, who left after the ouster of Maurice Saatchi as chairman at the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Co. *
Steven Landsberg was named creative director at Ogilvy &amp; Mather Toronto, succeeding John Staffen, who left to join DDB Needham New York as an executive vice president and creative director.
Mr.
Landsberg was previously a senior vice president and creative director at Wells Rich Greene BDDP, New York.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; N.J. Considers Gamblers' Train
One month from today, Amtrak will cancel its "Gambler's Express" service between Philadelphia and Atlantic City.
New Jersey Transit agreed on Tuesday to decide soon whether to pick up that service.


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Conference Calls
The regular season ends this weekend for all four of the Division I leagues and first place has been decided in three of them.
Colorado College, Maine and Michigan have clinched and are assured of berths in the National Collegiate Athletic Association's tournament, which will run from March 23 to April 1.
Under a new arrangement this season, the N.C.A.A.'s hockey committee has decided that automatic bids will go to teams finishing first in regular-season play as well as to those teams that win the conference tournaments.


Clinton Pledges to Reduce U.S. Nuclear Stockpiles by 200 Tons
In a new overture aimed at winning a permanent ban on the spread of nuclear weapons, President Clinton today ordered a major reduction in American stockpiles of materials used to make nuclear warheads.
Under the order, the Government's stores of highly enriched uranium and plutonium will be reduced by 200 tons, enough for thousands of nuclear weapons.
The size of the total stockpile is secret, but expert estimates suggest that the reductions ordered by Mr.
Clinton will cut the amount of available weapons-grade material by about one-half.


Gunmen Race For the Spoils In Somalia
The grab for Somalia's most prized piece of real estate began just before dawn today as looters clambered over the walls and gates of Mogadishu's airport while United Nations forces pulled back.
If the Pakistani brigade's withdrawal behind American lines was well-rehearsed, the Somali clan fighters, and the army of looters, seemed as thoroughly prepared for this moment.
As the looters began pouring into the airport, about 30 Somali armed trucks, said to belong to the forces of the clan leader, Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, sped out of Mogadishu's narrow side streets and careered onto the airstrip to take control.


Leaders Are Near Accord On Death Penalty Measure
Two weeks after they first announced agreement on a death penalty bill, legislative leaders and Gov.
George E. Pataki said today that they had resolved most differences over crucial details of the bill and might begin passing it as soon as Monday.
Today's consensus -- all sides were reluctant to call it a final agreement until they could draft a formal bill -- settled questions about how judges would determine whether defendants were mentally retarded, whether the same jury would be used for both the trial and sentencing phases of capital cases, and how the state would provide financial assistance for prosecutors and for defenders of the indigent.


Think of School Lunch Program as Business
To the Editor:
The attempt to dismantle the national school lunch program flies in the face of goals usually attributed to the Republican leadership.
By any definition, the 40,000 lunch programs around the country are really 40,000 small local businesses.
They produce a product, provide a service and operate in a most entrepreneurial manner.
Dismantling, or reducing, school lunch financing will cause enormous economic damage and small-business dislocation:
*
More than 200,000 school lunch employees will be laid off or disenfranchised.
These are hard-working people who also pay local, state and Federal income taxes, contribute 7 percent of their wages to Social Security and pay for their health care.


Vons Cos. (VON,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Essay; Singapore Sling
In Singapore last year, 27-year-old Nick Leeson was fined $140 for indecently exposing himself before a group of women in a discotheque.
But when he was running up $27 billion in financial-derivative trades that bankrupted a venerable merchant bank, what did the see-no-evil regulators of Simex, Singapore's swinging stock exchange, do?
They shyly looked the other way.
"It would be much harder, nearly impossible, to work that kind of conspiracy in New York than in Singapore," says David Shulman, chief equity strategist at Salomon Brothers.
Like Paul Volcker and Alan Greenspan, he cautions against making the new form of gambling -- the casino-style bets that are made on the movement of real securities and commodities -- the scapegoat for recent huge losses.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; College Awaits Votes on Closing
The president of Upsala College, Paul DeLomba, was set yesterday to count ballots cast by trustees on whether the school will close May 31, but he got a message from the college's lawyers: Faxes don't count.
Get signed originals.
A two-thirds vote of all 29 trustees is required to pass the resolution.
The president received 19 ballots, 5 by fax.
So far, 17 trustees, including 3 who voted by fax, favor closing the school.


Buttrey Food reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Expect Fewer Grants Instead of Smaller Ones, Endowment Heads Say
Jane Alexander and Sheldon Hackney, the heads of the two major Federal cultural agencies, told a Senate panel today that they were prepared to deal with less public money by reducing the number of grants they make instead of by cutting all the programs across the board.
"We would not fund as many, certainly," said Ms.
Alexander, chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Arts, when asked how reduced Federal money would affect her agency.
Mr.
Hackney, her counterpart at the Humanities Endowment, agreed, saying, "I would certainly not do an across-the-board cut."


Max Rudolf, 92, Conductor Who Passed His Art On to Many
Max Rudolf, a conductor and teacher who played a big part in the training and guidance of two generations of American conductors, died on Tuesday at his home in Philadelphia.
He was 92.
The cause was congestive heart failure, his family said.


Cascades Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bernard Cornfeld, 67, Dies; Led Flamboyant Mutual Fund
Bernard Cornfeld, a Brooklyn-reared salesman who became one of the most flamboyant and controversial figures ever to stride through the American mutual fund industry, died in London on Monday.
He was 67.
A family friend told Bloomberg Business News, which first reported Mr.
Cornfeld's death, that the financier had died of pneumonia after suffering a stroke shortly before Christmas.
His death was confirmed by the Chelsea and Westminster Hospital in London.


Noonan In Rare Scoring Splurge
Brian Leetch and Brian Noonan have been teasing each other for a while now about their scoring struggles this season.
"You've got to have a sense of humor about it," said Noonan.
"You can't let it drive you crazy."


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Hill Leads Pistons  Grant Hill scored 24 points and Allan Houston added 23, leading the Detroit Pistons to a 92-79 victory over the Indiana Pacers last night in Auburn Hills, Mich.
Detroit won for the ninth time in its last 10 home games even though forwards Terry Mills and Bill Curley were out with foot injuries.


Indonesia Cites Army in Timor Killings
A Government-appointed human rights commission in Indonesia accused the military today of torturing and killing six villagers in East Timor in an incident that has renewed criticism of the annexation of the former Portuguese colony.
The chairman of the National Human Rights Commission, which is underwritten by the Government but is nominally independent, said the six men had died "unnaturally" during a military operation in January.


Corrections
A chart on Sunday with an article about New York City's control program for stray animals, showing its results from 1990 to 1994, referred incorrectly to the ending of the involvement of the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals.
The organization asked to give up the role; it was not removed.


Three-Alarm Blaze Sets Off Evacuation of Palace Hotel
A fire filled the New York Palace Hotel with smoke yesterday morning and played havoc with the wiring of the mid-Manhattan high-rise, sending guests and hotel workers, clad in everything from minks to shorts and borrowed blankets, groping down dark hallways and stairwells and streaming into the streets.
Guests described a sometimes disorderly evacuation, with no alarms sounding on some floors and hotel workers telling people, even after the alarms had sounded, to stay in their rooms.
Short circuits caused lights to wink on and off throughout the hotel and ignited a number of smaller fires, prompting Consolidated Edison to cut off power to most of the 53-story building.


Now a Cowboy, Writer and Director
Made-for-cable movies take yet another competitive leap forward with TNT's "Good Old Boys," beginning its run at 8 P.M. on Sunday.
Tommy Lee Jones is not just the star of this cowboy tale set in West Texas of 1906.
He's also a writer, adapting with J. T. Allen a 1978 novel by Elmer Kelton, and he is making a hot-dang impressive debut as a director.
Mr.
Jones, his face ever more creased and his Texas twang sometimes near impenetrable, plays Hewey Calloway, a cowpoke rascal with hardly a dollar to his name but who's overflowing with life.
Riding Biscuit, an old horse past his prime, Hewey returns to east Texas to find his brother, Walter (Terry Kinney), on the verge of losing the land he acquired under the 1903 Homestead Act.
Yup, this is the old story of greedy bankers, fat cats who preach that "the practical side to patriotism is business," waiting impatiently to foreclose on the family farm.
It still works, at least for nonbankers.


12 Chinese Intellectuals Call For Limit on Police Powers
In their second petition in less than a week, 12 prominent intellectuals warned today that the failure to rein in indiscriminate police powers throughout China is threatening "the lives and freedom" of 1.2 billion Chinese.
The document calls on China's Parliament to rescind the powers of Prime Minister Li Peng's Government relating to unconstitutional arrest procedures that have allowed the police to detain without charge up to a million people each year.


Report From Giuliani Shows an Erosion in Some City Services
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani issued New York City's latest statistical report card on itself yesterday, and it showed an erosion of municipal services ranging from dirtier parks to bridges needing repairs, and fewer inspections for housing, recycling and drinking water.
In releasing the report, Mr.
Giuliani highlighted other statistics, however, saying the survey proved his budget policies were working, making the government leaner and less expensive.
And indeed the report showed improvements ranging from cleaner streets to more welfare recipients finding jobs.


At the Bar; Suing dictators (and similar types) here for violations committed elsewhere.
Just as he was about to be handed a degree from the Kennedy School at Harvard University in 1991, Gen.
Hector Gramajo was served with papers charging him in a Federal civil suit for his role in torturing people in his homeland, Guatemala.
Clad in his academic gown, General Gramajo regarded what was happening to him as a foolish affront.
The next day, when he was served with a second set of papers in connection with the rape of a nun by soldiers under his command, he spat on the process server.


First Documented Case of TB Passed on Airliner Is Reported by the U.S.
For the first time, Federal officials have documented a case of tuberculosis transmitted from one passenger to others on a commercial airline.
The transmission occurred last spring, when a woman on an 8 1/2-hour United Airlines flight from Chicago to Honolulu infected four passengers sitting near her.
Although all tested positive for the disease, none have become ill.
United Airlines said the woman died a few days after the flight.


Investor Group to Provide For Expansion of El Diario
The owners of El Diario/La Prensa, the Spanish-language daily in New York City, announced yesterday that a group of investors had agreed to provide the capital for a broad expansion into electronic and other Spanish-language media.
The new investors include Time Warner Inc.; the Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Company; Malayan United Industries, a Malaysian company with industrial and media properties, and a group that includes executives of Wertheim Schroder &amp; Company, the New York investment bank.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in Manhattan that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "IPHIGENIA AND OTHER DAUGHTERS," Classic Stage Company, 136 East 13th Street, East Village.
Three short works by Ellen McLaughlin about the Trojan War, told from the perspective of women in Greek mythology and inspired by the plays of Aeschylus, Sophocles and Euripides; featuring Kathleen Chalfant; directed by David Esbjornson.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today and tomorrow at 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $25 and $27.
Information: (212) 677-4210.


Home Video
Most straight-to-video movies are clearly just that, but now and then one comes along that starts arguments.
In December, for example, Turner released "The Desperate Trail" on videocassette without a run in movie theaters.
The move still angers the movie's director, P. J. Pesce.
It also still makes perfect sense to Turner.
Between the two viewpoints lies an interesting case history.
A gritty and bloody western, "The Desperate Trail" won Mr.
Pesce the award for best director at the Hamptons International Film Festival last fall and earned favorable reviews, if not raves.
Some critics said they were reminded of the work of Howard Hawks and Sergio Leone.


Ashton Graybiel Dies at 92; Research Aided Space Flight
Dr.
Ashton Graybiel, whose studies on the effects of weightlessness and acceleration on human balance, spatial orientation, physiology and performance helped prepare America's astronauts for manned space flights, died on Jan. 27 in Pensacola, Fla.
He was 92 and lived in Pensacola.
Dr.
Graybiel was among the doctors who examined John Glenn after his Mercury spacecraft circled Earth three times in February 1962 in the first orbital mission by an American.
He said Colonel Glenn's scores in balance tests were "a hair better" after the flight than before.


Driven to Succeed, They Died in the Ultimate Test in Frigid Water and Fog
Norman Tillman grew up poor and ambitious in rural Grenada, Miss., one of five children reared by a mother who scrubbed floors at the local hospital.
He joined the Army in October 1989.


Who's That Dancing at My Table?
"Exotica" was shown as part of last year's New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Caryn James's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Sept. 24.
The film opens today at Angelika Film Center, Mercer and Houston Streets, Greenwich Village.
A very young woman dressed in a schoolgirl's uniform steps onto the stage of a strip club called Exotica.
Eric, a disk jockey with a voice as creepy as it is suggestive, introduces her as Christina, "a sassy bit of jailbait," and says she will dance at your table for $5.
Eric's crass words seem at odds with this extravagant place.
The men wear suits and ties, the lush jungle decor evokes a Rousseau painting after innocence has been lost, and everything is nearly respectable.
Somehow, Eric and Christina will have to cross paths with Thomas, a meek, bespectacled man whom Canadian customs officials have been watching through a one-way mirror as he enters the country.


'We Are Freshmen, Hear Us Roar' Falls Silent at Senate
The scrappy Republican freshmen of the House, used to being the center of attention on Capitol Hill, had no role in today's balanced-budget drama in the Senate, so they created one.
They marched over to the Senate side, en masse, in the cold morning sunshine, to tell the Senators that they'd better pass the amendment or else.
But these were Republicans, and while electoral revolution may come ease, 60's-style demonstrations do not.


In a Final Budget Proposal, Pataki Sticks With His Cuts
Gov.
George E. Pataki released the final version of his state budget, merely tinkering around the edges of the $32 billion spending plan without making any major spending restorations.
The final amendments to Mr.
Pataki's proposal, which is subject to negotiations with the State Legislature, came after a month of widespread protests against deep cuts in the spending plan for transportation, education, health and social service programs.


3 Rescued After Boat Sinks
Three fishermen from New Bedford, Mass., were rescued from a life raft 75 miles off Monmouth County early Wednesday, the Coast Guard said yesterday.
The men were from the 74-foot boat Drake, which had sunk a short time before after being swamped in 6-foot waves driven by 25-knot winds.


It Could Cost More Than a Song
Beware the song police.
A bill passed by the Senate yesterday on a 34 to 1 vote and sent to Governor Whitman would require music company royalty collectors to provide restaurants with song lists and rates and identify themselves when they make their verification visits.


Sports of The Times; 'Who's Left?' Giants Fan Cries Out
THE players come, the players go.
This seems to be the operating theory of George Young and the New York Giants' management, but hard-core fans are not thrilled with that policy now that David Meggett is joining New England while Phil Simms is negotiating with Cleveland.
If any sport can accommodate free agency, it is football.
The players are so bundled up in helmets and face masks and shoulder guards that the casual fan might not be able to tell them apart except for uniform numbers.
Fans do get used to stars like Simms and Meggett and Lawrence Taylor, but Young seems to be suggesting there are always younger, cheaper bodies to stuff into those bulky outfits.


Senate Panel Cuts Spending For Pentagon
The Senate Appropriations Committee today slashed a Pentagon request for $2.5 billion in emergency spending by $600 million and decided to make cuts in other existing military programs to offset the remainder.
Pentagon officials criticized the panel's action, saying it would force cuts this fiscal year in research and development, and new weapons accounts.
But Senator Mark O. Hatfield, the Oregon Republican who heads the committee, said it cut from "lower priority" programs.


4 Newark Police Officers Indicted in Fraud Ring
Four high-ranking Newark police officers and one other person have been indicted on charges stemming from a long state inquiry into misconduct on the squad that investigates auto theft, a lawyer representing the officers said tonight.
The four officers were accused of taking part in a ring that failed to notify people whose stolen cars were recovered by the Newark police.
The ring then bought the cars cheaply at municipal auctions held for goods not claimed by their owners.


U.N. Chief Ponders Future of Peacekeepers
Today, on the day the last United Nations peacekeeping troops left Somalia, Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali suggested that the hopes for a new international order that blossomed at the end of the cold war has evaporated.
Within a few months, he indicated, peacekeeping troops in Bosnia and Croatia could also be on their way home.


Maid's Memory Is Target of Prosecutors in Simpson Trial
The current and unlikely center of gravity in the O. J. Simpson trial, a slight Spanish-speaking maid in a new sea-green jacket, testified today about what she did -- and, more often, did not -- remember about the night when Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman died, and what she told Mr.
Simpson's defense team about it afterward.
Rosa Lopez, formerly the housekeeper for Mr.
Simpson's neighbor, repeated that she saw Mr.
Simpson's Bronco outside his home "shortly after 10" on the night of June 12, about the time that prosecutors say Mr.
Simpson was committing murder two miles away.


Fred J. Borch, 84, Chairman Of General Electric in 1960's
Fred J. Borch, who was chairman of the General Electric Company for 10 years in the 1960's and early 1970's, died on Wednesday at age 84 in the Moorings Park Health Center near Naples, Fla.
The cause of death was heart disease, Joyce Hergenhan, a spokeswoman for the company, said.


The Song's the Thing: A Leiber-Stoller Revue
THE anonymous narrator of "On Broadway," that timeless anthem of ragged-edged ambition, could probably never have imagined that making it on the Great White Way would take the form it assumes in "Smokey Joe's Cafe: The Songs of Leiber and Stoller," the musical revue that opened at the Virginia Theater last night.
No sooner does the orchestra begin the opening vamp for the song, written by Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller with Barry Mann and Cynthia Weil, than the audience roars in affectionate recognition of a tune that is tattooed on the memory of most American adults.
But what follows is of a very different ilk from the haunted-sounding version made famous by the Drifters in 1963.
The rhythms have been souped up, with a hint of a disco beat.
And the song is performed by a sturdy-voiced quartet of men in sharkskin suits in a gymnastic, hybrid dance style that incorporates elements of voguing and Latin ballroom.


This Julio Cesar Also Fights
When Julio Cesar Vasquez walks down the streets of Santa Fe, Argentina, even his countrymen come up and smile and say, "Chavez, how is it going?"
Chavez, of Mexico, is the most famous Julio Cesar in boxing -- even though Vasquez happens to be the World Boxing Association junior middleweight champion.


Richard H. Arbib, 77, Designer Of Array of Consumer Products
Richard H. Arbib, an industrial designer whose array of products ranged from watches and vacuum cleaners to yachts and concept cars, died on Feb. 22 in his Manhattan home.
He was 77.
The cause was heart failure, said his brother, John A. Arbib of Fort Lauderdale, Fla.


Bond Prices Drop After Senate Vote
Prices of Treasury securities dropped yesterday, as the market reacted to the falling dollar and the Senate's failure to pass a balanced-budget amendment.
Anthony Chan, vice president and chief economist at Banc One Investment Advisors Corporation in Columbus, Ohio, noted that even if it had been approved, the amendment would face years of consideration by state legislatures before passage.


Growing Up Together, Whimsically
Baby-nurses waltzed ecstatically when Mina Tannenbaum and Ethel Benegui were born.
Or at least that is how Martine Dugowson, the writer and director of "Mina Tannenbaum," a sweetly captivating film about girlhood friendship, cares to imagine it.
Bringing whimsy and insight to bear on her story, Ms.
Dugowson breezily locates romantic and professional landmarks in the lives of both her heroines, who are played by radiantly good actresses.
Elsa Zylberstein, an effervescent newcomer, easily holds her own with Romane Bohringer, the extraordinary star of "The Accompanist" and "Savage Nights."
Though she slips badly in framing her film with heavy-handed tragedy, Ms.
Dugowson uses most of "Mina Tannenbaum" to bring her characters lightheartedly to life.
Mina (Ms. Bohringer) and Ethel (Ms. Zylberstein) are linked by destiny from the start.
Born almost simultaneously, they endure comparable childhood affronts to vanity (glasses for Mina, a weight problem for Ethel) before joining forces as two schoolgirls in fabulously awful 1970's clothes.
Droll costumes are among the many gentle manifestations of Ms.
Dugowson's wit.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AUTOMATIC DATA PROCESSING INC., Roseland, N.J., an electronic data processing service, completed the acquisition of Investing Software System, Littleton, Mass.
Terms were not disclosed.
Investing develops software and information systems that send news to financial services companies.
CONSECO INC., Carmel, Ind., said it secured financing for its $727.6 million purchase of the remaining shares of two insurance companies, CCP Insurance Inc. and Bankers Life Holding Corp., that it tried to sell last fall.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-13  BIG GAMBLES GONE WRONG  Barings P.L.C. left itself open to trouble.
Letting a rising young trader like Nicholas W. Leeson in essence police himself showed that the firm did not have effective controls to prevent the losses of $1 billion that brought it down.
A1  ANDREOTTI TO STAND TRIAL  Giulio Andreotti, a former Prime Minister and symbol of Italy's now-collapsed political establishment, was ordered to stand trial on charges that he acted as a protector for the Mafia.
A1


On My Mind; Wilson at the Pool
Will he run?
Put it this way, one of Pete Wilson's friends said in California this week: He wants to jump into the Presidential race so much that his toes already are hanging over the edge of the diving board.
Pete Wilson's toes, until recently a subject that never entered the American consciousness, now have become of some national moment, because many Americans believe they may be attached to the next President of the United States.


N.Y.U. Advances With Rout
For the last four seasons, both New York University and Hunter College have qualified for the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division III tournament.
And even though both have emerged as the local powerhouses from Manhattan in recent years, they had not met since 1989.
Last night, they squared off with more than local supremacy at stake: the season.
N.Y.U.'s continued, Hunter's ended.
The Violets routed the Hawks, 101-71, in a first-round game before 1,217 fans at the Cole Center in Greenwich Village.
The junior center Greg Belinfanti, who had 15 points and a game-high 9 rebounds in only 24 minutes, said: "We're both city schools and have done well recently. So it was something special."


A Vote for Riley From a Longtime Rival
Phil Jackson stretched his long legs onto the court from the front row at Madison Square Garden and wondered out loud what the fuss was all about.
"You got these chairs that are right on the floor," said the Chicago Bulls' coach.
"You got this place filled every game. It's a hot ticket. I remember we won our first playoff series here five years ago. Half the place was Bulls' fans."


2 Skinhead Brothers Charged With Killing Family Members
Brenda Freeman, 48, a soft-spoken and devoutly religious woman, was afraid of her two oldest sons, those who knew her recall.
The boys, Bryan, 17, and David, 15, shaved their heads, wore military-type uniforms, embraced a neo-Nazi subculture, and two weeks ago showed up at the family dinner table with "Sieg Heil" and "Berserker" tattooed on their foreheads.
Mrs.
Freeman telephoned counselors and psychologists to ask for advice and even managed to bring the rebellious brothers to a few "anti-skinhead" education sessions run by the local police department in her home town, Salisbury Township, Pa.
But her efforts failed.


House Clears More Limits On Environmental Rules
By wide margins, the House cast preliminary votes today for another significant restriction on environmental regulation, a bill that would prohibit Federal agencies from protecting wetlands or endangered species unless landowners are compensated for any resulting decline in their property's value.
The legislation would expand the application of the Constitution's prohibition against seizing property without compensation, a principle that the courts have been increasingly pressed to apply to situations where the use of the property has been limited by regulations.


Invest $200,000, Get 15% Rate: S.E.C. Sues in a 'Ponzi' Deal
The newspaper ads promised "two times any published rate of return" and the partner who would seal the deal was a convicted felon who had been censured by securities regulators for selling unregistered securities.
The firm that placed the advertisements, the Bankers Alliance Corporation, promised returns as high as 15 percent a week through investments like foreign currencies.
Its customers, who were lured through referrals and newspaper ads, first had to put down a substantial sum of money.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 24 about a six-month grace period in the Kansas City, Mo., school desegregation case misstated the amount of state aid received by the Kansas City school district.
The single biggest contribution was $ 266 million in 1991, not $ 500 million.


Elusive Atomic Particle Found by Physicists
Culminating nearly a decade of intense effort, two rival groups of physicists announced today that they had found the elusive top quark -- an ephemeral building block of matter that probably holds clues to some of the ultimate riddles of existence.
The announcements brought sustained applause and a barrage of questions from an overflow audience of physicists at the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, where the work was done.
Fermilab has the world's most powerful particle accelerator.


Art in Review
Haim Steinbach  Jay Gorney Modern Art 100 Greene Street (between Prince and Spring Streets) SoHo Through March 18
It's often remarked that while narrative has pretty much vanished from modern art, what's replaced it is art history itself.
The "content" of abstract or Conceptual art often lies in its stylistic references to earlier art.
Haim Steinbach's latest show simplifies the task of interpretation by providing the relevant art-historical references.
There are a dozen series of photographs by Eadweard Muybridge, the 19th-century pioneer of stop-action photography, and two photomontages by Michael Snow, the film maker and Conceptual artist who came to prominence in the 1960's.
The Muybridges here record the execution of mundane actions: a man climbing up a ladder, or getting up from a couch.
Similarly, one collage by Mr.
Snow captures the movements of random passers-by in the subway.


The Rent Is the Least Of Problems
One look at the photograph on the cover of "Roommates," Max Apple's book about life with his grandfather, and it's easy to see this story's appeal.
There is Rocky, the author's curmudgeonly 5-foot-tall grandparent, glaring at the camera with a sourpuss pucker on his face.
On his chest is an apron with cheery illustrations that would suit a nursery-school child.
By his side is a tot who smiles happily despite the old man's gruff expression.
Rocky's hands are messy.
He appears to be making cookie dough.
As the fond tale of a boy and grandfather whose odd-couple intimacy lasted until Rocky was 107, "Roommates" has stubbornly insistent charms.
Homogenized for the screen into a hokier Hollywood version (with a screenplay by Mr. Apple and Stephen Metcalfe), it still hangs onto its affectionate tone.
It's Peter Falk whose expert crankiness makes that possible.
Given the inevitabilities of the film's last reel, it was a slam dunk to make Rocky lovable.
Mr.
Falk makes him likable, too.


With No Stops on a Trip Through a Land of Racism
Racism is as American as apple pie.
That is the message of "The K.K.K. Boutique Ain't Just Rednecks," an eccentric home movie, written and directed by Camille Billops and James V. Hatch, which has the cloyingly cozy tone of a "Mister Rogers" program.
The film, which opens today at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, is a guided tour through an underground space that is part thrift shop, part museum.
The itinerary is analogous to the journey in Dante's "Inferno." As the party descends through circles of hell with names like "The Room of Racial Slurs" and "The Vault of Memory," the depictions of racism become increasingly virulent.
At the lowest level are those souls trapped in cages of their own hatred.


Diner's Journal
Frank's Is Back
The way I see it, you're either a Frank's kind of person or you're not.


Indiana Senator Will Seek G.O.P. Nomination for President
Senator Richard G. Lugar of Indiana said today that after "a definitive conversation" with his family on Sunday he decided to enter the race for the Republican Presidential nomination.
"I feel this is the right time for me to make the race in terms of age and experience and vitality and enthusiasm," the four-term Senator said in an interview.
"I think I can win the nomination and win the Presidency." He repeated his intention tonight on the CNN program, "Larry King Live," and has scheduled a formal announcement for April 29 in Indianapolis.


Whose Drug Problem?
President Clinton made the reasonable decision this week to continue aid to Colombia.
Despite its inadequate performance in stopping drug trafficking, he correctly decided that it would not serve American interests to cut Colombia off completely.
Each year the President must make an assessment of drug-producing and transit countries, judging whether they are making adequate efforts to stop the flow of drugs.
Denial of certification leads to a reduction in American aid and opposition to international lending.
But the President can continue certification for a country despite unsatisfactory performance if he believes it serves the national interest.
Mr.
Clinton's decision on Colombia points up contradictions in American drug policy.


Art in Review
Agnes Martin
PaceWildenstein Gallery  32 East 57th Street  Manhattan  Through March 18
Among the recurrent pleasures of art in New York are Agnes Martin's period shows of new paintings.
Although for more than 20 years this abstract artist has been consistent in both her medium (acrylic and pencil on canvas) and her style (horizontal bands of color), her work offers subtle differences every time out.


Punta Arenas Journal; A Hole in the Heavens (Chicken Little Below?)
The people of this quiet port city, on the Strait of Magellan at the bottom of the world, do not venture outside without first rubbing sunblock over their exposed skin and donning dark glasses.
For this practice, the 113,000 residents of Punta Arenas have one man to thank, or to despise: Bedrich Magas, an electrical engineering professor at the University of Magallanes.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A toy retailer taps marketers and a media company to promote one-stop shopping for baby products.
FOR Toys "R" Us, baby products are hardly -- you should pardon the expression -- child's play.
Sales of cribs, high chairs, teething rings and other merchandise for newborns and infants through age 2 complement the retailer's mainstay toy business because they are steadier and less seasonal.
And parents who come in for diapers or formula might be enticed into leaving with stuffed animals, rattles and dolls as well.
That's important as Toys "R" Us, the nation's leading toy retailer, seeks to reinvigorate its financial results, which have turned sluggish in the last year in the face of intensifying competition from Wal-Mart, Target and small chains that specialize in so-called learning toys like educational computer software.


W. R. Grace's Chief Quits Job Abruptly
J.
P.
Bolduc, who had served as president and chief executive of W. R. Grace &amp; Company for just over two years, resigned abruptly yesterday for what the company said were "differences of style and philosophy with the company's leadership."
Mr.
Bolduc, 55, was said to be unavailable for comment.
A former management consultant, he joined Grace in 1983 as a senior vice president, and became chief executive in January 1993.
He was a principal architect of a huge restructuring the company is undertaking that has lifted profits.


Plan To Cut Foreign Aid Is Attacked
The White House intensified an attack today on resurgent Republican isolationism and warned that cuts in aid to Jordan, which have already been approved by a House panel, could imperil the Middle East peace effort.
Noting that Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel had telephoned President Clinton to express alarm about a potential cut of $ 225 million, Mr.
Clinton's spokesman said such a reduction would force the Administration to renege on a vital commitment in the volatile region.


A Judicial Recommendation
Senator Bradley urged President Clinton yesterday to nominate Joseph Greenaway Jr., a Union County lawyer and former Federal prosecutor, as a Federal judge.
If confirmed, Mr.
Greenaway would replace Judge Dickinson Debevoise, who is going on partial duty as a senior judge.


Jets Add Brister, Gary Jones
The Jets acquired their second and third free agents of the off season yesterday when they picked up quarterback Bubby Brister and strong safety Gary Jones.
Brister played for new Jets Coach Rich Kotite with the Eagles the last two seasons, primarily as a backup to Randall Cunningham.
He is expected to fill the same role behind Boomer Esiason.


When Dedicated Officers' Lives Collide
They are both 31 years old and share a deep passion for policing.
And by all accounts, they are both outstanding officers.
But seven months after their paths crossed during a shootout at a Manhattan subway station, Officer Desmond Robinson of the transit police and Officer Peter Del-Debbio of the city police force have lived a nightmare.


Beard Stands Pat With Nets Lineup
After two days of speculation, Nets Coach Butch Beard said today that he did not anticipate any lineup changes.
"With 25 games left in the season and a shot at the playoffs, I see no reason to change," he said at practice at Fairleigh Dickinson.


Recall the Recall Bill
A taxpayers' group in New Jersey has lobbied long and hard for a way to recall politicians from office.
So why was it calling the bill approved yesterday by the Senate "The Uniformly Useless Recall Election Act?"


Developments in Washington
SENATE -- The Senate narrowly failed to adopt a balanced-budget amendment to the Constitution, reshaping both the political landscape and the prospects for further deep cuts in Federal spending.
The 65-to-35 vote, two short of the 67 supporters needed, was a victory for Democrats, who raised doubts about Republican whether Social Security trust fund would be safe if a Constitutional amendment required the Federal budget to be balanced.
At least in the short run, it was a body blow to the Republicans, who took over Congress with pledges to erase the Federal deficit and slice up the old order.
The President's power to eliminate spending items approved by Congress would be enhanced by two bills that a Senate committee approved and sent to the Senate floor, where it faces considerable Democratic opposition.
By a 13-to-2 vote, the Governmental Affairs Committee approved a measure that would give the President 20 days to delete a program but says the House and the Senate must approve the proposed rescission within 10 days.
But by a voice vote it also sent to the floor a stiffer measure requiring a two-thirds majority for Congress to reinstate projects killed by the President.


7 Astronauts Begin Flight To Set Record
Astronauts aboard the space shuttle Endeavour today began pointing a battery of unique telescopes across the sky to study the evolution and composition of stars and galaxies, and the invisible material in between.
The Endeavour and its crew of five men and two women began what was hoped to be the longest flight of the shuttle program with a blazing 1:38 A.M. launching ahead of a closing weather front that threatened to delay the mission.


Prosecutor Says Acquittal Won't Affect Other Cases
The acquittal of the first police officer to come to trial in the 30th Precinct corruption scandal does not reflect an underlying weakness in the cases against other officers in the precinct, a Federal prosecutor in Manhattan said yesterday.
Matthew Fishbein, the chief assistant to the United States Attorney, Mary Jo White, said the decision by a jury on Wednesday to acquit Officer John Arena after only three hours' deliberation will have no effect on the other cases, since the evidence at each trial "stands on its own."


Free the Courts From Frivolous Prisoner Suits
To the Editor:
As state attorneys general we are deeply concerned about the proliferation of prisoners' frivolous lawsuits throughout the nation and are committed to bringing about change in the system.
We are also concerned that Anthony Lewis, in his Feb. 17 column, presents readers with confusing and misleading information on the subject.


San Juan Capistrano Journal; Could This Be the Year Swallows Don't Return?
For more than two centuries, Mission San Juan Capistrano has been immortalized as the summer home of the cliff swallows, whose return each March has become the source of weeklong festivities in the surrounding town.
But two weeks from now, on Swallows Day, when thousands of craned necks and binoculars again congregate at the mission, there is worry that one thing will be missing -- swallows.


Witness in Bombing Plot Case Once Failed Lie-Detector Tests
The man who is now the main witness against 11 men accused of being terrorists failed several lie-detector tests in 1992, causing the Federal Bureau of Investigation to break its relationship with him at the time, lawyers said yesterday.
The man, Emad A. Salem, a 43-year-old former Egyptian Army intelligence officer, secretly recorded conversations involving several men now on trial in the seditious conspiracy case of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and 10 others in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
Mr.
Salem is expected to testify for the first time as early as Monday.


Italian Ex-Premier Is Ordered to Trial As Mafia Protector
Giulio Andreotti, a former Prime Minister and a symbol of the now-collapsed Italian political establishment, was indicted today and ordered to stand trial in September on charges that he acted as a protector for the Mafia during his many years in power.
Prosecutors will seek to prove that Mr.
Andreotti did favors for the Mafia in return for political support in Sicily for the Christian Democratic Party, which dominated the Italian Government for decades after World War II.


Empire Granted 15% Rise In Premiums for 727,000
Even as he scolded Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield for failing to cut waste and fraud, Edward J. Muhl, the state's new Insurance Superintendent, today approved an average 15.7 percent increase in premiums for 727,000 people, among them the oldest and sickest New Yorkers.
That increase fell $50 million short of the $181 million increase that Empire had requested.
But it still meant sizable premium increases for those who have the most trouble getting insurance: small businesses and those who must buy insurance on their own, groups that include people with chronic illnesses turned down by other insurers.


Pope Reschedules A Visit to the Region
Catholics disappointed when Pope John Paul II canceled a visit to the NewYork region last year were heartened when the Vatican announced that the Popewould make a four-day trip to the United States in October.
He will stop in New York City, Newark and Baltimore.
Church officials in the region were hoping that the schedule would includevespers at St.
Patrick's Cathedral, a prayer service at Shea Stadium and Masses at Yonkers Raceway and the Meadowlands.
Article, page B6.


Out of the Cellar, Into the Light: Works in Limbo
Museums are like icebergs: what you see on the walls is just the tip of the collection.
The rest of it is underground in a basement, or in a warehouse.
Down in the reserves, paintings are suspended like pots and pans from giant wire racks.
It's an artistic democracy: the good, the bad and the ugly hang side by side, without wall labels or Acoustiguides to tell you what to admire.
Discovering a good painting down here is much more exciting than seeing it upstairs in the galleries, pinned and fixed like a dead butterfly.
"Grand Reserves," at the Brooklyn Museum, tries to bring some of this excitement upstairs, gathering together 10 hitherto unknown canvases, most of which have been sitting for years in the reserves. (A few are recent acquisitions.) A text panel at the entrance to the exhibition explains that the museum is preparing a catalogue of its vast collection of American paintings (more than 7,500 canvases).
In the course of researching its holdings, a certain number of worthy pictures have been "rediscovered." Often, their appearance has been radically altered as a result of cleaning and conservation.
The question is: How were these 10 paintings chosen out of the thousands of possible candidates?
The copious wall texts offer no direct explanation, but, reading between the lines, you can see several varieties of historical revisionism at work.


I.B.M.'s Top Strategist Is Retiring
James A. Cannavino, the chief strategist at I.B.M. and one of the last high-ranking executives representing a link to the computer giant's past, said yesterday that he would retire at the end of the month after 32 years with the company.
Mr.
Cannavino, who is 50, had been widely considered the leading inside candidate to succeed John F. Akers as chief executive two years ago.
And after the International Business Machines Corporation instead brought in an outsider, Louis V. Gerstner Jr., to run the company, Mr.
Cannavino became Mr.
Gerstner's primary technical adviser and liaison to the engineers and product-development branches of I.B.M.
Mr.
Gerstner, who came to the company from RJR Nabisco, has a limited technical background.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A. Magic Dunks Rockets
Shaquille O'Neal's dunk with 3 minutes 47 seconds left helped lift the Orlando Magic to its first victory in Houston, 107-96, last night over the Rockets.
It was the Magic's fourth straight victory.
Anfernee Hardaway had 30 points for Orlando, and O'Neal had 19 points and 20 rebounds. (AP)


Market Place; The wine maker Canandaigua is riding high. But can it continue?
"WE will sell no wine before its time," Orson Welles said in a memorable commercial for the mostly forgettable Paul Masson wines.
Now Paul Masson is owned by the Canandaigua Wine Company, and the question is whether it is time to sell this wine company stock.
Like cabernet sauvignon aging in oak casks, Canandaigua shares have improved with time, although the company's 10 major brands of table wines are not the premium reds that benefit from aging, but inexpensive table wines whose bottles often cost more to make than the wine inside them.
Class A shares of the Canandaigua, N.Y., company have been advancing since it began acquiring brand names in 1991.
It opened that year less than $5 a share and closed yesterday at $36.50, down 50 cents, in Nasdaq trading.


Grief Fights Against Rage at Paterson Youth's Funeral


A Tactical Switch
In a parliamentary maneuver, Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the Republican leader and a main advocate of the balanced-budget measure, captured the right to call for another vote at any time.
He first voted for the amendment but then recast his vote when it became clear that the proposal would fail.


A Bad Idea, Buried
The Senate's rejection of the balanced-budget amendment by a narrow margin yesterday provides cheering evidence that Senate Democrats have the capacity to stop the worst excesses of the Republican revolution in the House.
The proposed amendment was foolish and fiscally reckless when it emerged from the House; it became a cynical charade through last-minute tinkering designed to secure passage in the Senate.
The amendment was always cursed by a heavy dose of posturing.
Many politicians would rather change the Constitution to require that the budget be balanced in the future than to cut popular programs right now.
But as it passed through the Senate the posturing became extreme.


Art in Review
Emma Amos 'Paintings and Prints, 1982-1992'
Studio Museum in Harlem  144 West 125th Street  Through April 2
Emma Amos's work reveals an artist who wants to put everything into her pictures: painting and weaving, figuration and abstraction, social comment and family history.


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan art shows: CARL FUDGE, "Meta-Apocalypse," Lauren Wittels Gallery, 580 Broadway, at Prince, SoHo (through March 12).
The three paintings in this show are, to say the least, process-intensive.
Through collaging, photocopying and silk-screening, Mr.
Fudge turns Albrecht Durer's woodcut illustrations for the Book of Revelation into intricate patterns half submerged in flame-colored pigment.
One is tempted to try to pick out Durer's figures, but they've been scrambled to a flickering tracery, a transformation, which, of course, exactly befits the charged subject (Holland Cotter).





No Headline
"This monster, compared with all the other quarks, is like a big cowbird's egg in a nest of little sparrow eggs. It's so peculiar it must hold clues to some important new physics." DR.
PAUL D. GRANNIS, leader of one of the groups that found the top quark.  [ B7:1. ]


CHRONICLE
"Nunc hic aut numquam."
That's not exactly the way Elvis Presley sang "It's Now or Never," but it is the Latin equivalent.
Some of his biggest hits have been reissued in Finland and translated into Latin on a compact disk to mark his 60th birthday, which was on Jan. 8, The Associated Press reported.


Series of Arson Fires In California Besets Abortion Providers
The setting of a fire here this week at a building that houses two women's health care clinics was the fifth arson attack in less than a month on abortion providers in California, Federal investigators say.
In the latest incident, early Tuesday morning, a tire soaked with gasoline was ignited at a window of the four-story building, which houses the Pregnancy Consultation Center and the Buena Vista Women's Center.


More S.&amp; L. Failures Are Seen by Agency
The General Accounting Office said today that high deposit insurance costs could lead to the failure of some of the nation's weaker savings institutions, prompting two senior members of Congress to declare that Congress should act to prevent it.
The two, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, the New York Republican who is the chairman of the Senate Banking Committee, and Representative John J. LaFalce, a New York Democrat who is a senior member of the House Banking Committee, did not propose any immediate remedies.


Close More Bases -- Now
The fourth round of military base closings has a stronger aroma of politics than the first three rounds.
This is the Pentagon's last crack under the expiring base-closings law.
Its list is too short.
A commission headed by former Senator Allan Dixon of Illinois will now review the list and make a final recommendation.
It should right the Pentagon's wrong and recommend more closings.
It is always politically painful to shut or even shrink a base, especially with a big election next year.
Whatever its motives, the Pentagon shrank the number of places to inflict pain.
It recommended closing 33 major bases and closing or shrinking 113 others.
Seventy major bases and hundreds of smaller installations were closed or cut back during the first three rounds.


Timber Country Set for the Hunt
Timber Country, king of the 2-year-old colts last year, winner of the Breeders' Cup Juvenile but the missing horse so far on the road to the Kentucky Derby, is about to join the race for the Triple Crown.
Afternoon Deelites has already run and won in the West.
Thunder Gulch has already left the West and won in the East.
Now it's time for Timber Country to join the traffic.
He is trained by D. Wayne Lukas and ridden by Pat Day, the combination that produced Tabasco Cat last year, and he is the favorite in the San Rafael Stakes at Santa Anita on Saturday.
And they are aware that no Breeders' Cup champion has ever gone on to win the Derby.


Accounts
*
Korey, Kay &amp; Partners, New York, and its direct response division, Korey Kay Response, were named as the first agency to handle three accounts with combined billings estimated at $5 million: Execu-Search, New York, an executive search firm; GAB Robins, Parsippany, N.J., an insurance claim and loss adjuster, and Kushi Macrobiotics, Stamford, Conn., a macrobiotic foods company.


Princeton Partners Gets Port Account
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey said yesterday that it had selected Princeton Partners Inc. in Princeton, N.J., to handle advertising and marketing for its port department, which covers the ports of Elizabeth and Newark, among others.
The account was previously handled by Earle Palmer Brown in New York.
Billings were estimated at $2.3 million.


The Sad Later Years of the Woman He Loved
THE LAST OF THE DUCHESS
By Caroline Blackwood
295 pages. Pantheon Books. $23.
This fascinating but ultimately disingenuous new book about the Duchess of Windsor is part detective story, part biography, part hatchet job and part comedy of manners.
It features characters who seem like exiles from "Les Liaisons Dangereuses," a social backdrop reminiscent of Evelyn Waugh and a plot that might have been worthy of Henry James.


Meggett's Latest Return, to Parcells, Hurts Giants
David Meggett, the Giants' best special teams player ever and in many ways its heart and soul, is on his way to Foxboro to play for his old coach, Bill Parcells.
Meggett yesterday agreed to terms with the New England Patriots on a five-year contract worth $2 million a season including a $3 million signing bonus.
The Giants offered him a $2 million signing bonus and about $1.8 million a season for four years.
The Patriots have scheduled a news conference to formally announce Meggett's signing today.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Farm Credit Bank is selling $60 million of medium-term notes due in 1997 through Fuji Securities Inc.
The notes are callable in one year, carry an interest rate of 7.13 percent and are priced at par.


A Bizarre Think-Along With a Murderer
As films become increasingly infatuated with high-tech toys, virtual murder takes on currency as a plot device.
It's a nice, no-fault way for characters to experience killing as an innocent thrill, but it has its down side.
When, as in "Hideaway," fishy occult phenomena make it possible to anticipate the thoughts of a murderer, Hatch Harrison (Jeff Goldblum) finds himself well ahead of the action.
But viewers are well ahead of Hatch.
It takes him half an hour to say, "I know it sounds crazy . . . " and discover what we already know.
Based on a novel by Dean R. Koontz, "Hideaway" was directed by Brett Leonard, whose "Lawnmower Man" was also most interesting for its technological ingenuity.
Without paying too much attention to plot niceties, Mr.
Leonard delivers an impressively creepy opening sequence (in which a teen-age satanic type commits murder before impaling himself on a dagger) and some vigorous special effects.
Called "photo-surreal death journeys" in the film's production notes, some of these images depict souls squirming in a psychedelic purgatory.
Others hurtle furiously through a high-tech netherworld.


PLANE MAKER SAYS IT MISUNDERSTOOD PROBLEMS WITH ICE
The chief pilot and a vice president of flight operations of the company that makes ATR turboprops testified today that until the crash of American Eagle Flight 4184 near Roselawn, Ind., last Oct. 31, they had missed the significance of earlier incidents in which their planes showed instability because of icing.
But they said at Federal hearings here that even if they had initially misdiagnosed some early incidents, they still believed that their planes had no design flaw.
In fact, they insisted that the control problems arose only when the twin-engine aircraft were flown into conditions much more severe than those envisioned by existing safety standards in this country and Europe.


UConn Women 26-0 and Counting
The Big East women's basketball tournament will be played tonight through Monday at Seton Hall's Walsh Gymnasium in South Orange, N.J., because that's what the schedule says.
But does anyone think a tournament is necessary to crown Connecticut as the conference champion and prime hope for the national title?
Does anyone think any of the other nine Big East teams can even make it close?
The Huskies finished the regular season 26-0 over all, 18-0 in the conference.
They are the only unbeaten major-college team, women and men.
They have been ranked No. 1 in the nation the last seven weeks.


Mason and Knicks Forge a Special Comeback
Anthony Mason was fantastic.
The Knicks' comeback was spectacular.
And for the Knicks to win after their dismal first half was incredible.
Erasing a 22-point, third-quarter deficit, Mason and the Knicks willed themselves to a memorable 93-89 victory last night at Madison Square Garden.
Mason has enjoyed many forceful perfomances, but this was the best game of his career -- a season-high 26 points, a career-high 7 assists, 12 rebounds and 11-for-13 shooting.
And if that was not enough, Mason put the defensive clamps on Scottie Pippen, who dominated in the first half, but who disappeared in the final quarter.
Starting in place of Charles Smith (sprained left knee), Mason played all 48 minutes, never looked tired and he refused to wilt until the Bulls finally did.


BUSINESS DIGEST
METRO DIGEST INDICTED OFFICER 'SYMPATHETIC FIGURE'
A1.


Prosecutor Is Sympathetic, but Officer Is Indicted
Even as he announced an assault indictment charging a police officer with recklessly shooting a black undercover transit officer on a subway platform last August, the Manhattan District Attorney yesterday called the indicted officer "a sympathetic figure" who had acted after finding himself in a frightening and "very difficult situation."
"I think we have to have a great deal of sympathy" for the indicted officer, Peter Del-Debbio, said District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau.


Republicans Agree to Back Restoration Of Some Cuts
The Republican majority on the House Appropriations Committee agreed today to restore millions of dollars cut from social programs like AIDS prevention but also approved legislation that would put further restrictions on state-financed abortions.
The action came as the panel debated the largest midyear spending cut plan in history -- $17.3 billion in reductions that had been approved by a host of subcommittees last month -- and began making tradeoffs to restore some programs by approving offsetting cuts in others.


G. Peter Fleck Is Dead at 86; Represented Rothschilds in U.S.
G.
Peter Fleck, an international banker and venture capitalist who represented the interests of the Rothschild family in the United States, died on Saturday at his home in South Orleans, Mass.
He was 86.
The cause was congestive heart failure, his family said.


Art in Review
'Mapping' 'A Response to MOMA'
American Fine Arts  22 Wooster Street (between Canal and Grand Streets)  SoHo  Through March 11
No one is ever satisfied with museum exhibitions of contemporary art: disparaging what was included and lamenting what was left out is a favorite New York parlor game.
Usually the game ends when the chardonnay runs out.
But the artist Peter Fend wouldn't let it end there.
Unhappy with the Museum of Modern Art's exhibition "Mapping" last fall, he persuaded American Fine Arts to let him organize his own counterexhibition on the same topic.


A Most Wanted Trader Is Detained
The 28-year-old futures trader who is said to have caused the collapse of the British merchant bank Barings P.L.C. remained in the detention cell of a courthouse here tonight, after German border police boarded an arriving flight from Brunei and apprehended him early this morning.
Nicholas W. Leeson, who was wearing blue jeans, a baseball cap and glasses, spent most of the day in Frankfurt International Airport in the custody of the border police, who had acted on an inquiry about Mr.
Leeson from a journalist in Bonn.
Police officials also took Mr.
Leeson's 23-year-old wife, Lisa Sims, into custody, but released her a few hours later.


Pope Reschedules American Visit for the Fall; Area's Faithful Again Preparing For a Papal Visit
Two artists from a far tip of Long Island, a priest who knew the Pope in Poland and a Brooklyn boy with the voice of an angel will be among the most excited Roman Catholics next October when Pope John Paul II returns to the United States.
The artists have carved a 4-foot-high black walnut sculpture of the Holy Family.
The priest has a banner reading, in Polish, "Witamy Naszego Papieza" -- or "Welcome Our Pope." And the boy is waiting to sing the hymn "Pie Jesu."


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about the International Cat Show at Madison Square Garden misstated the duration.
The show will end Sunday, not Saturday.


Real Winnie Mandela: Benefactor or Grafter?
In the more than two years since Winnie Mandela adopted this rough squatter camp as her power base and patronage showplace, life here has gotten measurably better.
There is an overcrowded but functioning school now.
Engineers are laying water and sewer pipes where new bungalows are to be built.
The tiny clinic has doubled in size.
The settlement even has a brightly painted bank of post office boxes.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday about a plunge on Mexico's stock market on Monday misstated the size of job cutbacks planned by Banamex, a Mexican banking company.
It plans to cut payroll costs, not its work force, by as much as 35 percent.
The company expects to reduce its staff of 32,500 employees by about 10 percent by the end of the year through attrition and severance payments.


INSIDE
Pope Is Planning a Visit To New York Area in the Fall
Pope John Paul II will travel to New York, Newark and Baltimore in October, rescheduling a trip canceled last year.
Page B6.
Blue Cross Rise Approved
New York's insurance chief approved a rate increase for Empire Blue Cross but criticized the company for failing to cut waste.
Page B6.
TB Spread on Plane
A Federal health agency reported today the first case of passenger-to-passenger transmission of tuberculosis on an airplane.
Page B7.
Tough Training, Fatal Ending
Army Rangers pride themselves on the toughness of their training, but last month the system broke down and four trainees died.
Page A20.
Rating New York's Services
Mayor Giuliani issued a statistical report that shows an erosion of some city services, from dirtier parks to bridges needing repairs.
Page B1.


Risk Monitor Wasn't Chosen
Officials at Barings P.L.C. considered buying software last summer that continuously tracks traders' positions to calculate potential risk, the software's manufacturer said today.
The officials decided against the purchase, however, because the $50,000 system was too expensive, said Jeffery Max, senior vice president at the Systems Development Corporation.


Replacement Yankees Outclassed by Dodgers
Don't get embarrassed.
Please, don't get embarrassed.
Those unenviable thoughts were swimming through the minds of Buck Showalter and perhaps Tommy Lasorda before replacement baseball became a reality today when the players wearing Yankees uniforms opposed the players wearing Dodgers uniforms on a field usually reserved for the real Yankees and the real Dodgers.
On a sunny, breezy day that was made for baseball, about 200 fans were at Fort Lauderdale Stadium to watch Frank Eufemia throw a strike past Chris Latham to christen the dawning of replacement games.
This notion would have been scoffed at when the major league players went on strike last Aug. 12.
So far, no one was too embarrassed.
There is still time for that.


What Men Can Do
The battle of the sexes has taken another ugly turn, and once again, science is to blame.
Behaviorists at Yale University now claim that they have uncovered definitive evidence that men and women use their brains differently.
According to reports in this newspaper, not only are men less sensitive than women to emotional cues, women "do better on certain tests, like those measuring verbal speed." Men, one article added dismissively, "do better on other tasks, like imagining what an object would look like if it were rotated."


Capitals Send Islanders Back to Earth With a Thud
So these are the Islanders.
They can defeat the best team in the league, but not the second-worst.
After reeling off impressive back-to-back victories, the first over the league-leading Pittsburgh Penguins, the Islanders came back to earth here tonight against the Washington Capitals in the final game of a four-game homestand.


Negotiations Take a Turn For the Worse
All those words of civility haven't nudged the players and owners toward a settlement any faster than their words of hostility did.
After Bud Selig, the acting commissioner, spent the past week extolling the new attitudes of the two sides and the lofty tone of their discussions, the baseball talks were on the verge of collapsing again today.
They didn't break down completely, but their future seemed tenuous.


Lackluster Gains for Big Retailers
Many consumers snapped their wallets closed in February, causing sales at several of the country's retail chains to fall below merchants' expectations.
Most retailers reported yesterday that their comparable-store sales showed lackluster increases, although a few managed to post some healthy gains.
Wal-Mart Stores Inc. said comparable-store sales in its discount chain jumped 8.4 percent, while Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company, citing help from promotions, said its comparable-store sales climbed 5.4 percent.


Representative Bliley's Double Talk
Representative Thomas J. Bliley Jr. speaks with a forked tongue when he talks about the Food and Drug Administration.
In one breath he accuses the agency of pokiness and nitpicking: "It breaks my heart when I think of American citizens having to go to Switzerland or Mexico to get the drugs or devices they need to stay alive because the Washington bureaucracy won't approve them." In the next, he implies that the F.D.A. cannot be poky and nitpicking enough when it comes to reviewing RU-486, the French abortion drug.
Congressman Bliley's is the lead signature on a citizens' petition that Americans United For Life filed with the F.D.A. demanding that it apply the strictest possible review standards for RU-486.
The petition also argues that the agency should not use data from foreign studies.


A Surf and Turf Scheme
A Camden County man accused of operating a pyramid scheme that took in at least $50 million and cost some investors hundreds of thousands of dollars has been arrested in the Cayman Islands on charges of mail fraud.


Paramount Joins P.&amp; G. in TV Deal
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company, in a significant expansion of its efforts to develop television programming, said yesterday that it would join with the Paramount Television Group in a co-venture to develop network and syndicated television series during the next three years.
The terms of the agreement were not disclosed.
P.&amp; G., the consumer products giant based in Cincinnati, and Paramount Television, based in Hollywood, will each contribute 50 percent of the costs of producing pilots for network series, and P.&amp; G. will become an equity partner in Paramount Television's productions of new shows for so-called first-run syndication.
Paramount Television's current network series include "Frasier" and "Wings" on NBC, and its first-run syndicated series include "Entertainment Tonight" and "Star Trek: Deep Space Nine."


Battle and Hampson: All Charm in a Parade of Hits
As so often happens when big, dominating personalities come together onstage, the concert by the soprano Kathleen Battle and the baritone Thomas Hampson on Wednesday evening at Avery Fisher Hall had perhaps more to do with showmanship than it did with music.
The program, which was presented to benefit Lincoln Center and telecast by PBS on "Live From Lincoln Center," offered so many sure-fire hits that the only suspense was what the singers could possibly do for an encore.
In fact, the encore, Irving Berlin's "You're Just in Love," provided the real spontaneity of the evening, when Ms.
Battle forgot some lines and trouped on charmingly through her obvious panic.
Even in a reprise of the encore (presumably off camera), with the singers making a grand show of referring to the music, Ms.
Battle repeated a line, but the good humor came as welcome relief from the studied veneer of the rest of the program.


Dollar Falls to New Low and Fed Intervenes
The Federal Reserve stepped in to prop up the dollar on international currency markets today, in a partly successful effort to halt the dollar's monthlong slide against the Japanese yen and the German mark.
The dollar touched a record low of 94.90 yen today, before the Fed began spending foreign currencies to buy dollars on currency markets in the afternoon.


CHRONICLE
PAUL KATZ, the cellist of the Cleveland Quartet, has played in many a concert hall, but the other day he faced the challenge of performing in a new venue: an airplane.
Mr.
Katz and his cello, which traveled in a separate seat under the name "Miss A. Cello," were flying on Tuesday from New York City to Rochester, preparing for a 14-city tour, when he discovered that Miss Cello's seat had been double-booked.
The other occupant of the bulkhead window seat: ROBIN LEACH, a co-host of the television show "Lifestyles With Robin Leach and Shari Belafonte."


Inside Art
Thinking Big
Despite continuing speculation about the financial health of the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, its director, Thomas Krens, is thinking big.
Mr.
Krens had a lot to say this week, both about the uptown museum and its SoHo counterpart, on Broadway at Prince Street.
For starters, the director confirmed reports that the Guggenheim is trying to expand its SoHo space by 20,000 square feet.
The museum now has three and a half floors: two floors of gallery space and a floor and a half of offices.





After a Century, Upsala Will Close Without Cash Rescue
Barring a last-minute infusion of cash, Upsala College will close after 102 years of operation on May 31, bringing down the curtain on a college that began life as a school for Swedish immigrants and became an urban campus with large numbers of black and Hispanic students.
The college is $12.5 million in debt, and a series of financial close calls over the last year has cut its enrollment by two-thirds.
As the decision of the trustees to close the school was announced this afternoon, students and faculty members alike said that the alumni and the state had not supported Upsala because its enrollment was so heavily minority, about 60 percent black and Hispanic.


Even DiMaggio Struck Out With Owners
To the Editor:  Joe DiMaggio was a fantastic baseball player, and he has grown older with the same grace and dignity he displayed on the diamond.
But Kitty Kelley's "80-Year Hitting Streak" (Op-Ed, Feb. 25) ignores an important incident in the Yankee's career.


Big Theater Chains Plan Merger
Two leading theater chains, the Cineplex Odeon Corporation and Cinemark USA, said yesterday that they would merge, forming the world's largest exhibition chain.
The deal was valued at $450 million, a spokesman for Cinemark said.


Suspect to Be Tried in Jordan
A prosecutor from Amman said yesterday that Mohammad Abequa, a naturalized American citizen who is charged with strangling his wife, Nihal, in her Parsippany apartment last July 6, will be tried in Jordan.
The United States and Jordan have no extradition treaty.


Ashes in Blue Section, Row 6
The Ash Wednesday ceremony in the Hudson County Administration Building was banned, so a priest distributed ashes in the parking lot.
Among those at the ceremony were Sheriff Edward Webster who had reluctantly canceled the indoor ceremony, performed for three decades, after the American Civil Liberties Union objected.
The A.C.L.U. said it did not object to the ceremony in the lot, as long as it was not promoted and sponsored by the government.
DAVID STOUT


Verplank Eases the Pain With Opening Round of 65
The sports precept that Scott Verplank once obeyed is fine for football, basketball and baseball.
It even makes a great book title.
But when it comes to golf, this is a maxim that should be avoided more than swing tips from a high-handicapper: You gotta play hurt.
Scott Verplank played hurt, and it almost cost him his career.
He ignored pain and he slid into a golf nether world from which he is only now emerging.
His journey back continued today when he shot a seven-under-par 65 in the first round of the Doral-Ryder Open and wound up tied for the lead with Davis Love 3d and Steve Lowery.


Free the Courts From Frivolous Prisoner Suits; Deterrence Fails
To the Editor:
Re "Punishable by Death: Lessons for New York," your Feb. 22-24 series on the death penalty, while comprehensive, ignores the issue of deterrence.
Yet the deterrence argument is the one most often used to justify the death penalty.
And it has been refuted in recent years.


Last U.S. Marines Quit Somalia as Escorts for the U.N.
Bringing an end to the United Nations involvement in Somalia, the last American marines left Mogadishu's shores early this morning, leaving behind a mission that fed Somalia's hungry, but did not end the fighting here.
The 72-hour operation by American and Italian forces to escort the last United Nations troops safely out of the country ended without any American casualties, although late Thursday night, the marines opened fire with several fusillades of machine-gun and cannon fire as Somalis tried to enter the narrow American zone.


SENATE REJECTS AMENDMENT ON BALANCING THE BUDGET; CLOSE VOTE IS BLOW TO G.O.P.
The Senate narrowly failed today to adopt a constitutional amendment requiring a balanced Federal budget, reshaping in one stroke both the political landscape and the prospects for further deep cuts in Government spending.
After days of persuasion, the Republicans supporting the amendment were unable to attract the one last vote they needed for a two-thirds majority, resulting in a victory for Democrats, who raised doubts in the final hours about whether the Social Security trust fund would be safe if the measure became law.


Demands of Simpson Case Land Prosecutor in Custody Fight
The long hours that Marcia Clark has worked on the O. J. Simpson murder trial have made her a famous prosecutor, but they have also sparked a custody fight.
In court papers filed last week in Los Angeles Superior Court, Ms.
Clark's estranged husband, Gordon Clark, argued that he should have primary custody of their two sons, because her grueling workload was harming the boys, ages 3 and 5.


Exhausted Doctors Don't Serve Patients Well; Warning on Haldol
To the Editor:
As the original chairman of the New York State Mental Hygiene Medical Review Board, which investigates sudden, mysterious deaths among mental patients, I find the Feb. 21 letter from juror No. 6 in the Libby Zion case of interest.


An Obstacle Course For a Future Stepfather
"Man of the House," the newest slick confection from the Disney cookie-cutter school of family comedies, follows the formula of many of its predecessors in trying to be two different movies at once.
The better of the two is a warm-hearted comedy about an embittered child of divorce who makes his future step father jump through hoops before accepting him into the family.
Attached to this story is a perfunctory "Home Alone" offshoot in which slapstick thugs are trounced and humiliated by clever children.
When "Man of the House" is following the campaign of 11-year-old Ben Archer (Jonathan Taylor Thomas) to undermine the relationship of his mother, Sandy (Farrah Fawcett), and her fiance, Jack Sturges (Chevy Chase), it has a ruthless sense of humor.
Ben, who narrates the film's opening and closing scenes, is the kind of bratty know-it-all who blithely cites "Geraldo" and "Donahue" as authorities on child psychology.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Breaking the Bank
Barings P.L.C. left itself open to trouble.
Letting a rising young trader like Nicholas W. Leeson in essence police himself showed that the firm did not have effective controls to prevent the kinds of huge trading losses that brought it down.  [ Page A1. ]


With No Stops on a Trip Through a Land of Racism
Racism is as American as apple pie.
That is the message of "The K.K.K. Boutique Ain't Just Rednecks," an eccentric home movie, written and directed by Camille Billops and James V. Hatch, which has the cloyingly cozy tone of a "Mister Rogers" program.
The film, which opens today at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, is a guided tour through an underground space that is part thrift shop, part museum.
The itinerary is analogous to the journey in Dante's "Inferno." As the party descends through circles of hell with names like "The Room of Racial Slurs" and "The Vault of Memory," the depictions of racism become increasingly virulent.
At the lowest level are those souls trapped in cages of their own hatred.


At Nutley High, Gambling 101; Youths Learn About Betting, Shakedowns and Kidnappings
If asked what teen-agers did in this prosperous suburb to get on the wrong side of the law, until this week residents might have talked about those troublesome youths who defy the curfew at the town park, set at 30 minutes after sunset.
That was before Wednesday, when law enforcement officials began their crackdown on a Nutley High School gambling ring that police said was run along the lines of an organized crime operation, complete with an "800" number to get the odds; shakedowns of parents to pay their children's debts, at least one kidnapping and thousands of dollars in weekly receipts for bets on football and basketball games and horse races.


Well, You Clean Furnaces in July, Don't You?


Visionary Images That 'Just Happened'
Few artists can claim as dramatic a beginning to their career as Minnie Evans (1892-1987).
When she was 43 years old, a voice in a dream told her to "draw or die," and draw she did, hundreds of pictures in the next 30 years.
She took responsibility for none of them.
"I have no imagination," she said.
"I never plan a drawing. They just happen."
About having no imagination, she was wrong.
The career survey titled "Minnie Evans: Artist" at the Museum of American Folk Art may begin modestly enough with her first abstract pen-and-ink jottings, but the images that followed, with their fantastic figures and sensuous floral designs, are shaped by a sure hand into a dynamic personal style.


As 2 Dakotans Stand Fast, Folks Back Home Approve
Out here on the wind-whipped prairies, North Dakota is accustomed to obscurity.
Once, the state was even mistakenly omitted from an atlas of America.
But North Dakota loomed large on the political map today, and its two United States Senators looked like a pair of Davids who had felled the Goliaths in Washington.


If at First You Don't Succeed . . .
"Who says only one shot is all you get?" asked Assembly Speaker Chuck Haytaian, who said yesterday that he is seriously considering a run for Senator Bill Bradley's seat next year.
Mr.
Haytaian said he had informed Republican leaders, including Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's office, that he will make his decision by Labor Day.
Mr.
Haytaian, who lost to Senator Frank Lautenberg by about 66,000 votes in November, said: "Tom Kean got two shots. Christie Whitman got two shots. I didn't embarrass myself last year. It's not like he blew me out of the water."


Team's Tradition of Futility Stretches to 71 Losses
For 71 straight games, the story of basketball at the Webb Institute of Naval Architecture has been depressingly the same.
Webb sinks baskets.
The other team sinks more.
A lot more.
The school, in fact, has not won a game in seven years; the last college it beat no longer exists.


Art in Review
Group Show
Paul Morris Gallery  530 West 22d Street  Chelsea  Through March 12
This gallery's strong inaugural show includes small pieces by more than 30 artists, some familiar, others not, several of whom could easily carry a show on their own.
The wide range of the work is evident from a quick glance at the lineup on a single wall: Billy Sullivan's by-the-sea self-portrait (familiar from a strong solo at Fischbach last spring), Kay Rosen's text paintings, Eric Wolf's zebra-stripe abstraction and George Stoll's luminously tinted beeswax cups.


On Stage, and Off
Booting Out a Play
In every contract between a theater and a producer, there's a catch: the stop clause.
If a play fails to sell a specified minimum number of tickets two weeks running, the theater owner can kick it out.
The clause insures that a vain producer with deep pockets won't keep a failing show alive, paying minimum rent, when a better prospect wants the house. (Above the minimum, the landlord gets a percentage of the box office.)
Stop clauses were once commonly invoked on Broadway, but Off Broadway they have been nearly unheard of.
Roger Gindi, a long-time general manager, said: "The last time I remember was Kevin Dowling exercising it on 'Nunsense' and kicking us out of the Cherry Lane. We moved to the Douglas Fairbanks, and I spent the next nine years reminding him of that."


Parking Rules
Because of the Id al-Fitr holiday, alternate-side street-cleaning regulations are suspended in New York City today and tomorrow.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Deal With Browns? Simms Passes, for Now
The white Cleveland Browns banner with the orange helmet was raised to half-staff behind a dais that contained four chairs.
The team's owner, Art Modell, vacationing in Florida, had done a dry run on the telephone that was placed on the table in front of the chairs.
Inside a makeshift sound stage complete with klieg lights at the team's practice facility here, the scene was set, literally, for the Browns to announce the signing of Phil Simms, the 39-year-old former Giants quarterback.


Bruins Are Still Taking Revenge Against Devils
When big, powerful Cam Neely of the Bruins was ejected only 3 minutes 29 seconds into tonight's game, the prospects for success seemed to increase considerably for the Devils.
Instead, the Bruins were the ones who seemed inspired.
Playing with gusto and effectiveness, the Bruins skated away with a 7-2 victory over the Devils in New Jersey's last regular-season appearance at the historic Boston Garden.


Abroad at Home; Zelig For President?
Gov.
Pete Wilson of California is close to a decision to go for the Presidency.
That is the talk among Republican politicians here.
A Wilson candidacy has been a possibility since last fall, when he came from behind to win re-election.
He defeated Kathleen Brown by a huge margin, 15 percent.


Breaking the Bank -- A special report.; Big Gambles, Lost Bets Sank a Venerable Firm
Last Friday should have been a good day for Peter Baring, the chairman of Barings P.L.C., the British investment firm founded by his family 233 years ago.
That morning, the company was to tell employees that they would be receiving hefty bonuses, a reward for bucking the industry trend and posting strong profits in 1994.
But just after 7 A.M.
Mr.
Baring received a call telling him there was a big problem in the firm's Singapore office.
Internal auditors had uncovered a huge financial bet that appeared to be going disastrously wrong.
Moreover, the man responsible for it, a rising star named Nicholas W. Leeson, who would turn 28 the next day, had disappeared, not to be seen again until he was detained today in Frankfurt, where he arrived after taking a circuitous route from Asia.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.94
5.56
3.26
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.72
5.73
3.46
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.89
5.89
3.67
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.28
7.21
6.33
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.48
7.44
6.83
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.36
8.33
7.63
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.36
6.35
5.97
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Land Value vs. Conservation
A bill to ban Federal protection of wetlands or species unless landowners are compensated for property-value declines won preliminary House votes.
Page A19.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Wednesday about the liquidation of the Collection Clothing Corporation, which held the license for Colours by Alexander Julian, referred incorrectly to the company's largest investor.
It was the Harvard Management Company, which invests the endowment funds of Harvard University -- not the endowment fund of Harvard Law School.
The article also misstated the company's founding date. It was 1990, not 1994.


F. Lundberg, 92, Author Who Wrote of the Rich
Ferdinand Lundberg, a prolific iconoclast whose books of social criticism pilloried the wealthy and what he perceived as their financial grip on the nation's economic life, died on Wednesday at Northern Westchester Hospital in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
He was 92 and lived in Chappaqua, N.Y.
He suffered a brief illness, his family said.


Lack of One Vote Could Cost Dole
Sometimes threatening, other times pleading, Bob Dole used every tool he had during the last month in his effort to round up a two-thirds majority in the Senate for the constitutional amendment to balance the budget.
Twice this week he abruptly recessed the Senate when he could not get the final vote he needed to put the count over the top.
But when all the votes were in today, the Senator from Kansas was still one vote shy.
Deservedly or not, this will probably be viewed by some as a defeat for Mr.
Dole in his first major test as the Senate's majority leader in the 104th Congress, and as a setback in his race for the Republican Presidential nomination.


Parts of a New Book Have Very Old Ring
A bedtime reader in Connecticut made an unsettling discovery recently: "The Primary Colors," a current and highly praised book by Alexander Theroux, bears a strong resemblance in some passages to Guy Murchie's "Song of the Sky," a 1954 book that has been out of print since 1973.
Article, page C3.


Corrections
A brief report in the Music Notes column on Saturday about the decision of the London Philharmonic to cancel its concerts in New York City and San Francisco this month misstated the Lincoln Center telephone number for ticket refunds and exchanges.
And a correction in this space on Wednesday gave an incorrect number supplied by Lincoln Center.
The correct number is (212) 875-5030.


Restaurants
The rink has been democratized, but next door is still for the rich and the rich at heart.
When I was growing up, only rich people went skating at Rockefeller Center.
To the rest of us it seemed like an enchanted place where people wearing custom-made skates and adorable costumes executed perfect figure 8's.
Meanwhile, we were up at Wollman Memorial, bundled in ungainly layers while we stood for hours in a line that snaked through Central Park.


Art in Review
Gregory Crewdson
Luhring Augustine Gallery  130 Prince Street  SoHo  Through March 25
Campy horror is the dominant emotional tone of Gregory Crewdson's color photographs.
Mr.
Crewdson constructs and photographs tableaux of the ominous birds, beasts and other forms of life that lurk in the bushes just beyond the neat lawns of suburbia.


Art in Review
David Smith  'The Inspiration of Music'
Washburn Gallery  20 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through March 25
Genius has nothing to do with taste.
These 1945-46 paintings by the sculptor David Smith show just how tacky Surrealism could be.
A female harpsichordist is turned into a praying mantis, extending long splayed fingers and teeth (teeth!) to the keyboard.
In "Untitled (Euterpe and Terpsichore)," pink-and-gray boxy figures contort before a yellow-green oval backdrop: the colors alone demand a double martini.


Debut Recital by a Pianist With a Lot to Live Up To
There was a substantial advance buzz about the pianist Alexander Korsantiya, who made his New York debut on Wednesday night in Alice Tully Hall as the winner of the 1994 Palm Beach Invitational International Competition.
When he was eliminated during the preliminary rounds of the 1993 Van Cliburn Competition, some felt an injustice had been done.
Mr.
Korsantiya, who is Alexander Toradze's teaching assistant at Indiana University, has inspired other critical plaudits as well.
Unfortunately, on this occasion, he did not distinguish himself from many other well-schooled contenders for attention.
His assets are easy to catalogue.
He began his career as a prodigy in his native Republic of Georgia.
He possesses a calm, self-assured manner at the keyboard and a technique that easily handled the knottier passages of Prokofiev's Eighth Sonata and the robustly lyrical final pages of Chopin's Fourth Ballade.
Mr.
Korsantiya also has a good sense of rhythmic shape, as he showed in the lilting syncopations of a selection of Chopin Mazurkas.
This was thoroughly acceptable playing at a high level.
But it did not go much further.


Comfortable? Easy? Not for Bruce Nauman
NOT every artist is like Matisse, who said he wanted his paintings to have the soothing ease of a comfortable armchair.
In the case of Bruce Nauman, whose extraordinary retrospective opens on Sunday at the Museum of Modern Art, the appropriate domestic equivalent is relatively harsh and esoteric: a hair shirt, perhaps, or a bed of nails.
For nearly three decades, Mr.
Nauman's widely influential art has been distinguished by its profound unease, a penchant for probing the basic nature of art and life (often at the same time) that has ranged from the ironic to the confrontational, the perverse to the grueling.


A G.O.P. Attack Hits Bit Too Close to Home
Sacred cows, it has been said, make the tastiest hamburger.
But Representative Scott L. Klug of Wisconsin may have given his fellow Republicans in Congress more than they can chew with his crusade to eliminate subsidies that have gone untouched for nearly half a century.
From helium reserves in Texas to dairy price supports in his own state, Mr.
Klug has taken literally his assignment by Speaker Newt Gingrich of Georgia to come up with a list of things that Government should not be doing.


A Reader Finds That a Current Book Reads Suspiciously Like an Old One
That the two books arrived on Cynthia Martin Kiss's night stand at the same time was sheer coincidence.
One, "The Primary Colors," a recent book by Alexander Theroux, had received a glowing review in The New York Times Book Review, so she bought a copy.
The other, "Song of the Sky," a 1954 book on navigation by Guy Murchie, which is out of print, had been recommended by a friend.
One cold Saturday night in December, having finished "The Primary Colors," Mrs.
Kiss picked up "Song of the Sky." Fourteen pages into the book, she ran across what felt like a familiar passage.
The author was exploring the color white.
Mrs.
Kiss had just read Mr.
Theroux's meditations on blue, yellow and red.
She chuckled to herself that she might have discovered Mr.
Theroux's muse.


For Children
Chopin Birthday Concert
Kosciuszko Foundation  15 East 65th Street  Manhattan  (212) 734-2130  Recommended ages: 10 to 14  Tomorrow
He dressed flamboyantly but meticulously, the same way his fingers darted across the keys of a pastel-colored Pleyel piano.
So Roman Markowicz, a concert pianist who is to impersonate Chopin for a 185th birthday celebration, will be wearing a wig, blouson shirt, cravat, cape and white gloves.
"Chopin looked a little like Edgar Allan Poe," said Tom Pniewski (pronounced pe-NEW-ski).
Mr.
Pniewski is the director of cultural affairs at the Kosciuszko Foundation, established in 1925 to promote Polish culture in America.
The foundation is holding a Chopin party for children, so they can discover the piano master's soothing, lyrical music.


Funeral of Paterson Youth Reflects Anger in the City
Mourners today at the funeral of Lawrence Meyers, the 16-year-old who was fatally shot by a police officer last week, heard condemnations of drug dealers, expressions of anguish, appeals for peace and calm, and rebukes to thoughts of violence.
The voices from the pulpit at Seminary Baptist Church reflected the anger and grief of the young in this faded industrial city, and the more moderate admonitions of their elders that teen-agers' outrage over the shooting of Mr.
Meyers must not be ignored.


Celebrity's Killing Stirs Talk of Intrigue in Russia
Russia reeled today over the news that the country's best-known, most popular television personality was gunned down by hitmen in his apartment stairwell late Wednesday night.
The killing of the man, 38-year-old Vladislav Listyev, who was recently put in charge of Russia's newly reorganized public television network, for a moment lifted the thin veil covering the corruption that has insinuated itself into the country's largest and most visible industries -- including television.


S.E.C. Cites Kemper In Complaint
For the second time in less than two years, the Securities and Exchange Commission has accused Kemper Financial Services of profiting at the expense of investors in its mutual funds.
The S.E.C. filed a complaint yesterday against several Kemper affiliates and executives, including the president of the Kemper Corporation in Chicago and the manager of several of its junk-bond funds.
The agency contends that in 1988, the manager, Kenneth Urbaszewski, put some hard-to-get stocks into the company's profit-sharing plan when those investments should have gone to some mutual funds in return for their purchases of some risky junk bonds through Drexel Burnham Lambert.


The 1995 Grammy Winners
Here are the winners at the 37th annual Grammy Awards ceremony on Wednesday night in Los Angeles: Single Record: "All I Wanna Do," Sheryl Crow


Exhausted Doctors Don't Serve Patients Well
To the Editor:
As a medical intern in the Bronx, I once gave penicillin to a child allergic to the drug: it was my 33d hour on call.
That the child came to no harm was lucky; he could easily have been a casualty of the long hours residents work, and I could well have been in the shoes of the doctors who treated Libby Zion.


A Night of Confusion and Fear in Which 4 Army Ranger Candidates Died
Second Lieut.
Spencer D. Dodge, president of the West Point class of 1994, was chest-deep in a muddy backwater of the Yellow River in the Florida Panhandle last month, lost in a fog, freezing to death.
He and 101 fellow students in the Army's Ranger training class 3-95 were in the last days of their nine-week course.
They had starved in the desert and frozen in the mountains.
Most of the men had lost 30 or 40 pounds.
They were exhausted.


Municipalities Struggle With Rule on Contracts
To the Editor:
If Gov.
George E. Pataki and the New York State Legislature are truly interested in reducing taxes, they should eliminate a nonfunded mandate up for renewal by the Legislature in July.


Art Imitating Andy Warhol
It's no coincidence that Bruce LaBruce, who wrote, directed and stars in "Super 8 1/2," is often shown standing in front of a poster for "Andy Warhol's Blue Movie." Periodically in this crude 16-millimeter film, which opens today at Cinema Village, Mr.
LaBruce, in sunglasses and bleached blond bangs, strikes a Warholian pose.
That pose is one of the film's many double-edged jokes.
While dismissing the notion of himself as the Warhol of gay punk cinema, Mr.
LaBruce, who plays a film maker named Bruce, seems intent on being seen as exactly that.
Like Warhol, Mr.
LaBruce facetiously muddies the waters separating experimental and exploitation films.
He even throws out a term, "pornology," to describe his stylistic blend of hard-core pornography, B-movie parody and cinema verite documentary, then jokingly rejects it in favor of "pornopoly." Be advised: the movie, which is unrated, includes several extended hard-core excerpts from Bruce's oeuvre.


School Gets Onassis Name
A Manhattan high school was renamed yesterday to honor Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, education officials said.
The school, formerly the Midtown High School for International Careers, was officially renamed the Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis High School for International Careers at a ceremony, said a spokesman for the Board of Education, John Beckman.
The board voted late last year to approve the change.


Club Owner Is Indicted In 4 Deaths
The owner of a nightclub where four young people were killed in a horrific stampede down a narrow stairwell has been indicted for second-degree manslaughter, accused of being responsible for the under-age drinking and overcrowding that the police believe ultimately led to the deaths.
The Union County Prosecutor, Andrew K. Ruotolo Jr., said today that the indictment for the events on Dec. 3 at the club, El Balcon, appeared to be the first such case in New Jersey based on the principle that a club owner can be criminally liable for deaths that occur on his property.


Let's Say Enough to Copyright Welfare
To the Editor:
Re "A Rights Movement With Song at Its Heart" (Arts pages, Feb. 23): The misguided attempt by songwriters' heirs to extend the copyright law from 75 to 90 years not only fails to guarantee protection of the writers -- who in nearly every case are long gone -- but isn't even a guarantee that a song won't be mishandled by the estates themselves.
Many an heir in search of a royalty fee is only too happy to license a song for junky commercial uses.


Anger Is Coach's Tool for Success
Curtis Frye coaches speed and attitude at the University of North Carolina.
He believes in rehearsed irritability.
As races approach, he wants his sprinters and hurdlers to turn down the volume on their pleasant dispositions and turn on the radio of rage.
His prize pupil is the hurdler Allen Johnson, 24, a Carolina alumnus who still trains in Chapel Hill, N.C.
This technique of practiced indignation has helped power Johnson to the world's fastest time of the indoor season, 7.38 seconds, in the 60-meter hurdles.
He will be favored at the national indoor track and field championships Friday and Saturday at the Georgia Dome, and at the world indoor championships next weekend in Barcelona, Spain.
All because he has learned to get mad, not even.


Pope Reschedules American Visit for the Fall; Pontiff's Health Had Been Topic Of Speculation
Pope John Paul II will make a four-day trip to the United States in October, with stops in New York City, Newark and Baltimore, rescheduling a visit that was canceled last year for health reasons, the Vatican announced today.
Nearly 30 years to the day after Pope Paul VI issued a plea for peace at the United Nations, the Pontiff will address the world body on Oct. 5 in commemoration of its 50th anniversary.


NEW JERSEY DAILY BRIEFING;
The city will borrow $3.4 million to buy land on which a $6 million police station will be built.
The Police Department has been located in a decaying, turn-of-the-century Masonic Temple since 1989.
The Policeman's Benevolent Association had pressured the city to close the old building.


Sale of Baring Assets To ING Group Is Likely
The ING Group, a large Dutch insurance and banking company, is in "exclusive negotiations" to acquire the assets of Barings P.L.C., administrators for the bankrupt British merchant bank said yesterday.
The exclusive nature of ING's negotiations with the administrators, which shuts out other prospective buyers, makes it likely that ING will take over the assets of Barings.


Accuser in the Muni Bond Industry
In 14 years at Smith Barney, Michael R. Lissack earned millions of dollars.
He advised local governments on bond issues worth tens of billions.
And, he contends, he helped Wall Street line its pockets at the expense of taxpayers.
Last month, according to Mr.
Lissack, he told his bosses at Smith Barney that he would no longer remain silent in grand jury testimony about what he considered the firm's misdeeds.
He was dismissed.


Marking the End of Ramadan


CHRONICLE
A.
E.
HOTCHNER hasn't given so much as a glance to his play "The White House" since it was produced on Broadway in 1964.
Tonight, he will probably give it his rapt attention.
Mr.
Hotchner plans to be at the White House to watch it being performed as part of a celebration of the 25th anniversary of National Public Radio.


Arrest of Ex-Mexican Leader's Brother Stirs Support for Zedillo
The arrest on murder charges of the elder brother of former President Carlos Salinas de Gortari has brought a surge of public support for the beleaguered presidency of Ernesto Zedillo, but it has also left Mexicans wondering if political conflict might not deepen as a result.
By ordering the police virtually into the home of his predecessor and onetime political mentor, Mr.
Zedillo struck at the impunity with which powerful Government officials, governing-party leaders and their relatives have amassed illicit wealth and committed crimes for decades.


There's Fragility and There's Muscle
It was a battle between the mystical and the physical when two inventive and experienced Texas singers and songwriters, Jimmie Dale Gilmore and Guy Clark, performed on Thursday night at the Church of St.
Ann and the Holy Trinity in Brooklyn Heights.
Where Mr.
Gilmore sang about the differences between the being and the seeming, Mr.
Clark sang about Texas cooking.
Where Mr.
Gilmore picked gentle, tentative lines from his guitar, Mr.
Clark plucked hard, muscular lines from his.
Mr.
Gilmore is one of country-folk's most distinctive performers.
He croons in a high, pinched, wavering voice that cuts right to the heart of a song, and his sensitivity is unmatched by any of his contemporaries.
He spent Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday on stages in New York.
First at Carnegie Hall for a benefit for the Tibet House, where he performed his haunting "Tonight I Think I'm Gonna Go Downtown" with David Byrne; then at the Mercury Lounge for a surprise solo performance, where his short set ranged from "Happy Birthday" to Townes Van Zandt's "Buckskin Stallion," and then a full-sized set on Thursday, which was the opening-night benefit for the Arts at St.
Ann's series.


Difficult Custody Decisions Being Complicated by AIDS
Yvette Santiago came home one sultry June night after a three-day crack binge to find that her seven children were gone.
There was no food in the house so a neighbor had taken them in; another neighbor had called the police.
The children eventually went to foster care.
It was not until months later, said Ms.
Santiago, who is infected with H.I.V., that getting her children back became her crusade.
Her epiphany came when she visited her 5-year-old daughter, who is retarded, and she heard her speak for the first time.
"I love you," the child said.


Dr. Fritz Fuchs, 76, Who Advanced Obstetrics
Dr.
Fritz Friedrich Fuchs, a New York obstetrician and gynecologist who advanced the knowledge and treatment of the female reproductive system, died on Feb. 17 at a hospital in Hamburg, Germany.
He was 76 and lived in Manhattan.
A spokeswoman for Cornell University Medical College, where he performed much of his research, said the cause was a stroke.
He was in Germany accompanying his wife, Dr.
Anna-Riitta Olsson Fuchs, a chemist who frequently collaborated with her husband, on her sabbatical from Cornell at the University of Hamburg's Institute for Hormone and Fertility Research.


Still Swimming in Love and Melody
"Shadow let go, there's something you should know," Jim Kerr wails at the beginning of the opening song on "Good News From the Next World" (Virgin), the newest album by the band he leads, Simple Minds.
"I just found my new direction, and I hope you like the key." On Monday night at the Academy, Simple Minds showed that while they may have switched directions, they are still sailing on the same sea of gliding new-wave melodies, breathy lyrics of transcendent love and streamlined funk beats that gave them their first and last Top 10 singles in the mid-1980's.
The difference is that only one other original member of the Scottish band remains, the guitarist Charlie Burchill.
Mr.
Burchill's increased contribution to the group, and the fact that alternative-rock and grunge have made synthesizer-driven rock seem retro, have resulted in Simple Minds using the guitar instead of the keyboards to power their songs of love and redemption.
The music isn't a return to the arty, experimental pop of their first albums, but rather a new attempt at pop credibility in the 1990's.


Finding Havens Within the Stock Group
When it comes to stock funds, a safe course proved the best choice in the early months of this year.
Financial services funds, the leaders, generally own shares at a low multiple of price to earnings.
Two other strong performers, growth-and-income funds and equity-income funds, often own blue-chip stocks that are widely held.
Health care funds, buoyed by recent industry mergers, have tended to do well going into recessions because the demand for health care is relatively steady no matter the economic environment.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AGWAY INC., Syracuse, a farm supply cooperative, will reduce its work force in an effort to cut costs.
Agway will cut 104 jobs, including 27 positions at its headquarters.
FLEET FINANCIAL GROUP INC., Providence, R.I., a bank holding company, said its Fleet National Bank unit had completed its acquisition of Plaza Home Mortgage Corp., Santa Ana, Calif., for about $88 million in cash, or $7.525 a share.
PHOENIX INFORMATION SYSTEMS CORP., St.
Petersburg, Fla., a provider of travel products and services, signed contracts with two computer reservations services, System One Corp. and Galileo International, making its products available on 136,000 terminals operated by the companies.
TEKTRONIX INC., Wilsonville, Ore., plans to introduce a new color printer for personal computers that uses solid sticks of ink rather than liquid in hopes of making printing faster.


Bond Prices Fall on Fears About Dollar
Prices of Treasury securities fell sharply yesterday, as investors sold because of concern about the dollar and fear that the Federal Reserve might be forced to push up interest rates to support it.
The Treasury confirmed in early trading that it was supporting the dollar in foreign exchange markets, and in some cases was acting with other central banks.


Business Digest
Markets  The dollar continued to slide despite a concerted effort by the Federal Reserve, the Bank of Japan and European central banks to prop up the value of the currency.
Even strong words from Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin proved no match for a wave of speculation against the dollar, which tumbled to another record low against the Japanese yen.  [ Page 33. ] Stocks advanced, despite the weak dollar.
Technology stocks, including I.B.M., led the rally.
The S.&amp; P. 500 rose 0.29 point.  [ 34. ] The falling dollar dragged down Treasury prices.
The dollar's slide raised fears that the Federal Reserve might be compelled to raise short-term interest rates to support the currency.  [ 44. ] Copper prices surged on signs of strong European demand.  [ 43. ] International  Britain began an inquiry into whether the collapse of Barings was a result of fraud that reached into its headquarters.
The investigation opened as talks continued between bankruptcy administrators and ING over the sale of the investment firm.  [ 33. ] Japan's securities industry is battling its bleakest period in recent history.
Indeed, with sharp job cutbacks and slumping stocks, the industry is facing the possibility that it may be hollowing out.  [ 33. ] Mexico seized the nation's eighth-largest bank, Banpais, in the first such takeover since its financial crisis began.  [ 45. ] Companies  A Mercedes-Benz executive praised American auto makers as the world's most efficient manufacturers.
The chief of Mercedes-Benz's car operations, Jurgen Hubbert, said that he no longer looked to Japan for guidance, as he did in the 1980's.  [ 33. ] Intuit disclosed new flaws in some of its tax programs.
The company notified users of its Connecticut and Indiana state tax programs of possible errors.
The disclosure came after Intuit said some users of its Turbotax and Macintax programs might be affected by minor flaws in the tax preparation software.  [ 33. ] National Gypsum rejected a $1.12 billion takeover bid from BPB Industries of Britain.
Analysts expect the bidding for National Gypsum to intensify, and its shares rose sharply.  [ 35. ] An Italian eyewear maker offered $1.12 billion for U.S.
Shoe, the parent of Lenscrafters, the largest American optical chain.  [ 35. ] Beneficial National Bank dropped a lawsuit against the I.R.S.  [ 35. ] Ford Motor posted strong sales of light trucks in February.
Ford said its results showed that the market remained firm.  [ 35. ] Losses are seen for the brokerage firms that did business with the bankrupt Adler Coleman &amp; Company.
But most of the 60,000 customer accounts are likely to find new homes next week.  [ 45. ]
The Economy  The Government's chief forecasting gauge indicated a slowdown ahead.
The index of leading indicators was flat in January.
In a separate report, factory orders rose a modest 0.6 percent.  [ 45. ] Your Money  A foreign fund has managed to avoid financial trouble spots like Japan and Mexico.
The iconoclastic approach has produced stellar returns for the fund, GAM International.  [ 32. ] Rising yields should not tempt investors to put money for retirement into money market accounts and bank deposits.
Advisers warn that the yields are still low for long-term growth.  [ 32. ]


UConn Women and Coach Sweep Conference Honors
Unbeaten Connecticut, the nation's No. 1 women's team, swept Big East basketball honors today when Rebecca Lobo was voted player and scholar-athlete of the year, Nykesha Sales rookie of the year and Geno Auriemma coach of the year.
The voting by conference coaches was announced at a luncheon in Summit, N.J.
Tonight, the conference tournament began at Walsh Gymnasium on the Seton Hall campus here with games matching the conference's four lowest-seeded teams.


3 Held in Death at Restaurant
Two new arrests brought the roster of defendants to three in the slaying of the manager of the International House of Pancakes.
In custody were Darrell Williams, 25, and Gerald Lydell Wilson, 27.
They join Timmy Smith, 21, who was arrested earlier in the Feb. 27 killing of Robert Hess, who was shot in an attempted robbery as he was leaving the restaurant shortly after midnight.
The Bergen County Prosecutor's Office said Mr.
Smith and Mr.
Williams beat and kicked Mr.
Hess in the face and dragged him across the parking lot toward his car, where Mr.
Smith shot him once in the back of the head.
Mr.
Wilson was identified by the prosecutor's office as the driver of the car used by the three defendants.


INSIDE
Fast Hunger Strike in Mexico
Mexico's former President, Carlos Salinas de Gortari, went on a hunger strike to rescue his "honor" and then suspended it hours later.
Page 3.
Senator Bolts Democrats
Ben Nighthorse Campbell of Colorado, the only American Indian in the Senate, left the Democratic Party and joined the Republicans.
Page 8.
Simpson Lawyers Are Fined
Judge Lance Ito levied fines against two of O. J. Simpson's lawyers for failing to give prosecutors a tape of an interview with a witness.
Page 7.


Jaspers Are Reaching For a Few More Goals
A few days before the start of the season, Manhattan Coach Fran Fraschilla brought a piece of chalk to work instead of a whistle.
Before running his players through practice drills, Fraschilla huddled with them in a classroom on the tiny Riverdale campus in the Bronx and then stepped up to a chalkboard and wrote down his six goals for the season:


Time to Be Counted
Testing . . . testing . . . one, two, three.
The United States Census Bureau is counting on this community to help it prepare for the next national survey by taking part in a trial run today.
Under scrutiny will be techniques intended to simplify the questionnaires, make them available at convenient sites, and send them in Spanish to areas with many Spanish-speaking households.
The test will also allow people to answer census questions by telephone and will try to improve the tally of the homeless.
In addition, the bureau will attempt to cut costs by teaming up with the Postal Service to identify vacant housing to eliminate useless follow-up visits.
LAWRENCE VAN GELDER


Earl Blackwell, 85, a Promoter Of Celebrities and Their Events
Earl Blackwell, a society impresario who made his fortune keeping track of celebrities, died on Wednesday at Roosevelt Hospital.
A Manhattan resident, he was 85 and also kept a home in Great Harbour Cay, the Bahamas.
He had suffered a long illness, said Vine Phoenix, his assistant for 40 years.


For Lakehurst, More Bad News
Hard luck dogged Lakehurst long before this week's recommendation by the Pentagon to close the Naval Air Warfare Center here.
Just when it seemed the town's fortunes were riding high, something would bring it all crashing down.
That was literally the case in the Hindenburg disaster.


Mexican Ex-President Starts and Ends a Hunger Strike
The political drama that has gripped Mexico since the arrest of a brother of the former President, Carlos Salinas de Gortari, veered toward farce today as Mr.
Salinas went on a hunger strike to rescue his "honor" and then suspended it hours later.
Mr.
Salinas, who left office three months ago as one of the most powerful Mexican leaders of the last century, told reporters who followed him to a poor neighborhood in the northern city of Monterrey that his protest had nothing to do with the arrest of his brother, Raul, on murder charges.


Dirty Work at the Blue Ribbon Laundry
It is not a compliment to suggest that a demonically possessed piece of machinery embarked on a bloodthirsty rampage has more personality than most of the flesh-and-blood characters in "The Mangler," a horror movie based on a Stephen King story.
Granted, the Hadley Watson Model 6 Steamer Ironer and Folder is an impressive hunk of metal.
Belching and hissing steam as frantic workers feed it sheets, this locomotive-size thingamabob dominates the Blue Ribbon Laundry, a hellish industrial cleaning plant in northern New England.
In its early scenes, "The Mangler," which opened yesterday, looks like a nightmare from the Industrial Revolution in which vengeful 19th- century ghosts come back to haunt postindustrial America.
And in a way it is.
Bill Gartley (Robert Englund), the grotesquely deformed and repulsive owner of the Blue Ribbon Laundry is a Dickensian monster who resembles a horror-movie caricature of Lionel Barrymore as Scrooge crossed with Judge Turpin from "Sweeney Todd."


The Battle of Seattle: Zeros vs. P-39's and Yamamoto's Victory
Pulp fiction novels that imagine what might have happened if Japan had acted differently in World War II are a popular genre in this country.
Here are excerpts from one such book, "The Decisive Battle on the American Mainland," by Yoshiaki Hiyama, published by Kobunsha, as translated by The New York Times.
On the afternoon of May 7, 1942, the fleet appeared off the coast of Seattle.
At 3:08 the air-raid alarm sounded.
Citizens of Seattle stopped their work and rushed to their posts as they had practiced in air-raid drills. . . .


Advice Unheeded on Averting Birth Defect
Despite an educational effort in South Carolina, women are not taking a B vitamin that can prevent one of the most common and devastating birth defects, a new study shows.
Experts say the finding bodes ill for less intense national efforts by groups like the March of Dimes to persuade women to take folic acid supplements and raises a more general question: what does it take to get Americans to change their health habits?


Another Search-and-Seizure Loophole
The Supreme Court, increasingly reluctant to enforce the Fourth Amendment's ban on unreasonable searches and seizures, has found a new exception to the so-called exclusionary rule, which bars the use of illegally obtained evidence.
Arizona courts had thrown out marijuana possession charges against Isaac Evans, who was arrested in Phoenix and searched on the basis of an erroneous computer record.
But the Supreme Court, saying the police relied on the faulty information in good faith, reinstated the charges.


To Change Presidio From Post to Park
To the Editor:
It is a proud tradition of the Presidio that a shot was never fired in anger from its cannons.
I will adhere to that tradition in responding to your Feb. 21 news article that presented a distorted view of the prospects for this great national asset.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about Senator Kent Conrad, a Democrat withholding his support from the balanced-budget amendment, misstated part of his educational background in some editions.
While he attended the University of Missouri, he received his A.B. degree from Stanford and an M.B.A. from George Washington University.


Editorial Notebook; Ladies' Mile, Then and Now
"Great Bargains! . . . Sacrifice! . . . All our Immense Stock at a Great Loss. . . . All the goods in the store 20 per cent below COST for CASH!!!!" Sound familiar, these siren calls?
You can hear them every time you walk down Fifth Avenue or Seventh Avenue or Broadway.
Or any avenue sporting stores that purport to be "Going Out of Business" and promise "Fantastic Reductions!"
The store that made these promises, however, exists only in an illustration done for Harper's Weekly in 1857 and titled "The Dry-Goods Epidemic, Broadway at 3 P.M." Yet the truths it speaks are for the ages -- and for a city that has always been a monument to consumerism.
Superstores come, mom-and-pop stores go, but whatever the economic weather New York City remains one whopping mall.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about the sedition trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and 11 others in Manhattan referred incorrectly to one element of a speech by the sheik that prosecutors entered as evidence.
While the sheik did urge devout Muslims to fight a guerrilla war against the enemies of Islam, he did not specifically identify the United States as one such enemy.


Ouagadougou Journal; Abuzz Over Africa's Week at, and in, the Movies
"Wasn't that Wole Soyinka?" someone asked in a crowded hotel lobby, referring to the Nigerian Nobel laureate and dissident, who was spotted darting from one interview to the next.
"Has anyone seen Alice Walker?" another celebrity-watcher wondered aloud, referring to the American novelist who visited here two years ago.


Developments in Washington
HOUSE -- The House completed its work on a series of antiregulatory measures, bundled them into a package with enormous implications for the system of Federal environmental controls and sent it to the Senate, where its fate is uncertain.
The package, which passed 277 to 148, would temporarily suspend most new regulations and subject proposed rules on health, safety and environmental protection to new cost-benefit and risk assessments.
It would also compensate private landowners when regulations reduced their property values, and it would honor the promise to roll back Federal regulations, a central part of the Republicans' Contract With America.


Whitewater Counsel Is Urged to Investigate Hiring of Ex-Justice Official's Wife
A Republican Senator has asked the Whitewater independent counsel to investigate the White House's role in a decision by the Interior Department to reinstate the wife of former Associate Attorney General Webster L. Hubbell to a political job.
Last year Mr.
Hubbell's wife, Suzanna, took an unpaid leave from her job as special assistant to Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt after Mr.
Hubbell left the Justice Department to defend himself in the Whitewater investigation.


COMPANY NEWS;
An Italian eyewear maker, Luxottica Group S.p.A., yesterday made an unsolicited offer of $24 a share, or $1.12 billion, for the U.S.
Shoe Group, the parent of Lenscrafters, the nation's largest retail optical chain.
Shares of U.S.
Shoe surged $5.375 yesterday, to $24.125, a new 52-week high, in heavy trading on the New York Stock Exchange.


Vice President Visits New York


He Inspired a Veterinary Renaissance
To the Editor:
In the obituary of James Herriot (Feb. 24), Maeve Binchy is quoted as having written in a 1992 Times review of his book "Every Living Thing" that "It is arguable that James Herriot has done more for his veterinary colleagues than any television series ever did for the mainstream branch of the medical profession."
One measure of that is that in the seven years following the publication of "All Creatures Great and Small" in 1972, seven new schools of veterinary medicine were created in the United States.


Lukas Appeals Suspension
D.
Wayne Lukas filed an appeal today for his 60-day suspension in the drug case involving the undefeated filly Flanders, and the trainer was granted a stay until after hearings are held by the New York State Racing and Wagering Board.
Robert Feuerstein, counsel to the board, said by telephone that the stay would probably carry past the Kentucky Derby on May 6, thereby leaving Lukas free to continue training his star 3-year-old colts, Timber Country and Thunder Gulch.
Timber Country, who is scheduled to run in the San Rafael Stakes Saturday at Santa Anita, won the Eclipse Award as last year's best juvenile; Flanders won the award as the best juvenile filly.


Japanese Refight the War, And Win, in Pulp Fiction
Fifty years after the end of World War II, the Japanese armed forces are rising again.
And this time, Japan is winning.
The revival of the Imperial military is taking place in World War II combat novels that have become popular in Japan, after being nearly taboo for decades.
Dozens, if not hundreds, of such war fantasy books have been published in the last few years, and in many of them, history is rewritten so that Japan triumphs in battles it actually lost.


A Derivative? Hmmm. What Is A Derivative?
So what exactly is a derivative?
Steve Kroft takes up a third of tomorrow night's edition of "60 Minutes" on CBS (at 7 o'clock on Channel 2 in New York) without managing to obtain a clear answer to that question from people who ought to know.
In general, it seems to be a means for an investor to place bets on how other, more conventional investments (currencies, commodities, interest rates, whatever) will do, relative to each other, in a given period of time.
Or something of the sort.
You have to be a computer to figure out whether your bet is winning or losing, but that hasn't stopped investors from succumbing to derivativitis.
Mr.
Kroft is more successful at reporting on how companies and other institutions that took fliers on derivatives in recent years wound up in the red, while the brokers who peddled them drew in hefty profits.
He begins with the disaster of Orange County, Calif., which suffered a $1.6 billion loss, and he visits less famous financial basket cases in Ohio, where the people in charge all say they were misled. (They expected to make money.)


Sign Language Teachers Halt Suicide
Two instructors from the School for the Deaf near Gramercy Park in Manhattan were about to wrap up another week yesterday afternoon when police officers arrived with an urgent test for their American Sign Language skills: could they help save a life?
At a building three blocks from the school, a 31-year-old man had walked onto a narrow parapet 22 floors above Park Avenue South.
Clutching a steak knife and leaning out over the street, the man seemed alternately ready to jump or to cut his own throat, the police said.


Whitaker Says Bright Lights Will Hurt Bigger Opponent
Julio Cesar Vasquez will have the weight but Pernell Whitaker will have the bright lights.
And that, says Whitaker, will be in his favor Saturday night when he meets Vasquez for the world junior-middleweight crown.
Of course, the weights lie.
They always do in boxing when the weigh-in is held 24 hours before the fight.
So even though both fighters weighed in at 153 3/4 pounds tonight, Vasquez will probably be 10 pounds heavier than Whitaker when the two fight for Vasquez's World Boxing Association junior-middleweight crown (154 pounds).


The Oilers Lure Gray Away From the Lions
The Houston Oilers are hoping they have solved their kick-return woes by wooing MEL GRAY, the National Football League's career kickoff-return leader, to the team.
Gray, who turns 34 this month, led the league in 1994 with a 28.4-yard return average and went to the Pro Bowl for a third straight year.
He agreed Thursday to a two-year, $2.4 million contract with the Oilers.
Gray was in Houston yesterday to sign the contract.


Times Company May Sell 7 Small Newspapers
The New York Times Company said yesterday that it was in discussions for the possible sale of seven of its small regional newspapers.
Among the papers are five dailies with a combined circulation of about 71,600 copies: The Daily Corinthian in Corinth, Miss.; The State Gazette in Dyersburg, Tenn.; The Daily Commercial in Leesburg, Fla.; The Lenoir News-Topic in Lenoir, N.C., and The Messenger in Madisonville, Ky.


When Scheduling a Maestro, It's All in the Timing
AT exactly 9:55 on Wednesday morning, Valery Gergiyev left his hotel and entered a waiting limousine for the short drive to Lincoln Center.
At 9:58, Ellyn Kusmin, the operations manager for the New York Philharmonic, who was maintaining telephone contact with the driver, rang for the elevator and held its door so the visiting Russian director would not lose any seconds as he headed up to the concert hall where 90 musicians were waiting for their rehearsal to begin.
"Almost all of our guests and soloists have their idiosyncrasies and peculiarities," said Ms.
Kusmin, whose job largely involves accommodating the desires of visiting soloists and conductors and making sure they get to where they are supposed to be precisely when they are supposed to be there.


Gibbs Offers a Helping Hand to Manley
On a day Dexter Manley was released from jail and committed to a Houston hospital, he saw a face from his past: Joe Gibbs.
Manley is a former Washington Redskins Pro Bowl defensive end who has been arrested three times in four months on cocaine charges, and Gibbs is his former Super Bowl coach who showed up yesterday at the Harris County Courthouse promising moral support.


A Good Month for the House
Thanks to good weather and a busy Presidents' Day weekend, casino revenue rose 15 percent last month.
The Casino Association of New Jersey reported a monthly win figure of $258.8 million, up from $224.9 million in February 1994.
All 12 casinos won more last month than in the previous February.
The win, or casino revenue, is the amount lost by gamblers.
It is not profit, which is determined after deducting operating expenses, interest, taxes and other costs.


Pat Robertston Says He Intended No Anti-Semitism in Book He Wrote Four Years Ago
Pat Robertson, the religious broadcaster who is one of the nation's most influential religious conservatives, has suddenly found himself defending a best-selling book he wrote four years ago against assertions that it contains anti-Semitic innuendo.
Written during the Gulf War, the book, "The New World Order" (Word Publishing, 1991), has Mr.
Robertson's speculations about biblical prophecy and at least two centuries of world history.
In part, it weaves theories of a broad conspiracy against American interests by "European bankers" and others.


Bronx School Employee Pleads Guilty in Scandal
At first, the central Bronx school administrator said she would like two Rolex watches.
But then she changed her mind and decided she would rather have a vacation in Puerto Rico.
"I'm really tired," said the administrator, Joan Salvatore, who worked in District 12.


Court Reverses Practice of Allowing Research on Psychiatric Patients
A State Supreme Court justice has ruled that mentally incompetent people in psychiatric institutions cannot be given experimental drugs without first agreeing to take part in the procedures.
Hundreds of patients, possibly thousands, in New York psychiatric institutions who lack the mental capacity to give informed consent to participate in research programs are getting experimental drug treatments for illnesses including extreme psychosis, advanced Alzheimer's disease and schizophrenia based on consent given by their relatives and friends.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.94
5.94
3.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.70
5.72
3.51
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.91
5.89
3.72
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.33
7.28
6.36
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.54
7.48
6.83
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.41
8.36
7.67
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.40
6.36
5.99
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


F.A.A. to Study Past Problems With Icy Weather Flying
A Federal Aviation Administration official said today that the agency would study past incidents of the rolling of turboprop planes in icy weather to see whether there were signs of the same kind of problem that led to the crash of an American Eagle ATR plane last October near Roselawn, Ind.
That study, using Government computer data bases of incidents and records from manufacturers, is scheduled to be completed by the first anniversary of the Roselawn crash on Oct. 31, also the start of the icy weather season for all aircraft.


Rangers Are Making Progress by Revving Up the Offense
The Rangers continued to roll last night, knocking off a hot team, extending their first-place lead and padding a few recent streaks.
In beating the Philadelphia Flyers, 5-3, at Madison Square Garden, they went up by 5 points over Tampa Bay in the Atlantic Division and extended their undefeated streak to four games, at 3-0-1.


Holocaust Museum's New Chief Resigns
The man chosen to lead the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum here resigned today, citing recent news reports over his misrepresentation of his scholarly accomplishments and a violation of leave policy while a faculty member at Cornell University.
The director-designate, Steven T. Katz, wrote in a letter faxed to Miles Lerman, the chairman of the United States Holocaust Memorial Council, that he was resigning because "frivolous and nonmeritorious allegations, which have been asserted, would unduly distract from the important educational mission" of the museum.
Dr.
Katz, 50, had been selected to succeed Jeshajahu Weinberg, the founding director of the museum, and was to take up the post of executive director on March 16.


POP
Mixing Punk's Best Elements With Efficiency and Gusto  Elastica Mercury Lounge


Hints by California's Governor Stir Up G.O.P. Presidential Pool
Just as Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's non-candidacy unnerved Democrats four years ago, the speculation that Gov.
Pete Wilson of California is running for President has set off a furious round of jockeying among Republicans already in the race and is threatening to tear apart the California Republican Party.
Mr.
Wilson's friends and advisers say he is edging close to entering the race.
But no matter what happens, the very talk of a bid by Mr.
Wilson has altered the early dynamics of the campaign.


Imagine Life Without Your Travel Agent
To the Editor:
When you call me for one of those $198 round-trip tickets to Florida I'll have to tell you to have your secretary call the airline -- good luck on getting through -- and demand that fare; not the $298 or $398 ticket because the cheap fare is sold out.


Two Letters and Excerpts From Book
Following is a statement from Pat Robertson, founder of the Christian Coalition, to The New York Times yesterday regarding assertions that his book "The New World Order" (Word Publishing, 1991) includes an anti-Semitic message:
"The New World Order" was written at the height of the Gulf War to answer Bush Administration officials who were announcing that America had entered "The New World Order" under the aegis of the United Nations.


Protective Custody for Man Accused in Carjacking


A Philadelphia Paper Keeps Standards High
To the Editor:
Your article about the departure of The Philadelphia Daily News editorial page editor, Richard Aregood (Feb. 18), painted an inaccurate picture of the newspaper's circumstances and left the impression, unfairly, that our commitment to quality journalism has waned.
Although The Daily News, its sister paper, The Philadelphia Inquirer, and other newspapers across the country are feeling the pinch of extraordinary increases in the price of newsprint, we are addressing the problem in a variety of ways -- not just by cutting space and staff.
The Daily News news staff remains at the same level today as in 1990.


Drug Cartel Suspect Arrested in Colombia
Colombia announced today that Jorge Eliezer Rodriguez Orejuela, the younger brother of two suspected leaders of the Cali drug cartel, was arrested on Thursday during a police raid in Cali and surrounding cities.
Justice officials said that Mr.
Rodriguez Orejuela was apprehended in Cali as he entered the house of a fortune teller.
They said that he did not resist arrest and that he was flown on Thursday night to Bogota, where he remained in custody.


I.R.S. and Lender Settle Dispute on Refunds
The nation's leading maker of loans secured by expected income tax refunds has dropped its lawsuit intended to force the Internal Revenue Service to continue acting as its collection agent, saying yesterday that the I.R.S. had promised to resume the task next year.
The Beneficial National Bank, a subsidiary of the Beneficial Corporation of Wilmington, Del., sued the I.R.S. on Feb. 21 after the Government agency said it would no longer honor taxpayers' directives to send their refunds directly to the bank, which would then retire their loans.
Instead, the I.R.S. said, it would send paper checks to individual taxpayers.


More Flaws Found in Computer Tax Programs
Intuit Inc., already scrambling to fix flaws in the Federal versions of its popular Turbotax and Macintax personal computer programs, said yesterday that it had also notified users of its Connecticut and Indiana state tax programs of possible errors.
On Thursday, the company, based in Menlo Park, Calif., acknowledged that 1 percent of the 1.4 million users of its Turbotax and Macintax programs might be affected by the relatively minor flaws in its individual tax preparation software.


E.P.A. Chief Is Accused Of Lobbying
A leader of efforts in the House of Representatives to limit Federal regulations has accused the head of the Environmental Protection Agency of illegally lobbying to defeat the package of antiregulatory bills that the House approved today.
The lawmaker, Representative David M. McIntosh of Indiana, accused the agency's Administrator, Carol M. Browner, and her aides of breaking the law by sending out fact sheets and news releases on the bill, which is part of the Republicans' Contract With America.


No Headline
Because of the Id al-Fitr holiday, alternate-side street-cleaning regulations are suspended in New York City today.
Other regulations remain in effect.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Near Perfect Performance, If the Hall Were Only Smaller  'Der Rosenkavalier' Metropolitan Opera


Players Accept Important Part of Owners' Proposal
In the roller-coaster world of strike-bound baseball, just when talks between the owners and the players appeared to be on the verge of collapse, the players took a stunning step today and laid the groundwork for another possible major step.
With Bud Selig, the acting commissioner, back in Milwaukee and speaking with fellow owners by telephone, the negotiating team he left behind heard the players' negotiators say they would accept the clubs' revenue-sharing plan in the form the players had long rejected.


JAZZ
Fluctuations in Tension Follow Changing Tempos  Stephen Scott, pianist Village Vanguard


Corrections
A brief article by Reuters on Jan. 28 about a dispute at the former Nazi death camp at Auschwitz referred incorrectly to a scuffle involving a New York rabbi, Avi Weiss, who led a protest at the site of a large cross erected there.
While some Poles struck members of Rabbi Weiss's group, the group did not trade blows with them.


Corrections
Articles on Thursday and Friday about foreign policy speeches by President Clinton, Senator Bob Dole, Representative Newt Gingrich and others misidentified the Washington research center at which the remarks were delivered.
It is the Nixon Center for Peace and Freedom, not the Nixon Center for Peace and Justice.


Judge Fines Two Lawyers For Simpson
The bizarre saga of Rosa Lopez ended today, at least temporarily, with Judge Lance A. Ito imposing sanctions on two of O. J. Simpson's lawyers -- and stopping just short of reporting them to the California bar -- for withholding from prosecutors an interview that she gave the defense last summer.
Judge Ito fined the lawyers -- Johnnie L. Cochran Jr. and Carl Douglas -- $950 each for failing to give prosecutors an audiotape of the interview, in which Mr.
Simpson's chief investigator questioned Mrs.
Lopez about the night of June 12, the evening of the two killings for which the defendant is on trial.


WFAN Won't Carry Game
WFAN-AM has canceled today's broadcast of the Mets-Yankees exhibition game, and the Mets are steamed.
"We are very disappointed not only with their decision but with the lateness of notice," said David Howard, the Mets' vice president of business affairs.
WFAN informed the Mets of its decision at noon yesterday.
The station is contracted to carry 10 exhibition games, but "we prefer not to carry a replacement game," said Joel Hollander, WFAN's vice president and general manager.
Although Howard said WFAN would reschedule the game, Hollander said, "That's still up in the air."


Police Haven't Found Muslim School Vandals
To the Editor:
In his Feb. 18 letter, Steven Emerson, who produced "Jihad in America," a PBS documentary alleging a widespread Islamic terrorist network, mentions a vandalism attack on the Muslim Community School in Potomac, Md., that occurred a week after his show aired (the program mentioned the school).
Mr.
Emerson claimed that "Maryland police revealed that Islamic students at the mosque were responsible."


Nicholas Pennell, 56, an Actor In Shakespearean Roles, Dies
Nicholas Pennell, who was for many years a versatile actor with the Stratford Festival in Canada, died on Feb. 22 at the Stratford General Hospital.
He was 56, and lived in Brunner, Ontario, just outside of Stratford.
The cause was cancer, the festival said.


Losses Seen at Client Firms Of Bankrupt Adler Coleman
The brokerage firms that did business with the bankrupt Adler Coleman &amp; Company are going to suffer substantial losses, the bankruptcy trustee indicated yesterday.
But most of the 60,000 customer accounts -- with total assets of about $775 million -- are likely to find new homes next week.
About 40 brokerage firms, mostly firms specializing in low-priced stocks, cleared their customers' trades through Adler Coleman, which went broke after one of those firms, Hanover Sterling, went out of business a week ago.


Clinton Challenges the G.O.P. To Detail Its Spending Plans
President Clinton said today that the defeat of the balanced-budget amendment meant it was time for Republicans to spell out their spending plans, and warned that they seemed intent on cutting aid to children to benefit the well-to-do.
Mr.
Clinton's call for more specificity came a day after the Republicans failed in their quest to pass the balanced-budget amendment.
He said that result made it incumbent on Congressional leaders to show how they would cut spending and reduce the deficit in the coming year.


U.S. Sues University for Program That Was Closed to White Men
The Justice Department announced today that it was bringing what it called a highly unusual Federal civil rights suit, an employment discrimination complaint on behalf of white men.
The department is suing Illinois State University over a janitor-training program that excludes white men.


Intervention No Help As Dollar Sinks Again
The dollar hit another record low against the Japanese yen today as coordinated intervention in currency markets by more than a dozen central banks and strong words from Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin proved no match for a wave of speculation against the currency by traders around the globe.
The Federal Reserve, the Bank of Japan and a dozen or more European central banks bought dollars and sold other currencies today in an effort to brake the dollar's fall, currency dealers said.
It was the first coordinated intervention by central banks to support the dollar since June 24.


CHRONICLE
Many people still remember those witty radio commercials that JERRY STILLER and ANNE MEARA did for Blue Nun wine in the early 1970's.
The comic couple, who have gone on to stage and television fame since then, will be reminiscing about the advertisements today at a luncheon for Peter Sichel, the president of Sichel Wines, which is marking a switch of importers.
"It was weird," Mr.
Stiller said yesterday, recalling how the concept of "two idiots, two nudnicks" discussing wines about which they knew absolutely nothing arose.


South Africa: Betrayers of the Dream
Winnie Mandela, the estranged wife of South Africa's President, Nelson Mandela, is charged by police with defrauding four impoverished black communities.
The continuing descent of this former heroine of the anti-apartheid struggle is an individual tragedy, not a metaphor for the larger story of the African National Congress in power.
Still, corruption is a serious problem in South Africa, from bribe-seeking police and customs agents to the kickbacks sought from businesses by rainmakers trading off old A.N.C. connections.
So far there is no evidence directly implicating top officials of the new Government, a favorable contrast with the last years of white rule.


Taking No Prisoners, In Manner of Speaking
Joseph M. Arpaio strode into a maximum-security wing of one of his jails here the other day and was greeted by jeers and catcalls.
Men shook their fists at him from behind the bars of their cells.
He loved it.
He had worked hard to be able to call himself the meanest sheriff in America.
"See anybody dying?" he said to a reporter, dismissing complaints of local civil libertarians that his approach is inhumane.
"They're locked up; what am I supposed to be doing with them? So they lost some of their privileges. So what?"


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with an article about North Dakotans' reaction to the balanced-budget amendment referred incorrectly in some copies to the man shown.
He was Lyle Reul, who said of the amendment, "We've got to balance the budget, and there doesn't seem to be any other way to do it." (Harvey Greuel, also quoted in the article, was not shown.)


That Way Madness Lies
"Kill," he whispered.
"Kill?" I swallowed hard.


House Committee Completes Plan to Overhaul Welfare
The House Ways and Means Committee today finished work on sweeping legislation to redesign welfare programs that provide cash assistance to more than 15 million people.
But last-minute procedural objections by Democrats forced the panel to delay its final vote to next week.
For the last four days, House Republicans have crushed Democratic objections to the bill and voted down Democratic amendments intended to liberalize it.


Democrats Lose Senate Seat With Switch by Coloradan
Ben Nighthorse Campbell, the only American Indian in the United States Senate, startled and puzzled the political world today by bolting from the Democratic Party and joining the Republicans.
He suggested that the Democrats no longer represented his views.
But in a typically ambiguous statement, he said he would continue to vote as he had in the past, which has been with the Democrats and President Clinton 78 percent of the time, according to tallies by Congressional Quarterly.


New Bonus Babies? Yanks May Offer Minor Leaguers Gold-Plated Carrots
The Yankees have started revamping their approach to developing a replacement team and may offer bonuses to minor leaguers as an incentive to join the team.
"We'll do whatever we have to do," said the owner George Steinbrenner.
"It's never been a question of money. These things should have been discussed before teams did all these things."


Place Your Bids
State Treasurer Brian Clymer said the two-year high stakes battle to run the lottery system must start again from scratch.
Mr.
Clymer ordered a new bidding process to run the system two weeks after a state appeals court overruled his decision to award a $110 million lottery contract to a Hackensack firm.


METRO DIGEST
MODEST DEATH PENALTY BILL OFFERED Governor Pataki and state legislative leaders released the final version of a death penalty bill that would make as many as 20 percent of New York's 2,400 annual murders punishable by execution.
Experts said the bill, which is expected to pass in both houses of the Legislature and be signed into law by Mr.
Pataki next week, is relatively modest in scope, falling in the middle of the other 37 states with capital punishment in terms of the crimes it covers.
Page 1.
CUSTODY CASES COMPLICATED BY AIDS Child welfare caseworkers and family court judges, called upon to make already difficult custody decisions in drug abuse and neglect cases that may involve homelessness and joblessness, now face the extraordinary task of deciding such cases when the parents also have AIDS or H.I.V.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY  OFFICIAL ADMITS ROLE IN SCHOOL SCAM At first, the Bronx school administrator said she would like two Rolex watches.
But then she changed her mind and decided she would rather have a vacation in Puerto Rico.
"I'm really tired," said the administrator, Joan Salvatore.
The man she was speaking to, Steven Wolff, owned one company that sold office supplies to the school system and worked as a salesman for another.
What Ms.
Salvatore did not know during those conversations in 1993 was that Mr.
Wolff had already been arrested in a fraudulent supply-purchase scheme that was benefiting both of them and swindling the Board of Education.
And he was secretly recording the talks under the direction of investigators for the school system.
Page 23.
IT'S ALL IN THE TIMING At exactly 9:55 on Wednesday morning, Valery Gergiyev left his hotel and entered a waiting limousine for the short drive to Lincoln Center.
At 9:58, Ellyn Kusmin, the operations manager for the New York Philharmonic who was maintaining telephone contact with the driver, rang for the elevator and held its door so the visiting Russian director would not lose any seconds as he headed up to the concert hall where 90 musicians were waiting for their rehearsal to begin.
About New York, page 23.
SIGN LANGUAGE FOILS SUICIDE Two instructors from the School for the Deaf near Gramercy Park were just about to wrap up another week when police officers arrived with an urgent test for their American Sign Language skills: could they help save a life?
Three blocks from the school, a 31-year-old man had walked onto a narrow parapet 22 floors above Park Avenue South.
Clutching a steak knife and leaning precariously out over the street, the man alternately seemed ready to jump or to cut his own throat, the police said.
Page 22.
BROKERAGE INVOLVED IN SCANDAL IS SOLD Brown, Harris, Stevens, a real estate brokerage and co-op management company that was engulfed in a kickback scandal, has been sold by Harry Helmsley to the heirs to two of New York City's real estate dynasties.
Page 22.
REGION  GUILTY IN DEATH BY BOWLING BALL A Jersey City man was found guilty of throwing a 16-pound bowling ball off an overpass, killing an 8-month-old girl who was riding in her family's car.
Page 24.
Parking Rules...22


Grgurich Gives Up Job
TIM GRGURICH resigned yesterday as the Nevada-Las Vegas men's basketball coach, physically and emotionally overwhelmed by his return to a place seemingly haunted by the scars of the JERRY TARKANIAN era.
Grgurich, a former Tarkanian assistant, coached only seven games after being hired in October to replace ROLLIE MASSIMINO. (AP)


U.S. Pleased With Its Role In Somali Exit
It lasted an extra day because a ship leased by the United Nations to carry the remaining peacekeepers was delayed and was then rammed by a tugboat.
It ended in a hail of machine-gun fire, most of it from the American side, in which several Somalis were apparently killed.
Ultimately the American commander, Lieut.
Gen.
Anthony C. Zinni of the Marines, was stranded for nearly six hours in churning seas when his amphibious assault vehicle broke down while pulling away from the beach at 1 this morning.


No Plan Yet To Help U.N. Leave Croatia
Less than a month before the threatened expulsion of United Nations peacekeeping troops from Croatia, the United States and its NATO allies have not agreed on a withdrawal plan or how they will pay for it, senior Administration and NATO officials said today.
A draft NATO plan under discussion in Washington and in allied capitals concludes that if the 12,000 peacekeepers withdraw from Croatia, the 24,000 in Bosnia might have to withdraw as well.
Such an ambitious withdrawal could require upwards of 70,000 NATO troops and cost between $1.5 billion and $2 billion, according to Pentagon officials familiar with the draft plan.


Bridge
A leading Danish player, Morten Andersen, is nicknamed Duck, according to Ib Lindby, a Danish journalist.
But whether this is because the first syllable of his last name sounds like duck -- the fowl -- in Danish, or because of his tendency to duck at the bridge table is not clear.
The diagramed deal on which he sat South suggests the latter.
There is a school of thought in Europe that favors intermediate two-bids rather than weak two-bids.
The opening bid of two hearts showed a strong hand and a long, strong heart suit.
The method did not work well here, for the partnership reached a virtually hopeless six-heart contract.


Borough Gets Some Good News
Color the future a little rosier for this borough after the Legislature voted to designate it an urban enterprise zone.
"This could mean the rebirth of Carteret and the surrounding areas," said Mayor Peter J. Sica.
"Carteret is an old industrial area, but many of the industries have moved out. So this is a heck of an attraction to bring new business and industries back here." Among the lures are reduction of the sales tax, from 6 to 3 percent, on all purchases in the community; elimination of sales taxes on materials purchased by new businesses; a $1,500 corporate tax break for new businesses that hire people from Carteret, and a 50 percent reduction in the unemployment insurance rate.


Sports of The Times; It's Time To Fight For Hodges
ONE day when Gil Hodges was Brooklyn's first baseman and first citizen, he was picked off second base.
Or so the umpire ruled.
Charlie Dressen, then the Dodger manager, hurried out to argue the call but his slugger, who knew the shortstop hadn't tagged him, trotted toward the dugout without a word.
"How can I fight for you," Dressen scolded him later, "if you don't fight for yourself?"


Lakehurst, N.J., Loses Most of Its Navy Base
During decades of hard luck, Lakehurst, N.J., always had its Navy base to bolster the local economy.
That, too, now seems just another casualty for the town.


Taylor Loses TNT Job
TNT, which is overhauling its pre-game pro football show, has decided not to bring back the former Giants linebacker LAWRENCE TAYLOR after his rocky first season.
Earlier this week, Taylor announced that he will face SCOTT (BAM BAM) BIGELOW for the World Wrestling Federation, a rival to Turner's World Championship Wrestling.


Knicks Hope to Build on Stirring Comeback
It remained to be seen how much momentum, if any, the Knicks would gain from Thursday night's emotional victory.
But the Knicks hoped it would serve as a positive springboard into the final weeks of the regular season.
By erasing a 22-point deficit in their 93-89 victory over the Chicago Bulls, the Knicks showed characteristics they will need from this point on: suffocating defense, aggressive rebounding and strong play off the bench.
Would that kind of play carry over to tonight's game in Cleveland against the Cavaliers?
Or would the Knicks, who are 7-5 in their last 12 games, continue to change from one game to the next, or even from one half to the next?


Journalist Mourned in Moscow


Fraud Inquiry On Barings In Britain
As bankruptcy administrators rushed to complete the sale of the failed investment firm Barings P.L.C., the authorities here began an investigation today into whether the company's collapse was a result of fraud that reached into its London headquarters.
Although the trading that brought down the company took place in Singapore, Britain's Serious Fraud Office and the police in London's financial district said they were opening an investigation.
They said they would examine the dealings between Barings in London and Nicholas W. Leeson, the Barings trader whose $1 billion of losses brought down the firm last weekend.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  JAPANESE NOVELS REWRITE HISTORY
After being nearly taboo for decades, World War II combat novels have become popular in Japan.
And in many of them, history is rewritten so that Japan triumphs in battles it actually lost. 1


Gergiyev Molto Presto: 8 Days, 8 Performances
It is a tribute to benign bridge traffic in this city, or at least to on-time subway schedules, that Valery Gergiyev has survived the last week.
Crossing and re-crossing the East River at what must be amazing rates of speed, the hot young Russian conductor will have, by Tuesday night, conducted the Kirov Opera four times at the Brooklyn Academy of Music and the New York Philharmonic four times more at Avery Fisher Hall.
This does not count rehearsals.
Lord knows what Mr.
Gergiyev does on his lunch hour.
Nervous energy was largely sublimated at Thursday's Philharmonic program: a collection of Russian music split between understatement and garrulity.
It was actually two concerts (and two audiences) divided by an intermission.
At first, calm, quiet and a certain bleakness battled conflicting expectations from subscription listeners, who seemed impatient to be blasted from their seats.
A vivid repertory of coughs, sighs, paper rattling and foot shuffling greeted Mussorgsky's three items from "Kovanshchina" and his four "Songs and Dances of Death."


Helmsley Sells Brokerage In '94 Kickback Scandal
Brown, Harris, Stevens, a real estate brokerage and co-op management company that was engulfed in a kickback scandal last year, has been sold by Harry Helmsley to the heirs to two of New York City's real estate dynasties.
Two of the four buyers, Arthur Zeckendorf, 36, and Kent Swig, 34, confirmed the sale in an interview yesterday, although they would not disclose the terms.


Clinton Defends Yeltsin and U.S. Policy for Russia
President Clinton offered measured support for President Boris N. Yeltsin today while denying that his Russia policy was too closely tied to the Russian leader.
At a news conference, Mr.
Clinton rejected the idea that Mr.
Yeltsin was not in control of Russia and rebuffed the suggestion, put forward by some Republicans, that his Administration should deal with someone else.


Improvising With Intensity
The pianist Darrell Grant's show at the Iridium on Tuesday night mixed two strategies: precise and complicated small-group arrangements and ferocious interplay.
Mr.
Grant was leading his first important New York engagement, and he came prepared, producing a set that swung mightily from the first note, and offered up small-group improvisation at its most intense.
Mr.
Grant's compositions work around bass figures and drum patterns, along with tempo changes, and an improviser's reaction to it all.
At the club, he set a riff for the drummer Carl Allern to solo against, and during improvisations repeated ideas popped up, adding structure to the pieces.
As a pianist, Mr.
Grant likes busy solos that jump around; he'll slam his left hand as counterpoint to a run, or cram notes together for heavy chordal passages.
He likes blues ideas, and on an unaccompanied version of "Blue in Green," bold blues figures added motifs to the improvisation.


The Venerable Vienna Harbors 2 Americans
Americans might be surprised to know that within the Vienna Philharmonic -- that bastion of insular Central European culture -- lurk two of their own.
William McElheney and Ronald Pisarkiewicz are both brass players.
Both came to the orchestra by way of Germany in the early 1980's.
Both seem happily ensconced, accepted by their colleagues and their neighbors.
They are part of three concerts under Sir Georg Solti at Carnegie Hall this weekend; the first was last night.
Mr.
McElheney, 40 years old, is from Berkeley, Calif., and studied the trombone at Indiana University.
He had been playing in the opera house in Kassel, Germany, when he answered an ad for a position with the Vienna.
He and his wife, who also is American, now live in the suburb of Klosterneuburg, and their two children are like any other young Austrian schoolgoers except for an English-speaking home life.
He gets to California every other year for family visits.


Teen-Ager's Death Is Protested
Chanting "No justice, no peace" and vowing continued protests, hundreds of people marched peacefully through the streets yesterday to protest the killing of an unarmed 16-year-old drug suspect by a police officer.
The Rev.
Al Sharpton, locking arms with the slain boy's mother, Margaret Walls, led the march from the site where Lawrence Meyers was shot.


Nets Lose Composure and Third Straight
Personal slumps are one thing.
Kenny Anderson could lose himself in a forest of 7-footers with time running down and still have Derrick Coleman bail him out with a rebound basket.
Benoit Benjamin could have the best seat in the house to watch the action because Jayson Williams could always be summoned from the bench to replace him for good.


Near Collision Changes Takeoff Rules
A near collision between a jumbo jet and a commuter plane on a runway at Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport on Monday evening led Federal authorities yesterday to issue an emergency order altering takeoff procedures from sunset to sunrise at the nation's airports.
The new order temporarily bans a practice of allowing planes to taxi and wait for takeoff clearance on a runway also being used for landings.
The action followed an incident in which an American Airlines MD-11 from Chicago that was landing with 60 people on board was reported to have passed less than 50 feet over a commuter plane waiting for takeoff on the same runway.
The incident was the fifth of the type to happen in the country since September, the Federal Aviation Agency said.


No Spotlight on the Likely Successor
Although no one doubts that Gordon B. Hinckley will become the next president of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, leadership of the world's nearly nine million Mormons will not be transferred or even discussed publicly until sometime after the funeral services for Howard W. Hunter, the Mormon leader who died yesterday.
Mr.
Hinkley served as first counselor, or second in command, to both Mr.
Hunter and his predecessor, Ezra Taft Benson.
Since Mr.
Benson was incapacitated for years before his death in 1994 and since Mr.
Hunter was himself in poor health, Mr.
Hinckley in many respects has been the firm hand on the church's tiller for a decade or more.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Sherryl Swoopes and Dawn Staley were among those who were to compete for the United States team at the games in Argentina, March 11-27.
The United States Olympic Committee and USA Basketball were told on Tuesday that Puerto Rico had dropped out of the field, leaving only the United States, Argentina, Brazil and Cuba, one fewer team than Pan Am rules allow. (AP) YACHT RACING  Women's Team Wins  Getting a new America's Cup yacht up to speed off San Diego proved to be a formidable task during the America  team's first trials race in Round 4 on Thursday, and the result was a loss to Stars &amp; Stripes.
But the mechanical troubles, which skipper Leslie Egnot had termed "teething problems," appeared to subside yesterday as the all-women's crew defeated Young America by 56 seconds.
J.
J.
Isler, starting helmswoman on America  's new boat, Mighty Mary, shrewdly steered the yacht off to the right side of the course when a favorable wind shifted in that direction at the start, and 10 minutes later, Mighty Mary tacked in front of Young America, and was ahead by about six boat lengths.
SAILOR, 70, IN TROUBLE: The quiet and relatively uneventful passage through the ice-ridden South Pacific for most of the 13 solo sailors left in the BOC round-the-world yacht race was interrupted late Thursday night by a report that a Class II competitor, Harry Mitchell of England, had sent out a distress signal.
Race officials in Charleston, S.C., pinpointed Mitchell's position at 1,450 miles west of Cape Horn.
HIGH SCHOOL BASKETBALL  Lincoln Routs Clinton  Lincoln routed Clinton, 91-42, in the second round of the Public Schools Athletic League Division A playoffs at Riverbank State Park yesterday.
The teams met for the first time in more than 15 years and by halftime -- with the Railsplitters ahead by 45-22 -- they seemed decades apart.
Clinton (12-13) could not stop Gerard Hawkins, who had 18 points in the opening half against the Bronx team and finished with a game-high 20.
Stephon Marbury added 14 points and 8 assists for Lincoln (21-3), which will play Boys &amp; Girls on Wednesday in an all-Brooklyn quarterfinal.
In yesterday's other second-round game, at Lehman College in the Bronx, Manhattan Center outlasted Newtown, 42-38.
Manhattan meets Erasmus in the quarterfinals on Tuesday.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the transmission of tuberculosis from one airline passenger to others misstated the annual rate of new TB cases in the United States.
It is about 10 per 100,000 people, not per 10,000.


To Patriots, Meggett Is Worth Every Cent They Will Pay Him
When Robert Kraft, the New England Patriots owner, awoke this morning, he was greeted with the cold fact that he had paid close to $10 million for a 5-foot-7-inch running back.
"My wife said, 'You paid $9 million to a player who's shorter than you. Bill always says bigger is better. Have you gone crazy again?' " Kraft said.


CHRONICLE
In the movie "Yentl," BARBRA STREISAND played a girl who wanted to get an education so much that she masqueraded as a boy.
In real life, on May 21 Ms.
Streisand will receive one of the highest honors academia has to offer: an honorary doctor of humane letters degree from Brandeis University.
She already made a high-profile visit to a university this year, when she gave a speech at Harvard defending the involvement of Hollywood celebrities in politics.


The Shrinking Welfare State
Gov.
George Pataki announced this week that he wanted to move even faster than planned to dump supposedly able-bodied New York State recipients from the Home Relief rolls.
He and New York City's Mayor, Rudolph Giuliani, also want to reduce Home Relief and other welfare benefits outright.
Their goal of ending welfare as a way of life is laudable.
But punitive acts against people who need help to survive won't take them there.
Driving people off the rolls and cutting welfare benefits rest on a popular but false assumption that New York is a welfare free-spender.
The Mayor and Governor point out that the total spent in New York State on the main welfare program, Aid to Families with Dependent Children (A.F.D.C.), is greater than what is spent by every other state except California.
But that is simply because New York has more poor people eligible for welfare than any other state except California.
There are now about 1.1 million people on welfare in New York City, of whom 586,000 are children.


World News Briefs; Ukraine Accepts Terms For Loan From I.M.F.
Signaling a strong commitment to overhaul its ailing economy, Ukraine agreed today to conditions set by the International Monetary Fund for a $1.8 billion loan.
The aid, expected to be formally approved later this month, would help Ukraine to cover its payments deficit, reduce inflation and mobilize other Western aid for the transition to a free-market economy.


Mercedes View of Efficiency: Ford Has Pulled Past Toyota
The American auto makers, led by the Ford Motor Company, have surpassed Toyota to become the most efficient auto manufacturers in the world, the chief of Mercedes-Benz's car operations says.
The Big Three auto companies routinely say that Toyota's operations set the standards, or benchmarks, for them as they try to increase productivity.
But the Mercedes executive, Jurgen Hubbert, said he no longer looked to Japan for guidance, as he did in the 1980's.


DANCE
From Risa Jaroslow, Glimpses of Poland  'Book Song Woman Man' Bessie Schonberg Theater


Georges Kohler, 48, Medicine Nobel Winner
Georges Kohler, co-inventor of one of the most important techniques of biotechnology, for which he shared the Nobel Prize in Medicine in 1984, died on Wednesday in Freiburg, Germany.
He was 48.
The cause was heart failure, said Dr.
Marinus Lamers, a colleague of his at the Max Planck Institute for Immune Biology in Freiburg.


No Headline
Howard W. Hunter, the spiritual leader of the world's nearly nine million Mormons, died yesterday at his home in Salt Lake City, nine months after taking office, the shortest term ever served by a president of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
He was 87.
A church spokesman said he died of natural causes.


New York City Can't Solve Its Budget Crisis by Confronting Albany
To the Editor:
Esther R. Fuchs's advice to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani (Op-Ed, Feb. 22) on how to deal with the budget crisis is based on a series of ill-founded assumptions, irrelevancies and wishful thinking.
New York has spent more on services than other cities because, unlike many of them -- Chicago, for example -- it has no separate county government structure on which it can dump some of the costly functions.
New York also spent more because it had more.
With its economic base eroded, the capacity to spend more has gone.


Why C.I.A. Can Disclose Much, but Not All
To the Editor:
The wedge is the simplest tool, and news reporters who blatantly take one side in a Washington debate over equally valid but competing principles (Week in Review, Feb. 19) risk being classed in the wedge family.


Hugh Steers, 32, Figurative Painter
Hugh Auchincloss Steers, a figurative painter, died on March 1 at the home of his cousin, Hugh D. Auchincloss Jr.
He was 32 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was AIDS, said his dealer, Richard Anderson.


A West Unlike the Westerns
Erick Hawkins, who was born in Colorado, loved the West.
When the Hawkins Dance Company offered three of his choreographic commentaries on that region on Wednesday night at the Joyce Theater, it soon became clear that the Western landscape he evoked was not that of Hollywood movies with their gunslingers and cowpunchers.
His West was a fairy-tale realm, which appeared especially wondrous in "Agathlon," a work of 1979 to music by Dorrance Stalvey.
The piece was inspired by rock formations in the Monument Valley of Utah, and the sculpture by Ralph Dorazio adorning the stage resembled a solid boulder supported by slender, but sturdy, poles.


Japan's 11th-Century Tastes
Saeko Ichinohe's "Tale of Genji," performed on Wednesday night at the Japan Society, was thought provoking in ways that were perhaps not entirely what Miss Ichinohe intended.
The ambitious new piece shared the program with an onstage presentation of costumes worn at the Heian court in Japan from 794 to 1185.
An exquisite cultural event in itself, the presentation included the methodical dressing of a model, Kaori Sato, in layer upon layer of silk kimonos of increasingly intense pink to red hues, with witty narration by Celeste Holm.
So when the curtain rose on "The Tale of Genji," drawn from the 11th-century novel by Lady Murasaki, it was something of a shock to see a decidedly nontraditional mixed-race cast, in costumes that seemed to have very little to do with what had gone before, performing theater and movement that mixed Western contemporary and Asian traditional styles.
The Japanese-born choreographer, now celebrating her 25th year in America, does know her stuff.
The blend was seamless and comfortable, as was the score.
But by the end of the ambitious piece, one had very little sense of connection to the characters or this complicated story of a young prince and the women who haunt him.


Japan Securities: A Downhill Ride
Minoru Yoshida laughs nervously about his annual income falling to $40,000 from $180,000 a few years ago, but he points to fellow brokers who have it even worse: they do not get any paychecks at all, and even have to reimburse their employers for insurance contributions.
"The securities world in general is suffering," he said.
"Some people say that the reason the stock market is down is that the industry is kuu-dooka."


NEW YORK LEADERS OFFER LIMITED BILL ON DEATH PENALTY
Gov.
George E. Pataki and state legislative leaders today released the final version of a death penalty bill that would make as many as 20 percent of the state's 2,400 annual murders punishable by execution.
Experts said the bill, which is expected to pass in both houses of the Legislature and be signed into law by Mr.
Pataki next week, is relatively limited in scope, falling in the middle of the other 37 states with capital punishment in terms of the crimes it covers.


Retirement Accounts: Not for Parking Money
ALTHOUGH yields are rising on money market accounts and bank deposits, they are still not the place to park money for retirement, financial professionals warn.
Short-term investments are fine for a small portion of ordinary savings, where they can be readily tapped for emergencies, but they don't make sense for retirement portfolios, where long-term growth is needed.
Splitting assets appropriately between retirement accounts, which are tax deferred, and taxable accounts is often a troublesome area for small investors.


No Headline
"These cases reside with you. They wake you up at night." -- JUDGE RICHARD FITZGERALD, describing custody cases that involve parents with the AIDS virus.  [ 1:6. ]


Islanders Get Severyn
The Islanders announced yesterday that they have acquired BRENT SEVERYN, a 29-year-old defenseman, from the Florida Panthers for a fourth-round pick in this summer's draft.
They also reassigned PAUL STANTON to Denver of the International Hockey League.


In America; Contract On the Consumer
A small group of ordinary Americans who were not protected against unsafe products or corporate negligence went to Washington this week to speak out against Republican-sponsored legislation that would make it much more difficult to obtain compensation for terrible injuries and deaths that result from corporate wrongdoing.
Several spoke at a press conference.
Janey Fair of Radcliff, Ky., said: "On May 14, 1988, Shannon, my 14-year-old daughter, was killed due to a defective motor vehicle. She was riding on a school bus for a church trip along with 63 other children and four adults."


CHRONICLE
Does a former Governor who is used to living in an executive mansion have an easier time renovating a new home than ordinary citizens?
"Please don't ask," MARIO M. CUOMO told The Associated Press yesterday, discussing his delayed move to an apartment on Sutton Place.
"It's been nothing but aggravation," he said.
"If you do any renovations at all, it's easier to build than to renovate."


Following the Wallpaper Trail
What was good for the town was good for one of the township commissioners and his wife, prosecutors say.
When the township got new carpeting and wallpaper, so did the home of Michael and Linda DiGiovanni, according to an indictment, which said the same was true of plumbing and heating work.
Mr.
DiGiovanni, a township commissioner who supervised the Department of Parks and Public Properties, resigned his elective post yesterday; what will happen to his wife's job as one of his clerks has yet to be determined.


Cochran Becomes the Latest to Tame the Blue Monster
For the second consecutive day, a docile, receptive golf course has been just the elixir to soothe a struggling golfer's soul.
First it was Scott Verplank, now it is Russ Cochran, roaring around the Blue Monster course in 64 strokes and popping into contention at the halfway point of the Doral-Ryder Open.
Maybe it's something in the water -- there's a lake for just about every hole on the course.
Or perhaps the gentle conditions, the warm breezes and the sunshine, that provide the succor for the wounded.
In any event, the thumb injury that has been plaguing Cochran for the last eight months disappeared and he shot the best round of the tournament so far to pull within one stroke of the leader, Davis Love 3d, whose 69 put him at 10-under-par 134.


Renewing Tradition in a New Land; Immigrant Jews Seek the Bris, the Faith's Ritual Circumcision
As a Jew in the former Soviet Union, Symon Altberg had only the vaguest sense of his heritage.
He had never read the Torah, never attended a synagogue, and never, in fact, done anything that would call attention to his Jewishness.
But after arriving as a refugee in New York City five years ago, he faced an unexpected decision as he embraced his new-found freedom -- and his faith.
Like most Soviet Jewish men, he had never been circumcised.
He had never undergone the delicate operation that is usually conducted on the eighth day after birth in a ceremony called a bris, considered a fundamental Jewish rite.


Cost Savings Are Outlined For Schools
Facing a $690 million gap in the city's school budget next year, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines yesterday proposed dozens of cost-saving moves, ranging from cutting food choices in cafeterias to letting some special-education classes grow in size.
The plan would virtually eliminate summer school, except for seniors who need the credits to graduate and for some math and science programs.
Classes would be bigger during the first and the last months of school, when schools would not be allowed to hire substitute teachers.
There would be fewer counselors, and after-school programs would be mostly eliminated.


The Jets Release Veteran Center
Coach Rich Kotite and the Jets' front office continued to dramatically alter the team's character yesterday by releasing center Jim Sweeney.
"I told him I appreciated what he's done for us, but we're going in another direction with Cal Dixon," Kotite said.


House Endorses Deep Cutbacks In Regulations
The House of Representatives today completed its work on a series of antiregulatory measures, bundled them into a package with enormous implications for the current system of Federal environmental controls, and sent it to an uncertain fate in the Senate.


Ford's Sales Rose in February; Nissan's Fell
Contributing to the cacophony of signals about the condition of the auto market in the United States, the Ford Motor Company reported today that its sales of vehicles rose in February, while the Nissan Motor Company said its sales fell during the month.
Most auto makers reported their sales on Wednesday.
Altogether, sales of cars and light trucks fell 4.1 percent, compared with a strong period a year earlier.
Light-truck sales edged up, while car sales fell more than 7 percent.


Israel Warns U.S. Not to Cut Aid to Nations in Peace Talks
Keeping up the pressure on Republicans in Congress, Israel warned today that the United States could pay a "terrible price" if it withheld aid to countries involved in Middle East peace talks.
Israel's immediate concern is a threat in the United States Congress to cut more than $200 million in debt relief that the Clinton Administration promised Jordan for making peace with the Israelis last year.
On Thursday, President Clinton's spokesman described the cut, proposed by the Republican majority, as "yanking out one of the pillars of American leadership in the world."


Season With a Mission in the Bronx
THE barbershop is one of the last bastions for smokes, for male bonding," Marco Greco declared.
And the barbershop shave, a 20-minute ritual of hot and cold towels, warm lather, moisturizers and talc -- the works for $9 -- is a man's ultimate no-sting facial.


End Bank Law and Robber Barons Ride Again
To the Editor:
Re "For Rogue Traders, Yet Another Victim" (Business Day, Feb. 28) and your same-day article on Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin's proposal to eliminate the legal barriers that have separated the nation's commercial banks, securities firms and insurance companies for decades: The American Bankers Association, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, Representative Jim Leach and Treasury Secretary Rubin are gravely misguided in their quest to repeal the Glass-Steagall Act.


Corrections
An article on February 19 about Kevin Mitnick, the fugitive computer criminal, misidentified the North Carolina county where he was arrested.
It is Wake County, not Wade.


In War on Drugs, Police Taking to the Highways
Searching a white Nissan Pathfinder from New Jersey that he pulled over for speeding, Cpl.
John Appleby of the Maryland State Police peered into the hidden recesses drug smugglers commonly use to stash their products on the mad dash along Interstate 95 between Miami and New York.
Using a screwdriver and a flashlight, he loosened door panels, raised the dashboard, looked into the exhaust pipe, checked the spare tire and inspected under the hood.
"He has good reason to believe something's going on," said Cpl.
Paul Quill, who had just arrived with several other officers and a canine unit to help Corporal Appleby.


A Computer At the Wheel
I HAVE seen a small part of the future, and it works pretty well: The computerized guidance screen available in some rental cars is a big help in getting around an unfamiliar city.
I rented an Oldsmobile 88 equipped with a Guidestar system from Avis at the Los Angeles airport in February and got so attached to the screen, its voice and its beeps that I was at sea when it temporarily conked out.


U.S. SAYS IT'S WON U.N. VOTES TO KEEP SANCTIONS ON IRAQ
New evidence of an Iraqi military buildup has helped the United States beat back an effort to lift United Nations sanctions against Baghdad, senior Administration officials said today.
They said the Clinton Administration had shared intelligence data, including satellite photos, with other Security Council members to show that President Saddam Hussein has been rebuilding factories that could produce chemical weapons or missiles, and integrating stolen Kuwaiti missiles and armored vehicles into the Iraqi Army.


A Social Idealist Who Found a Heartbeat in Stone
IN RECENT YEARS, THE BRITISH sculptor Barbara Hepworth (1903-75) has not had the liveliest of constituencies in the United States.
But at the recent opening of her retrospective at the Yale Center for British Art in New Haven, there was a very large attendance.
And when Alan Bowness, formerly director of the Tate Gallery, gave an informal talk for more than an hour on Hepworth (who was his mother-in-law), every seat was filled, people were standing four deep at the back of he hall, and no one left.


BACKTALK: Skiing and Safety: There's More to the Story; Vail's Response
To the Sports Editor:
We at Vail Associates find John Underwood's article misleading, poorly researched and an unbalanced presentation of an issue that we have publicly determined to be our single greatest concern as a ski area operator.


Another Vacuous Plan for a Tax Cut
In "Poor Wont' Suffer, Republicans Assert"  [ Feb. 5 ] , Representative Peter T. King is quoted as saying that cutting middle-class taxes now is good public policy.
He put it this way, "Giving more money to the middle income will help the local economy."
Consider this: The total 1994 debt of the United States is $4.6 trillion, and based on the Congressional Budget Office, this figure will rise, to $4.9 trillion in 1995 and, conservatively, to $6.8 trillion by the year 2000.
Against a background of a sharply rising debt, does anybody believe that a middle-income tax cut is sound economic policy?
Could it just be that Mr.
King is thinking about the political gain to himself when he talks about "giving" money to the middle class.


UConn, Villanova, Seton Hall and Pittsburgh Advance in the Big East
The Connecticut women's basketball team, ranked No. 1 in the nation for the past seven weeks, made its first appearance tonight in the Big East tournament and won by 29 points.
Villanova and Seton Hall, UConn's only real threats in the conference, also won quarterfinal games after sluggish starts.
In the first game of an evening doubleheader before 1,950 spectators at Seton Hall's Walsh Gymnasium, Connecticut (now 27-0) routed Providence (10-21) by 92-63.
In the afternoon, Seton Hall (22-7) beat Miami (11-16) by 66-50 and Villanova (19-8) struggled to a 73-65 victory over Georgetown (12-16).


Wary Devils Break Character in High-Scoring Victory
Six different Devils produced goals this afternoon, three of them within 1 minute 20 seconds late in the second period, in a 6-1 triumph over the Florida Panthers at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The victory provided the right antidote for the Devils after their 7-2 loss at Boston Thursday night.


Feb. 26 - March 4: Pleading for the Poor; New York Bishops Oppose Spending Cuts
Their words were strong, but in the end it didn't seem to make much difference.
Last week, a group of Roman Catholic bishops implored Gov.
George E. Pataki to restore cuts in his proposed budget that they said would fall painfully on the poor.
Bishop Howard Hubbard of Albany, John Cardinal O'Connor of New York and several other Catholic leaders met for nearly three hours with the new Republican Governor to plead their case that $1.9 billion in proposed cuts to social service and health care programs would devastate the poor and elderly.
Afterward, Mr. Pataki said he hadn't changed his mind. JAMES DAO


Making a Pot au Feu for a Party of Six
IT takes time to assemble the ingredients, simmer them, trim them properly and arrange them on the table.
But a simple boiled dinner -- called pot au feu in French and bollito misto in Italian -- is a heart-warming delight.
It is best made for a minimum of six people, to permit a variety of meats to go into the pot and flavor the soup.
For this reason, and because it is actually best prepared in advance and reheated, it is excellent dinner-party fare.
Refrigerating it overnight improves the texture of the meats and makes for easy removal of most of the fat.


PLEASURES OF THE PACIFIC RIM
The usual map of the world, in two dimensions, places the Atlantic Ocean comfortingly in the middle, with North and South America on the left, Europe and Africa on the right, the Middle East and Asia stretching beyond.
But perhaps it's time to look at the world with the vast Pacific at its heart.
Then we can perceive clearly that entity called the Pacific Rim, made up of everything touched by Pacific waters - from China to Peru, from Alaska to Australia, from the dynamic economies and burgeoning cities of Southeast Asia to the tranquillity of Tahiti.
There is even a Pacific Rim National Park on Vancouver Island in Canada, 123,000 acres looking out toward Russia.


BACKTALK: Skiing and Safety: There's More to the Story; Free to Ski
To the Sports Editor:
John Underwood makes some interesting observations.
However, he ignores the soul of the sport when he speaks of regulating and policing ski slopes.
Skiing is about freedom.
You alone decide where to ski, when to turn, how fast to go.
Take away the freedom and skiing is no different from driving on the highway, merely transportation.


Who Do You Think Reads All the Books?
Discussing the boom of "megabookstores" across Long Island, "All (Almost All) Hail the Megabookstore"  [ Jan. 29 ]  the writer discusses specifically the Borders Books and Music which has recently opened in Lake Grove, near the Smithaven Mall.
Amazed by the tremendous success this store has experienced since opening, the writer marvels at this "intriguing puzzle," since, in his own words, the store sits "in the wasteland beside Route 347 in Lake Grove, the last place one would expect to find a feast of literature." For the writer, a megabookstore in the heart of suburbia, where, he has already admitted, no one reads anything anymore, makes no sense.
Beyond the writer's elitist dismissal of those who live in the surrounding communities as representative of America's decline into "a new age of illiteracy," I am most distressed over his complete failure to mention anywhere in his article that within walking distance to Borders is the campus of SUNY Stony Brook.
This sprawling campus, with over 17,000 students and 1,500 faculty members, is a thriving center of academic work.
Over 6,000 full- and part-time graduate students are pursuing degrees in over 40 different graduate programs.
Perhaps the students, faculty and staff of SUNY Stony Brook have, to some degree, contributed to Borders's success?


Home Exchange
To the Editor: I was outraged at the way Teacher Swap characterized its record of home exchanges (Practical Traveler: "Home Swapping: Where to Look," Jan. 8).
In August 1992 I arranged an exchange through Teacher Swap.
My three daughters and I were experienced exchangers, having used Intervac and also having made our own arrangements in Europe and the United States.
Sometimes things were not perfect but we knew that this was to be expected.
Through Teacher Swap, we exchanged our four-bedroom apartment for what was described as a two-bedroom Paris apartment, which had one bedroom.
The apartment was filthy -- months-old food in the refrigerator and on kitchen shelves and dirty furniture.
Despite a written agreement, when we returned to New York our apartment had been ransacked.
Dirty linen was lying on the floors, personal items were missing, broken dishes were on the counters, there were piles of garbage.
An unpaid long-distance telephone bill greeted us weeks later.


Correction
A picture caption last week about work by the artist Donald Judd misidentified the subject.
It was an interior of Cobb House, not of a former bank that Judd also furnished.
Both buildings are in Marfa, Tex.


A Match Made in Secret
TOMORROW IS ANOTHER COUNTRY The Inside Story of South Africa's Road to Change.
By Allister Sparks. 254 pp.
New York: Hill &amp; Wang. $22.


Starting From Scratch. Or Rather, Seed.
EVEN though it still appears to be winter outside, the season should be early spring indoors.
Seed sowing time is here.
This annual rite provides rich rewards.
The awakening of seed has a miraculous side, as the plant embryos, tightly packaged in seed coats of all kinds, push up and grow.
Some end up as big as trees, while others turn out to be tiny tufts that hug the ground.
Many kinds of seed should be planted now, especially those that take a long time to germinate or need a long period of infancy before they are sturdy enough to plant outdoors.
A few of those that come to mind are slow starters, like petunias, snapdragons, peppers and eggplant.
Others, like tomatoes, can be started later in the month.


HOUSTON
IN THE MIDDLE OF THE country's fourth-largest city, Houston, along and even under downtown, flows the Buffalo Bayou.
Many days it is still, almost indolent, a welcome counterpoint to the bustle of all the moneymaking going on nearby.
After a heavy rain, it rages brown and muddy, a wild-eyed tycoon ready to strike some serious deals.
But on most days the bayou is peaceful, and, if you don't mind having to portage around a stubborn log or two, it is possible to paddle a canoe from the dams of the western suburbs, under the glass-and-steel structures of downtown, to the Houston Ship Channel, about 30 miles in all, at which point the bayou fully surrenders its natural state before giving out to Galveston Bay.


In Russia, Too, Opposition Grows to Wearing of Fur
To the Editor:
The Feb. 19 article "The Furs of Brighton Beach" imbues the wearing of furs with exaggerated cultural significance, leaving the false impression that opposition to furs is just a Western phenomenon.


Seinfeld, Come Home?
A NEW HOPE HAS gripped New Yorkers ever since an item appeared in Liz Smith's gossip column in January.
"Jerry Seinfeld is looking to make a permanent move back to New York City," she revealed, and soon the rumors escalated among Manhattan's actors and script writers -- not only was Jerry coming, but he was bringing his show with him.
New York magazine celebrated by putting Seinfeld's smiling face on the cover above the words: "Goodbye, L.A. Hello, N.Y.C."
I can understand the excitement, because I, too, have longed for Jerry and the gang to come home.
"Seinfeld" always struck me as a troubling paradox.
Yes, it captures the travails of Manhattan better than any show ever on television, but it is written and filmed in Los Angeles.
Yes, the characters Jerry and George seem to be quintessential New Yorkers, the kind who believe, as John Updike put it, "that people living anywhere else had to be, in some sense, kidding." But the characters' creators and real-life counterparts -- Seinfeld and his friend Larry David, the show's executive producer -- appear to be doing just fine in California.
Their show's success threatens New York's work ethic, which is based on the assumption that we all have to endure the city's cramped indignities in order to gain that ineffable New York savvy.
If the "Seinfeld" crew can prosper by reproducing that quality in the sunny hills of Southern California, where does that leave us?
New York, New York: why make it here if you could make it so much more pleasantly somewhere else?


Baskets, and Some Don't Hold a Thing
THE word "basket" suggests a practical container, but an exhibition here juxtaposes utilitarian baskets from the 19th century with innovative modern baskets that are not meant to carry anything.
The show at the Museum of Early Trades and Crafts is sponsored by the New Jersey Designer Craftsmen along with Basketmakers of New Jersey.
A jury selected work by 15 craft artists, including 11 New Jerseyans.
The historic examples, all made in this state, were chosen from the museum's own collection.


Dominoes' Return
ROBERT RUBIN, THE new Treasury Secretary, believed strongly that a collapse of investor confidence in Mexico would lead to similar dismay in other economies that need foreign investment.
"Not all of Mr. Rubin's friends on Wall Street," David E. Sanger wrote in The New York Times, "fully subscribe to what he calls this 'theory of interconnectedness' -- 'if that's a word,' he adds."


On West 22d, Accusations And Anger
As Claude Rolls tells it, he was cutting a bacon and egg sandwich on Feb. 25 when he heard a noise at his door at 442 West 22d Street.
He says he opened the door, steak knife in hand, and found his landlord, Robert Sigmund, scraping off bulletins announcing a meeting to "Kick the Slumlords Out of Chelsea." Mr.
Sigmund and his partner, Thomas Iveli, were the objects of the meeting.
Curses flew, and Mr.
Rolls, 61, called the police.
But when they arrived, Mr.
Sigmund told them that Mr.
Rolls had brandished a knife, and it was Mr.
Rolls whom they arrested.


Jennifer R. Rubin, Robert B. Larson
Jennifer Rose Rubin, the daughter of Barbara and Kenneth Rubin of Savannah, Ga., is to be married there today to Robert Bowden Larson, the son of Joan and Robert Larson of Morristown, N.J.
Rabbi Arnold Belzer is to officiate at Temple Mickve Israel.


Correction
A review on Feb. 5 about "Being Digital," a book about computers and society, gave a technically incorrect definition for the term "baud." It is the number of changes per second in a signal, not the number of bits per second carried by that signal.


A Candidacy Unraveled By Murder In 2d Degree
On a Sunday evening nine days before the November 1993 elections, Iris Pyne, a Democratic candidate for town board, pointed a .38-caliber revolver at her husband and pulled the trigger five times until all the chambers were empty.
Then, as Richard Pyne lay dying on the kitchen floor, Mrs.
Pyne telephoned her friend Marcia Chiaradia.
"I just shot Dick," the friend recalled her saying. "He tried to kill me."


THE COUNTER COUNTERCULTURE
It is striking how similar these young reactionaries are to the far-left radicals of a generation ago they so disdain ("The Counter Counterculture," by James Atlas, Feb. 12).
Like them, they demonize their enemies and, as Michael Lind perceptively points out, romanticize the "common people" they neither know nor understand.
JOSHUA ROSENBAUM Brooklyn


The Hourglass Again: Remember Mae West?
This spring it will be more fashionable than ever to get fit -- but not just with aerobic exercise.
Now the clothes themselves will sculpture the silhouette.
Fit and structure are fashion's new catchwords.
Clothes that used to droop from a hanger now have a defined silhouette.
Think of Donna Karan's jacket with bra-seaming inset; Gianni Versace's hourglass suit; Chanel's bolero, so snug that you need a controlling stretch corset underneath.


Feb.26-March 4; 'We Regret the Inconvenience . . . '
The roof evokes the mountains beyond.
The runways can land three planes at a time.
The cost was an astonishing $4.9 billion.
And the baggage system doesn't shred the luggage anymore.
But the most astonishing thing to be said about Denver International Airport last week was that it was open -- 16 months late and $2 billion over budget.


With Broadway's Costs, Can This 'How to' Succeed?
IT'S a natural.
Any Broadway musical with words like "Business" and "Succeed" in its title inevitably inspires two questions.
Is putting it on good business?
And can it succeed? (If, that is, artistic success can be measured in cold dollars.)
And the full title -- "How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying" -- raises another question: Is this a case of "How to succeed on Broadway without really writing" -- writing a new show, that is?


Mexico's Ex-President Returns to People
Scrap dealers on donkey carts rattle along Solidarity Avenue just behind the humble house where former President Carlos Salinas de Gortari began his second day of an on-again, off-again hunger strike.
There was widespread confusion about Mr.
Salinas's actions on Friday when he suddenly announced a suspension of his hunger strike, saying he wanted to discuss his complaints with the Government.
But after a visit to Mexico City that lasted more than five hours, he returned to the outskirts of this large industrial city in northeastern Mexico.


Once There Was Shag and a Family Called Brady
The Wild Bunch  A reissue of the classic western at the Sony Lincoln Center theaters.
William Holden, Robert Ryan, Ernest Borgnine Directed by Sam Peckinpah R 145 minutes


List Sex Offenders, State Tells Schools
THE State Parole Division, which has been sending school districts the names and pictures of paroled pedophiles living in their districts, is now recommending that schools adopt policies to notify their communities about the sex offenders.
But the districts are not happy with the responsibility.
The president of the Nassau-Suffolk School Boards Association, Dr.
Bruce Brodsky, said: "We have taken the position that you can't lay this on us, simply because we're no law-enforcement agency. We don't have the expertise.  We don't have the money to do it, nor the resources, nor the personnel. Nobody knows what they're doing. Our primary focus is getting kids educated."


Jets Make Offer for Lageman
The chase for Jeff Lageman, the Jets' longtime defensive end, heated up yesterday when they made him their first offer since he became a free agent.
However, Lageman's agent, Brad Blank, said that Jacksonville, which tried him out last week, would make an offer tomorrow, and that, in any event, Lageman was committed to visiting the 49ers next week.


Roy Battenhouse, English Scholar, 82
Roy W. Battenhouse, an Episcopal priest who was professor emeritus of English at Indiana University, died on Feb. 17 at Bloomington Hospital in Bloomington, Ind.
He was 82 and lived at the Meadowood Retirement Community in Bloomington.
The cause was heart failure, said his daughter, Anna Battenhouse of Austin, Tex.


A New Restaurant Will Prepare American and Asian-Marinated Steaks
EAST will meet West in Huntington Village when Miller's Steak House opens in May.
The new 100-seat restaurant over Orlando's at 15 New Street will be half traditional American and half Asian steakhouse, with separate chefs for each.
Fillipo Bolgna and James Dolce, who own Orlando's, are combining forces with Josephine Miller, who is of Chinese-Filipino-Spanish background, in this crosscultural venture.
Ms.
Miller moved here from the Philippines and now lives in Dix Hills.


In Stolen Briefcase, a Mother's Loss
The items stolen recently from the trunk of Beverly Rotter's 1994 Ford Escort carried little street value.
It's doubtful that Ms.
Rotter's organizer and telephone book, some letters from women whose children have died of AIDS and about 100 buttons and 50 caps inscribed with the words "Mothers March Against AIDS" would finance even a fleeting high.
But to Ms.
Rotter, the mother of Iris De La Cruz, the advocate for AIDS causes who died in May 1991, these objects were priceless.
"How can you put a value on a year's worth of work?" she asked the other day.


Private Custodial Services Set for Some City Schools
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines announced yesterday that the city would hire private companies to clean and repair 52 of New York City's public schools as a way to save money and improve the dismal record of school maintenance.
Under contracts to begin in July, the private companies will be required to provide services now handled by the custodians' union and also to fix things like shattered windows, chipping plaster or broken faucets -- repairs that the school system's 800 custodians do not now have to do.


Journal; Bit by Bit
As a media celebrity, the Internet is now seriously overexposed.
Were it a person, we might be as sick of it as we are of Lance Ito.
In recent weeks, it has made magazine covers from Newsweek to The Economist.
Kevin Mitnick, the hacker who devoured the Internet, and Tsutomu Shimomura, the white hat who brought him to justice, have become national fixations, not to mention the subjects of an intense bidding war for book and movie rights ("Smart and Smarter"?).


What Was Said of Killing Farrakhan By the Accused and by the Informer
For 14 years, Qubilah Bahiyah Shabazz never heard a word from that burly boy with the grim reaper tattoo and all the tough talk about guns.
Then out of the blue last year, around Memorial Day, there he was, Michael Fitzpatrick, a long-distance voice on the telephone, calling her "Hon."
Soon after that first call, the Federal Bureau of Investigation started listening in on the former high school classmates.
And by January, Ms.
Shabazz, Malcolm X's second-oldest daughter, was under arrest and charged with plotting the murder of the head of the Nation of Islam, Louis Farrakhan, her slain father's one-time protege turned bitter foe.


BEST SELLERS: March 5, 1995
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
53
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
2
3
2
BORDER MUSIC, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A Texas rancher, trying to erase his Vietnam trauma, takes to the road with an exotic dancer.
3
2
37
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
4
4
4
ORIGINAL SIN, by P.D.
James. (Knopf, $24.) Adam Dalgliesh probes a case involving intrigue, malice and murder in a prestigious London publishing house.
5
5
7
KISS THE GIRLS, by James Patterson. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) A police detective pursues a serial killer.
6
7
4
HOME SONG, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $23.95.) The appearance of his unknown biological son threatens the serenity of a man's family life.
7
6
3
DAISY-HEAD MAYZIE, by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $15.) A girl's head unexpectedly sprouts a daisy.
8
9
134
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
9
1
THE JUROR, by George Dawes Green. (Warner, $21.95.) A woman's life takes a fearful turn when she is chosen as a juror for a mob trial.
10*
14
2
THE CAT WHO BLEW THE WHISTLE, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Putnam, $21.95.) Aided by his two cats, Jim Qwilleran investigates embezzlement and a murder.
11
8
6
ACCEPTABLE RISK, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $23.95.) A medical researcher's quest has devastating results.
12
12
4
ALWAYS A RECKONING, by Jimmy Carter. (Times Books/Random House, $18.) A collection of poems.
13
11
7
EYES OF A CHILD, by Richard North Patterson. (Knopf, $24.) The apparent suicide of a San Francisco man leads to courtroom encounters.
14
1
ROGUE WARRIOR: GREEN TEAM, by Richard Marcinko and John Weisman. (Pocket, $23.) Navy Seals contend with a violent religious movement.
15
1
FROM TIME TO TIME, by Jack Finney. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) Simon Morley of "Time and Again" returns to the past, trying to prevent World War I.
16*
1
THE CUNNING MAN, by Robertson Davies. (Viking, $23.95.) A doctor uses shamanism and Platonism as well as scientific medicine in his practice.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
4
I WANT TO TELL YOU, by O.J.
Simpson. (Little, Brown, $17.95.) The former football star, now on trial for murder, responds to letters he has received.
2
2
10
SISTERS, by Carol Saline.
Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of sisters, reported in words and pictures.
3
4
21
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
4
3
4
RAGING HEART, by Sheila Weller. (Pocket, $18.) An account of the marriage of O.J. and Nicole Simpson.
5
5
26
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up comedian.
6
8
3
THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House, $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the lives of all Americans.
7
9
22
DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion, $19.95.) Anecdotes and meditations on life by the star of "Home Improvement."
8
2
THE DISCIPLINE OF MARKET LEADERS, by Michael Treacy and Fred Wiersema. (Addison-Wesley, $25.) A discussion of marketing techniques; reclassified this week as nonfiction.
9
6
6
INSIDE THE WHITE HOUSE, by Ronald Kessler. (Pocket, $23.) Anecdotes about events at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue during the past 30 years.
10
7
52
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
11*
12
6
ALL MY CHILDREN, by Gary Warner. (General Publishing, $25.) A scrapbook of photographs and mementos about the long-running television show.
12
11
14
THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY, by Robert G. Hagstrom Jr. (Wiley, $24.95.) An account of the career of the man said to be the world's most successful investor.
13
13
10
NICOLE BROWN SIMPSON, by Faye D. Resnick with Mike Walker. (Dove Books, $14.95.) The former wife of O.J.
Simpson as remembered by a friend.
14
1
LOVE LETTERS, edited by Michelle Lovric. (Marlowe/Shooting Star, $19.95.) An illustrated collection of romantic missives exchanged over the past 300 years.
15*
14
63
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
2
45
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
2
1
93
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
3
3
3
THE BEARDSTOWN LADIES' COMMON-SENSE INVESTMENT GUIDE. (Godin/Hyperion, $19.95.) Tips for successful investing from 16 Illinois women.
4
4
7
FOOD, by Susan Powter. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) Information about recipes, nutrition and diets.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Feb. 18, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE ADVENTURES OF MAQROLL: Four Novellas, by Alvaro Mutis. (HarperCollins, $24.) Brilliant stuff from a Colombian writer, the second volume of interrelated, outrageous tales from the life and times of Maqroll, a mysterious, mythic seafarer.
AN ANTHROPOLOGIST ON MARS: Seven Paradoxical Tales, by Oliver Sacks. (Knopf, $24.) More tales of the engrossingly abnormal by a generous, humane neurologist who explores the peculiar thinking of both physician and patient.
A DIVING ROCK ON THE HUDSON: Volume 2 of "Mercy of a Rude Stream," by Henry Roth. (St. Martin's, $23.95.) When it rains it pours: 60 years after "Call It Sleep," Mr.
Roth, back at the keyboard, plunges on with a purposely garrulous narration whose hero looks much like himself; the novel centers on a spectacular sin.
DOSTOEVSKY: The Miraculous Years, 1865-1871, by Joseph Frank. (Princeton University, $35.) Volume 4 of this planned five-part biography excels in providing a cultural, literary, social and biographical context for Dostoyevsky's works.
FRANCO: A Biography, by Paul Preston. (Basic Books, $37.50.) A huge, all-inclusive life of the outright winner of Spain's civil war, the shrewd, lucky dictator of his country for almost 40 years.
KWANZAA AND ME: A Teacher's Story, by Vivian Gussin Paley. (Harvard University, $18.95.) A wise kindergarten teacher, long committed to integration, re-examines its value by paying attention to what children and parents say.
THE LIFE OF GRAHAM GREENE.
Volume 2: 1939-1955, by Norman Sherry. (Viking, $34.95.) Mr.
Sherry brings to the grotesquely complicated life of Greene a relentless passion for detail, resulting in a compulsively readable account.
OVERCOMING LAW, by Richard A. Posner. (Harvard University, $39.95.) The author, a high Federal judge and former law professor, examines the plight of the law from a "law and economics" viewpoint, urging more respect for the empirical reality of legal issues.
THE POINT: Stories, by Charles D'Ambrosio. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) An impressive collection, mixing the exotic and the familiar, precise as to prose, various as to tone, emotionally generous.
TERRIBLE HONESTY: Mongrel Manhattan in the 1920s, by Ann Douglas. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $25.) The great big city in the great good time, analyzed with broad scope and minute complexity as the locus of the national psyche when Americans attacked the conditioned responses of the pre-1914 world.
THE TUNNEL, by William H. Gass. (Knopf, $30.) This great big novel (652 pages) by an American master is all spun out of the head of its monstrous protagonist, a language-driven professor of fascist views who is as dreadful as he is plausible.
THE WEDDING, by Dorothy West. (Doubleday, $20.) A novel by an 87-year-old survivor of the Harlem Renaissance; its main subject is the subtle assumptions of color, class and status in a summer colony of upper-class black families.


Mayan Epics in Small Spaces
THE MAN PAINTED ON THE ancient cup, wearing a feathered headdress and beads, sits crosslegged on the floor.
He is pulling a figure from a shell with one hand and lunging at him with a knife with the other.
The cosmological tale unfolding like a pre-Columbian comic strip on the sides of the vessel is one of many depicted in "Painting the Maya Universe: Royal Ceramics of the Classic Period," an exhibition of 90 pieces of pottery at Yale University Art Gallery.
The show, which runs through April 23, was organized by Dorie Reents-Budet, an art history professor and associate curator at Duke University Museum of Art, with the cooperation of the Los Angeles County Museum of Art.


In the Region/Connecticut; A Plan for Housing the Homeless, With Counseling
AN application is expected to be filed here this week for a zoning amendment that would pave the way for a comprehensive program to house and counsel homeless single men and women.
The proposed zoning change is part of a statewide effort to address the homeless problem.
Twelve sites in nine Connecticut towns and cities have been targeted for the creation of a total of 400 apartments, financed and managed cooperatively by 6 state agencies, 21 nonprofit organizations and a variety of philanthropies and corporations.
If the Stamford zoning amendment is granted, it would permit the construction of 41 studio and one-bedroom apartments at 85 Franklin Street, and 25 similar apartments at 44 Ludlow Street.


WHAT THEY SAW AT THE HOLOCAUST MUSEUM
As one of the writers of "Daniel's Story," the film component of "Remember the Children," I am disheartened by the reactions that Philip Gourevitch has chosen to relate in "What They Saw at the Holocaust Museum" (Feb. 12).
I'm sure he's right that many leave the museum with their own agenda of intolerance and insensitivity intact, but I found his reportage cynical.
Just because some teen-agers may not have the vocabulary to express the intangible effects of the visit does not mean that they were not educated and moved.
RICHARD B. KAPLAN New York


Feb.26-March 4; At Carnival, a Respite From Misery
There are few jobs and precious little electricity, the cost of living is soaring, and the American troops who provide the only real security are scheduled to withdraw at the end of the month.
But for three days last week, Haitians managed to push aside those earthly concerns and devote all their attention and energy to their pre-Lenten Carnival.
A brutal dictatorship had dimmed the luster of the festivities for the past three years, but with President Jean-Bertrand Aristide back, Haitians were convinced they finally had something to celebrate, and set about to make the "Carnival of Hope" live up to its name.
Minister of Culture Jean-Claude Bajeux estimated that a million people took to Port-au-Prince's streets; countless other local celebrations were also organized.


Shared Parenting Urged
To the Editor:
I read "Dads to the Rescue for Child-Care Needs"(The Executive Life, Feb. 12), with great interest.
It was wonderful to see it recognized that many dads of the 90's are primary caretakers for their children.
Unfortunately, matrimonial courts do not.
When career women are awarded custody (as most are) or are allowed to move out of state, their children are forced to have their loving fathers ripped out of their lives.
This is nothing less than emotional child abuse.


Critic Says Inactivity of 'Friendly Fire' Panel Shows Racism
A Police Department task force created to review the so-called friendly fire incidents between police officers has seldom met and has adopted no procedures, the president of a black police officers organization charged yesterday, saying the task force's ineffectiveness was indicative of departmental racism.
"Like an alcoholic, the Police Department is going through a denial stage," said Eric Adams, president of the Grand Council of Guardians.
"If the department has to admit that there are some racist elements in the force, it will go against what they believe in. We've said all along that this thing would go nowhere. They were not serious."


UConn Struggles To Victory And Title
As soon as the Connecticut basketball team reached its Miami Arena locker room after tonight's game, out came the commemorative T-shirts: 1995 Big East champions.
"As I told Ollie," forward Donny Marshall said, "we've had a great four years. Let's end it right. This is the first time anyone has won back-to-back Big East titles."


Private Custodians For Some Schools
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines announced yesterday that the city would hire private companies to clean and repair 52 of New York City's public schools as a way to save money and improve the dismal record of school maintenance.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Sit Up! Bark! Meow!
THE family portrait was not going well.
Stella was hissing at Whitney, and Charlie was finding it difficult to sit and stay.
There was only one thing left to do, the portrait taker, Pamela Setchell, decided.
She took out a slide whistle.
"Yeeeeeep!" went the whistle.
What, what, what went the heads of her three subjects.


Q. &amp; A.
Obtaining Assessed Valuations Q I purchased 4 acres of undeveloped land in Schroon Lake in 1981 for $6,000.
The land is now assessed at more than $75,000.
Is it possible to obtain neighbors' assessed valuations or the amounts of recent purchases of similar property?
To whom do I write for information? . . .
Martin Gittleman, Manhattan.


The World; Mexico's Reluctant Martyr
ON the rare occasions when Jose Lopez Portillo appeared in public after giving up the nearly absolute power of the Mexican presidency a decade ago, it was not unusual for people to bark at him; it was their way of remembering that before ushering in a disastrous economic crisis in 1982, he had sworn to defend the currency "like a dog." But he put up with the abuse because, as he observed last week, there are rules to being a former President here.
"The role of a former President is to be prudent and to serve Mexico by being silent and not creating more problems for the President in office," he said in an interview with several Mexican newspapers.
"What I did to serve my country when I stopped being President and they attacked me brutally, without misery, was to shut up and take it."


When East Meets West and the Ends Split
THEY arrived as a team at the Shin Masami Hair Salon, three sober-looking young men, college students from Tokyo.
They walked out with big grins and blond highlights glinting in their black hair.
A fraternity initiation?


O'Connor Links Cuts in Welfare to More Abortions
John Cardinal O'Connor said last week that the legislation cutting back welfare proposed in the Republican Party's Contract With America was "immoral in its virtually inevitable consequences."
The strongly worded statement, which came in a column that appeared on Thursday in Catholic New York, the archdiocese weekly, drew attention to the fears of many abortion opponents that the political party that has been their standard-bearer is now championing a measure that could result in tens or even hundreds of thousands of additional abortions.


Ideas &amp; Trends; This Is No Place Like Home
A REFUGEE camp was once an easy thing to spot on the horizon, whether in Central America, the Middle East or Asia.
There were neat rows of tents (or thatched huts or little mud-walled houses) with some larger structures bearing the logos of international relief organizations.
There was a kind of order.
But that was before wars among nations became longstanding lethal skirmishes among neighbors.
That was before Bosnia, Rwanda, Chechnya.
The camps and the lives of people in flight have changed with the metamorphosis of warfare.


Julie B. Bloch, H. Martin Mendelsohn
Julie Beth Bloch, a daughter of Gail and Gerald Bloch of Milwaukee, is to be married today to H. Martin Mendelsohn, a son of Rona and Allan Mendelsohn of Washington.
Rabbi Martin Lockshin, a cousin of the bridegroom, is to perform the ceremony at Beth El Ner Tamid Synagogue in Mequon, Wis.
The bride, 27, is an associate in the Washington office of the law firm Cleary, Gottlieb, Steen &amp; Hamilton.
She graduated from the University of Michigan and received her law degree from Harvard University.
She was also a Fulbright Scholar in Hong Kong.


Glenn Close's 'Sunset' Standby Is Ready for Her Close-Up
KAREN MASON MAY BE THE nation's leading expert on dashed expectations.
When her name is announced at the Minskoff Theater on Broadway, some members of the audience groan.
Ms.
Mason has one of the more thankless temp jobs in the American theater.
Outfitted with a beeper and a cellular phone, she is the standby for Glenn Close in the hit Andrew Lloyd Webber musical "Sunset Boulevard." (A standby only goes on when substituting for another actor; an understudy usually performs in the show and takes over an additional role as required.) Ms.
Mason knows that when disappointed theatergoers leave even before she enters, it has little to do with her.
Even so, it hurts.


The $4.25-an-Hour Question
To the Editor:
When discussing labor-management disputes, newspaper numbers somehow always become the Sunday-holiday-midnight-overtime rate, grossed-up with payroll taxes and benefits.
But in your vision of contented, grateful, plantation workers, "A City Built on $4.25 an Hour" (Feb. 12), there seems to be no benefits at all.
That's possible when you're young and healthy (and lucky).
But it's easy to imagine one of Jacksonville, N.C.'s $8,840-a-year workers making the mistake of believing that Social Security is a pension plan.
Does Newt Gingrich know that we're all partners with Jacksonville's clever employers?
It takes a lot of Medicare to make up for 65 years of no health care at all.
It's ironic that the advice given in a town where restaurants are the major employers is, "Don't go out to eat. Don't use credit cards." Where would the United States economy be today if everyone had been forced to follow those recommendations since World War II?
TIMOTHY H. BUCHMAN  Wyckoff, N.J., Feb. 13


Here Comes the Sun
Now that more sun is streaming through the windows, houseplants are growing again, so give them a drink of fish fertilizer or seaweed.
Start seeds indoors for hardy vegetables like broccoli and flowers like cosmos and hollyhocks.


'Locked In the Cliches'
To the Editor:
While Alvin Ailey was astute enough to recognize George Balanchine's creative genius, he, like so many others, made the mistake of associating abstract movement and the absence of sentimental emoting with a lack of feeling and emotion  [ "What Ailey Thought of Balanchine," Feb. 12 ] .


In Atlantic City Airport's Growing
THE residents of Atlantic City are all too familiar with grand schemes that eventually turn out to be something less.
Item: Since the announcement last summer of the Uptown Renewal Tract, a proposal to spend $200 million on a hotel, amusement park, casino and new housing in a blighted neighborhood, the price tag has dwindled to $50 million, and the casino and housing have been cut.


Correction
An article on Feb. 5 about living in Ho-Ho-Kus, N.J., referred incorrectly to St.
Luke's school.
It merged with two other parochial schools and is no longer at St.
Luke's parish.
St.
Luke's former school building is used by ECLC, a facility for learning-disabled students.


Parachuting at the Pole
You could go to the North Pole the easy way (if there is one), but Forum Travel International, a California company, lets you parachute in.
The skydiving is the culmination of a trip April 13 to 23.
From Moscow, the tour goes to a former Soviet missile base at Khatanga, in Siberia, visits the indigenous people of the tundra and goes snowmobiling on the Khatanga River.
You make the parachute drop securely harnessed to an experienced parachutist who does the work while you enjoy the free fall.
After landing, you will spend 3 to 12 hours at the pole.


Humans to the Rescue
Grampa, a blind poodle, sleeps in a crib on one side of John Contino's bed.
On the other side is a cage containing five kittens.
Here and in the houses of friends, he is the master of 24 dogs and five cats.
Mr.
Contino, a slight, articulate man living on a pension, roams the vacant lots, windswept beaches and rubbage-strewn alleys and parks of Brooklyn, trying to save the lives of abandoned animals.
Some of the animals stay their whole lives, but most go on to new adoptive owners.


Once There Was Shag and a Family Called Brady
Mina Tannenbaum  Romane Bohringer, Elsa Zylberstein Directed by Martine Dugowson Not rated 128 minutes


Body Found in Basement


Florence Airport Adds New Terminal
With the opening of a new terminal, the Amerigo Vespucci Airport outside Florence is now linked to 11 European cities.
Airport authorities forecast that the expanded airport will be handling more than 800,000 passengers a year, up from 650,000 in 1994.
The cities with direct service to Florence are Augsburg, Barcelona, Berlin, Brussels, Frankfurt, London (both Heathrow and Gatwick), Lugano, Munich, Nice, Paris (Charles de Gaulle) and Vienna.


'I Want A Movie After I Kill Everyone'
Whatever it was in the seemingly unremarkable life of Jeffrey Howorth that led him to gun down both his parents in the family's ranch-style house here late Thursday afternoon, it apparently escaped everyone in Macungie.
Sixteen-year-old Jeffrey appeared to have at least a little bit of what every teen-ager here needs to get by before getting out, say classmates and neighbors in this small bedroom community just outside Allentown.
He took several honors courses at Emmaus High School, was a member of the swimming team there and was active in the family's church.


Once There Was Shag and a Family Called Brady
Man of the House  Chevy Chase, Farrah Fawcett, Jonathan Taylor Thomas Directed by James Orr PG 98 minutes


The Ladder Man of 14th Street
IN the last place where Hassan Bouker ran a retail concern, the Ivory Coast in West Africa, dealing with shoplifters was a simple matter.
"If someone is seen doing that there, everyone around the store will run over and start slapping him," he explained.
"He gets very scared and never comes back."
But on 14th Street, where he manages Luciano, a low-price clothing store, such corporal methods are frowned upon.
So instead, Mr.
Bouker chooses to perch atop a large ladder placed strategically outside the store, where he can survey those who pass by to shop, linger, and yes, steal.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
REMEMBERING PARIS
"Ghosts of a Paris Past," a melodrama for narrator, cello and piano, will be performed on Monday at 8 P.M. at the Westminster School Theater in Simsbury.
Mark Lamos, artistic director of the Hartford Stage Company, will be the narrator, Harry Clark and Sanda Schuldmann, respectively the cellist and pianist of the Chamber Music Plus duo, will provide the music.
Paris of the 1920's and the artists and writers who gravitated to the city for inspiration and camaraderie are the subjects of the script by Randy Svendsen.
Ms.
Schuldmann and Mr.
Clark have selected music from the works of Aaron Copland, Virgil Thomson, Claude Debussy, Nadia Boulanger and other composers and musicians of that time and place.
Incorporated into the Svendsen scenario are excerpts from the prose and poetry of F. Scott Fitzgerald, Ernest Hemingway and Gertrude Stein, to name a few.


Dinners Downtown, Midtown and Uptown
Events in behalf of policing, people with learning disabilities, Hispanic well-being and art.


Is It Now Time For Gun Control On Wall Street?
WHO killed Barings?
Was it really Nick Leeson, a 28-year-old trader?
Was it a shocking lack of controls in a major securities firm?
Was it a belief that the strategy was basically riskless, and therefore did not need to be monitored?
Or was it derivatives?
The answer to all of those questions is yes.
Mr.
Leeson is being widely branded as the culprit, but he could not have succeeded without the other three factors.
His bosses evidently thought he was arbitraging the difference between Japanese stock futures prices in Osaka and Singapore.
Perhaps he had done so profitably in the past, but the reality of financial markets is that such opportunities evaporate quickly, as more people become aware of them.


Congressional Memo; What Now? Easy Issues Are Out of the Way
From the committee rooms of the House to the floor of the Senate, there was a clear sense on Capitol Hill this week that the battle over the nation's fiscal and spending priorities was fully joined.
After two months when the Republicans seemed to dominate the political agenda almost effortlessly, the Democrats are finding their voice as a minority party.
They realized almost warily that they could win one, on occasion, with the Senate's rejection of a constitutional amendment to require a balanced budget, although the Republicans immediately moved to blunt that victory.


Our Foreign Policy Should Put U.S. First
To the Editor:
In an attempt to change the subject from our mainstream agenda, Frank Rich (column, March 2) distorts the meaning of my 1991 book "The New World Order."


Hail, Hail, The Gang's All...Where?
At one time or another, all the pictured luminaries lived in the same great European city.
What is it?


Get a Job? Strike Isn't So Bad at Low End of Pay Scale
Lou Piniella and Ron Davis, marquee players with the Yankees, waited on tables at a midtown restaurant in Manhattan.
Other players worked, too, some counting their pennies while contemplating the sale of their homes as they scrambled to survive what was then the unthinkable: the 50-day baseball strike of 1981.
The 14 years since then have brought inflation to major league baseball.
Star players who felt the crunch in 1981, even in an era when $400,000 annual salaries were not uncommon, have given way to $7 million-a-year players who routinely see $400,000 paychecks twice a month.


Q and A
Crater Lake Park
Q.
I would like to visit Crater Lake National Park and have been told that an historic lodge there is being renovated.
Can you give me any details? -- Don H. Chin, M.D., Portland, Ore.


No Headline
"New York is a wonderful place to live a religious life. The differences between good and evil are stark here. You have to make a choice." ARIEL BYBEE, a Mormon who sings with the Metropolitan Opera.  [ 1:3. ]


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate
1.
Balanced Budget: Vote on a constitutional amendment requiring a balanced Federal budget by 2002.
Failed, with 65 in favor and 35 opposed (short of necessary two-thirds majority), March 2.
1
Connecticut
Dodd (D)
Nay
Lieberman (D)
Nay
New Jersey
Bradley (D)
Nay
Lautenberg (D)
Nay
New York
D'Amato (R)
Yea
Moynihan (D)
Nay
House
1.
Risk Assessment: Vote on a Democratic proposal to scale back the impact of new legislation requiring Federal agencies to conduct broader risk-assessment and cost-benefit reviews when issuing regulations.
Rejected 246 to 174, Feb. 27.
2.
Risk Assessment: Vote on an amendment to a bill requiring expanded risk-assessment and cost-benefit requirements for regulatory agencies.
The amendment recommended that whenever an agency finds that a cost-benefit analysis conflicts with public health or other existing standards, the agency should report back to Congress, which could then decide whether it wanted to amend the rules.
Rejected 238 to 181, Feb. 28.
3.
Risk Assessment: Vote on a bill that would require proposed regulations protecting health, safety and the environment to undergo a detailed scientific assessment of how effectively the rules would reduce risks to the public and require agencies to certify that the costs of compliance are justified by the anticipated benefits.
Approved 286 to 141, Feb. 28.
4.
Landowner Protection: Vote on a bill that would prohibit Federal agencies from protecting wetlands or endangered species unless landowners were compensated for any resulting decline in their property's value.
Approved 277 to 148, March 3.
1
2
3
4
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
Nay
2. Gejdenson (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
Nay
3. DeLauro (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
Nay
4. Shays (R)
Yea
Yea
Nay
Nay
5. Franks (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
Yea
6. Johnson (R)
Nay
Yea
Yea
Nay
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
Nay
2. LoBiondo (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
Yea
3. Saxton (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
Yea
4. Smith (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
Yea
5. Roukema (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
Nay
6. Pallone (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
Nay
7. Franks (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
Nay
8. Martini (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
Nay
9. Torricelli (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
Nay
10. Payne (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
Nay
11. Frelinghuysen (R) li Nay
Nay
Yea
Nay
12. Zimmer (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
Nay
13. Menendez (D)
Yea
Nay
Nay
Nay
New York
1. Forbes (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
Yea
2. Lazio (R)
Nay
Yea
Yea
Nay
3. King (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
Yea
4. Frisa (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
Yea
5. Ackerman (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
Nay
6. Flake (D)
A
Yea
Nay
Nay
7. Manton (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
Nay
8. Nadler (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
Nay
9. Schumer (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
Nay
10. Towns (D)
Yea
Yea
Yea
Nay
11. Owens (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
Nay
12. Velazquez (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
Nay
13. Molinari (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
Yea
14. Maloney (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
Nay
15. Rangel (D)
A
A
Nay
A
16. Serrano (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
Nay
17. Engel (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
Nay
18. Lowey (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
Nay
19. Kelly (R)
Nay
Yea
Yea
Yea
20. Gilman (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
Yea
21. McNulty (D)
Nay
Yea
Yea
Yea
22. Solomon (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
Yea
23. Boehlert (R)
Yea
Yea
Nay
Nay
24. McHugh (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
Yea
25. Walsh (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
Yea
26. Hinchey (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
Nay
27. Paxon (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
Yea
28. Slaughter (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
Nay
29. LaFalce (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
Nay
30. Quinn (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
Nay
31. Houghton (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
Yea
KEY: (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


BOHEMIA, WHERE FAIRY TALES MIGHT BE TRUE
The teen-age wedding guests assembling at the pink castle at Cervena Lhota giggle anxiously when they see one another in their period costumes.
The scared, slightly goofy groom and his pals sport top hats, long hair, black frock coats.
Renaissance princes, Hapsburg dandies, Sergeant Pepper's Band, they're working-class kids from the nearby southern Bohemian city of Ceske Budejovice, known throughout the Czech Republic as the home of Budvar beer.
The pale bride, in white satin, drifts away from the rowdy group to gaze at the shell-pink 16th-century chateau.
The castle could have been plucked from the top of a giant's wedding cake, which may explain its popularity as a marriage setting for couples who come from as far away as Prague, a two-hour drive to the north.


Business Diary: February 26 - March 3
INTERNATIONL Barings P.L.C.: 28-Year-Old Brings Down 233-Year-Old  Robert L. Citron.
Joseph Jett.
And now, Nicholas W. Leeson.
The 28-year-old, a trader in the Singapore office of Barings P.L.C., has joined the gallery of those charged with larger-than-life investment mistakes.
By betting $29 billion on derivatives in the Japanese markets and losing more than $1 billion, Mr.
Leeson managed last week to sink Barings, a 233-year-old British investment firm that financed the Louisiana Purchase and oversaw royal fortunes.
Mr.
Leeson, at right, bet that Japanese stocks and interest rates would rise.
Both fell, and then the story sped up: the Bank of England tried to rescue Barings and failed, Barings went bankrupt and on the block, Mr.
Leeson was on the lam until his arrest in Frankfurt.
When the dust settles, one issue will stand out: What has happened to finance that individuals can bring huge institutions to their knees?


King Family, in Truce With Park Service, Reopens Birthplace
In a thawing of three months of icy relations between the family of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. and the National Park Service, family members reopened Dr.
King's birthplace to free Park Service-conducted tours today at 10 A.M.
Dexter Scott King, the head of the Martin Luther King Jr.
Center for Nonviolent Social Change, said the decision was a temporary agreement spurred by his disappointment at seeing schoolchildren who had traveled to the King historic district kept outside the two-story, clapboard and shingle birthplace.


An ENTOMOLOGICAL STUDY if APARTMENT 4A -- My Wild Kingdom
LOUIS SORKIN HAS a prominent forehead, gently rounded abdomen and powerful bandy legs.
During the day, he can be found in the entomology department of the American Museum of Natural History.
Sorkin, a senior scientific assistant, has agreed to identify the insects that have been calling my home home since we asked Fred, the building pest control operator, to stop spraying.
"God bless you," Fred used to say at the door, as if we might be seeing each other for the last time.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
A HAND FOR THE HUNGRY
Helping Hands for the Homeless and Hungry, a Rye-based nonprofit organization, will benefit from the Winter in Rye Antiques Show, today from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. at the Rye Middle School on Route 1.
Sixty-five dealers will participate, and the admission of $4.50 will be reduced to $4 for anyone taking a can or box of food.


Tougher Adversaries Might Face the Union
Like a parent raising the specter of a bogeyman to a disobedient child, the owners have threatened the players with Jerry Reinsdorf and Robert Ballow.
If ya don't like what we've offered ya, they told the players, wait till ya see what ya get with Jerry and Ballow.


To Cut City Payroll, 4th Severance Plan Is Offered to Workers
With its efforts to reduce the size of New York City's payroll lagging behind schedule, the Giuliani administration announced yesterday that it had reached an agreement with the municipal unions to offer another round of severance packages to trim 2,000 to 2,500 more jobs.
The latest severance program is the fourth offered by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani over the last year as part of his effort to wrench down the size of the city's work force without resorting to widespread layoffs.
The previous three rounds of severance have succeeded in enticing about 12,000 of the city's 216,000 workers of a year ago to leave their jobs.


Early Tableware In Williamsburg
The tableware of early Americans is the focus of two exhibitions at the DeWitt Wallace Decorative Arts Gallery in Williamsburg, Va.
"British Delft From Colonial Williamsburg" examines the use and decorative motifs of the most common type of ceramic in the British colonies during the first half of the 18th century.


Relentless March of Industrial Decay
ENTROPY is usually defined as the measure of disorder in a system or substance that increases as available energy diminishes.
It may take a physicist to grasp the full significance of this, the second law of thermodynamics.
But there is no missing its most visible symptom -- the decay that overtakes all things, with the possible exception of the plastic harnesses on six-packs.
A show that addresses entropy is barely conceivable, yet at Rider University here, James Dickinson, an associate professor in the department of sociology, has staged just such a show at the gallery in the Student Center.


THE COUNTER COUNTERCULTURE
Plus ca change.
The 1990's counter counterculture appears to be as dogmatic and ideological as its 1960's counterculture brethren.


Deaf Team Carries On, to a 0-14 Record
THERE have been good seasons and bad.
But for 25 years there has always been a season for the boys' varsity basketball team at the Mill Neck Manor School for Deaf Children.
"It's such a tradition here," the principal, Dennis Tobin, said.
"If just one kid benefits from it we'll keep the team going."


Aboard a Sinking Ship, Pressure on Nets Grows
The general manager and the coach huddled in a small room adjacent to the Nets' clubhouse Friday night, deciphering, as they often do, the elements of losing basketball.
What went right.
What went wrong.
And what can be done to alter the course of a derailed team.
The lowly Philadelphia 76ers had caused this latest meeting of minds by becoming the ninth lottery team from last season to beat the Nets this campaign.
Their 102-98 loss at Byrne Meadowlands Arena Friday elicited boos at the final buzzer.


Plain, Simple and Enjoyable Indeed
THE Emerald City Cafe (named for the focal point in "The Wizard of Oz") has the same ownership as the movie theater next door and makes combining a light supper and a film an enjoyable matter.
Unlike its movie counterpart, there is nothing glitzy or phony about the cafe.
Green plasticized banquettes, wooden tabletops, a leaf-pattern industrial-type carpet, spotlights in the ceiling, all suggest low budget, low maintenance, and low prices to match.
What sets Emerald City apart is its short menu, which is partly Middle Eastern, partly nondoctrinaire vegetarian.


Correction
Pictures on Feb. 12 with an article about an innovative barber in Jamaica, Queens, credited the photographer, Alistair Morrison, incompletely.
He is with the Sygma agency.


The Executive Life; Setting Aside the Time For Intellectual Growth
THE eight most senior executives of the First American Corporation, a bank holding company based here, sit in a circle engaged in earnest discussion.
Sometimes a voice is raised to emphasize a point, but the discussion generally continues in easy Southern tones during the two-hour gabfest and the three-hour dinner that follows.
Unlike the many other occasions when these executives gather formally or informally, however, this meeting is not about their business.
Instead, it is a book club, where they analyze a variety of works that may help them do a better job but also go much farther.
Indeed, the books are selected with the objective of stimulating intensive thought and conceptual awareness among the participants, all of whom are also executives of the corporation's subsidiary, the First American National Bank, a $7.3 billion bank with 142 branches in Tennessee and Kentucky.


THE NATION: A Leg Up; My Equal Opportunity, Your Free Lunch
TORMENTED by their white classmates, Hispanic students at a leading law school needed reassurance.
They were being told that they didn't deserve to be there because they had scored lower than whites on the Law School Admission Test.
And they wanted this smear refuted.
"I tried to be very candid with them," the law school's dean later recalled.
It was true, he told them: their scores on the L.S.A.T., the standard benchmark for admission, were somewhat lower.
But if they worked extremely hard, he said, they could make up for "differences in past credentials."


Poly Prep Buys Woodward Park
For years, the board of Polytechnic Preparatory Country Day School thought a key to greater success would be lower grades -- adding kindergarten through fourth to the school, which offers fifth through twelfth grades at its campus in Dyker Heights.
But board members also feared that few parents of young children in the lower grades would be willing to allow them to be bused to the far southwest corner of Brooklyn.


Feb. 26-March 4; Opening in Moscow: Trophy Art II
Given the nationalist politics of today's Russia, every gesture, even in the world of fine art, must have a chauvinist sting in the tail.
With enormous defensiveness last week, Moscow's Pushkin Museum of Fine Arts unveiled another cache of 63 fine paintings and drawings seized as trophies by Soviet troops in Nazi Germany and kept secret ever since.
The exhibit, open to the public until July 16, is not only dedicated to the 50th anniversary of "the Great Victory" over Germany (lest Bonn forget), it is entitled "Twice Saved": first by selfless Soviet soldiers from the chaos of war, then by Soviet and Russian art restorers.


Lorella Jones, 51, University Physicist
Dr.
Lorella Margaret Jones, a science educator and physicist known for her work in theoretical high-energy physics, died on Feb. 9 in a nursing home in Champaign, Ill.
She was 51 and lived in Urbana, Ill.
The cause was cancer, said colleagues at the physics department at the University of Illinois, where Dr.
Jones was active as a professor of physics until a month ago.


More Human, Less Superman
He's fast becoming the Gilbert Grape of his sport: What's eating Pete Sampras, and why can't he seem to win a tennis tournament anymore?
Just a year ago, Sampras didn't just appear invincible, he actually was.
With the exception of an off night in Philadelphia last February, he won every tournament he entered last winter.
His challengers started referring to him, with good reason, as superhuman.
Playing Sampras scared them.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: The Sophisticated Traveler  Magazine Part 2 Pleasures of the Pacific Rim:
Hikes in Maui's extinct volcano.
Serenity in a Kyoto ryokan.
Perfect sushi in Los Angeles.
The North Island of New Zealand.
Indonesia's exotic Spice Islands.


'Terrible Honesty'
To the Editor:
I have not had the pleasure of reading Ann Douglas's "Terrible Honesty: Mongrel Manhattan in the 1920s," but Arnold Rampersad's review (Feb. 12) is breathtaking in its historical assumptions.


50 Years Later, Remembering the End of a War
The concluding events of World War II are being commemorated in rapid succession this year, the 50th anniversary of Allied victories in Europe (V-E Day, May 8) and the Pacific (V-J Day, Aug. 15).
An observance in Remagen, Germany, on Tuesday will mark the crossing of the Rhine by Allied troops on March 7, 1945.


Sports of The Times; Heading From Minors To Oblivion in a Hurry
SOMEWHERE in Florida, or in Arizona, another Buck Showalter is ruining his future career.
Another Jim Leyland.
Another minor league grunt who deep inside has what it takes to run somebody's major league team with actual major league players.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
OFF STAGE  By Betty Comden. Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.


DENVER
WITH THE ROCKY Mountains so tantalizingly close, some visitors to Colorado tend to blow past Denver, thinking it too urban.
But within a southeast Denver neighborhood, a bastion of handsome brick bungalows and trendy shops, lie 154 acres of trees and gardens and water: Washington Park.
Ancient cottonwoods and scarlet oaks, rising from a carpet of Kentucky bluegrass, give the park a stately atmosphere.
In the spring, gardens bloom with crocuses and tulips.
There are two big ponds, Grasmere Lake and Smith Lake, and, from a tree-ringed meadow, you can gaze up at the mountains to the west.


Will the Shore Landscaping Be Occasional or the Rule?
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 19 "Manhattan Up Close" on the Hudson River Park Conservancy misses the point.
The Hudson River Park Conservancy is not really a "conservancy" but a subsidiary of a state authority, the Urban Development Corporation, which is not known for building parks.
The problem is whether the West Side will be a series of commercial strips with occasional landscaping, like the conservancy-approved Chelsea Piers project, or a landscaped shoreline with unobstructed views of the Hudson River.


IN SHORT: FICTION
THE SORROW OF WAR  A Novel of North Vietnam. By Bao Ninh. Pantheon, $21.


Out of Africa


BACKTALK: Skiing and Safety: There's More to the Story; On Knee Injuries
To the Sports Editor:
John Underwood makes several astute observations about the risk of serious knee injury in Alpine skiing and the cost, both monetary and personal, to the thousands of skiers that sustain this injury each year.
But, we believe, his broad-brush approach to the overall risks in skiing and the factual basis for the solutions he proposes misinform the reader.
Since we have been quoted by Underwood in a manner intended to lend credibility to his arguments, we feel a responsibility to clarify several points.


INSIDE
Russia's TV Revolution
The slaying of a prominent journalist shows how Russia's once-tightly controlled television stations are attracting graft and crime as well as creating lucrative markets.
Page 6.
Former Mexican Official Held
An official who was investigating his brother's political assassination was arrested in Newark as he boarded a flight for Madrid.
Page 10.
Power of One Little Word
The addition of a word here or a phrase there in product liability legislation can make all the difference for certain industries.
Page 16.
Baseball Talks Press On
Following concessions by the players on Friday, negotiations to end the baseball strike moved haltingly ahead.
SportsSunday, Section 8.


Stop the Secrecy Of Health-Care Insurers
"Physicians Are Joining Group Care"  [ Feb. 12 ]  was a good start toward educating the public about structures of H.M.O.'s and other managed-care systems, but there is much more that consumers need to know.
For example, in capitated systems primary-care physicians lose money when they refer patients to specialists for consultation, and patients must get approval from their primary provider in order to be covered.
This can create adversarial feelings between doctors and their patients who request to see a specialist.


Minor Players, Major Penalties; The Rockefeller Drug Laws Took Prisoners -- for 15-to-Life
Rasheed Javeri had been living in the United States for six years, doing well in the jewelry business and enjoying life in the relatively fast lane -- skiing the mountains of Utah, going to lots of parties -- when an acquaintance offered him a chance to pick up an extra few thousand dollars.
All he had to do was get a few ounces of heroin for a man halfway across the country.
But the transaction went sour and Mr.
Javeri landed in jail.
That was 11 years ago.


Uncle Bob
"COFFEE, COFFEE, COFFEE," SENATOR BOB DOLE says, peering into a muddy cup of instant espresso.
"One more sip of that good stuff. Ahhh. That's good." It's 6:20 A.M. on the opening day of the 104th Congress, and the soon-to-be Senate majority leader is relaxing in the Capitol Building's television anteroom, cracking jokes and gulping the foul brew from gold-rimmed china cups.
Up close, he looks tired.
There are bluish shadows under his eyes, and his striped silk necktie is slightly askew.
But as he barnstorms through the morning news programs, explaining in his rumbling bass voice his plans for the new Congress, Dole is on a roll.
In less than six hours, he will be transformed from minority leader to majority leader, from the Senate's critic to its commander; already the tightly coiled, slightly menacing figure of years past seems a changed man: jaunty, self-possessed, aglow with power.
"Hope you sleep better this year," he tells the crew of the "Today" show, fixing his tie with a few energetic tugs.
"Ought to, with Republicans in charge." Not even the news of Kathleen Gingrich's indiscreet disclosure to Connie Chung fazes him.
"Too bad about the Connie Chung thing," he muses in the elevator.
"That's going to be the big news today." He knits his eyebrows.
"Agghh, my mother would have said, 'Off the record.' "


BACKTALK: Skiing and Safety: There's More to the Story; Rating Danger
To the Sports Editor:
John Underwood asks the reader to compare skiing "mentally with any other sport or recreation." Had he followed his own advice, he might have presented a more balanced, accurate article.


Are the Hungry Few Their Own Problem?
In "More Elderly Waiting to Join Food Programs"  [ Feb. 12 ]  you reported a 20 percent increase in the number of elderly in Suffolk County who sought food stamps in 1994.
This news came only days after your newspaper quoted local Representative Michael Forbes' saying: "We don't have actual poverty. We have behavioral poverty. Very few people out there go hungry."
Of course Mr.
Forbes's comments are ludicrous.
Even conservative estimates show a rise in poverty, hungry, and homelessness.
Yet his rhetoric is a key element in the Republican Party's ideological campaign to mobilize the public's hostility and paranoia against poor people.


After Signs Of Hope, Talks Move Backward
Negotiators in baseball's labor dispute should have quit while they were ahead.
That would have been at noon today when they recessed a one-hour meeting because neither side wanted to be the first to take the next step in the talks.
Six hours later, when each side had taken a next step, the players and owners were so far apart that the owners' lead negotiator said that at the rate they were moving "some of us could have Arizona residences by the time it's over."


Mayor's Meet Is Run Again
The Mayor's Trophy meet, through the 1950's, 60's and 70's one of the top indoor track and field events for New York City high schools, was reinstated after an 18-year hiatus yesterday at the West 168th Street armory in Upper Manhattan.


Feb. 26 - March 4: Bittersweet Finale; The Marines Leave The Shores Of Somalia
It was a rapid retreat without the usual ceremonial flag-lowering last week, when American Marines loaded up the last of the United Nations peacekeepers -- a Pakistani unit -- and left Somalia.
What began as a mission of mercy 26 months ago reached its bittersweet end, having collapsed under a combination of idealistic assumptions, an ill-conceived expansion of the mission and fatal confusions over troop command.


Starks Fits The Role Of Hotshot For Knicks
When John Starks broke out of his shooting slump, the Knicks broke open tonight's game.
Led by Starks's 7-for-13 shooting from 3-point range, the Knicks pulled away in the fourth quarter and cruised to an 89-76 victory over the Cleveland Cavaliers tonight at Gund Arena.


Formidable Fare, in a Stunning Setting
PANAMA HATTIES was an exciting surprise in 1992.
In 1995 it is awesome.
The surprise was finding sit-up-and-take-notice food in an ordinary-looking restaurant.
Now, Panama Hatties has had an eye-opening makeover, and the ambiance is an appropriate backdrop for the food.
Formerly, diners first saw a large bar, brass railings and booths.
Those booths have been replaced by upholstered banquettes, the railings are gone, and the size of the bar has been reduced.
The space saved is now a snug dining area with large wood-framed mirrors, sponge-painted walls and subdued fabric swags.


Corrections
An architectural rendering published last Sunday, showing a Frank Lloyd Wright design being adapted for a convention center in Madison, Wis., carried an incorrect credit.
The rendering was painted in 1994 by Jim Anderson for the city of Madison and Taliesin Architects.


In Russia's Fast-Developing Television, New Forces for Political Pluralism
The gangland-style murder this week of a prominent television journalist and executive, Vladislav Listyev, is a tragic but important sign of the rapid development of Russian television.
Big new money and markets have attracted graft and crime, but they are also creating a pluralism that undermines the strict control of the state.
In the last two years, the once-firm grip over television broadcasts by the central Government has been significantly weakened by the creation of privately owned and relatively independent networks like NTV, or Independent Television, and TV6 Moscow.


Cup Masters Match Up Again, but the Blend Is Different
The competitive edge has no rounded corners for Dennis Conner.
Take wine.
He bought a stake in a French vineyard at the request of a friend looking for an investor.
A sailor first, and an America's Cup veteran above all else, the 52-year-old Conner added labels to the bottles imprinted with the name of his boat, Stars &amp; Stripes.
But then, what happens if he invites Bill Koch over to dinner?
Koch, a wine connoisseur, serves a personal-label Grand Cru.
The Stars &amp; Stripes bottles are one notch down from that in quality.
Not to worry, said Conner, who spoke of his solution in a recent interview here: a Stars &amp; Stripes label for a few Grand Cru bottles bought from a nearby vineyard.


Hungary's Liberals
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 27 Budapest Journal on Mayor Gabor Demszky uses the term liberal as if it meant the same thing in Hungary as in the United States.
This is not the case.


President Yeltsin, in Perspective
When the Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev found Communist Party member Boris Yeltsin too mercurial for his taste, he bounced him from the ruling Politburo.
Though some in Washington seem to wish otherwise, President Clinton does not have that kind of option available as he tries to keep relations with President Boris Yeltsin of Russia on an even track.
But there is more the Clinton Administration can and should do to talk bluntly with Mr.
Yeltsin about misguided policies that are turning Russia away from reform.
Mr.
Yeltsin has not looked so attractive lately.
His brutish offensive in Chechnya is a political and military disaster.
He has cut loose reformist advisers and embraced a clique of military and internal-security aides pushing repressive policies at home and a Soviet-style agenda abroad.
His health is deteriorating or his drinking increasing.


In Forbidden Territory
To the Editor:
The article "An Enigma of 'Quiz Show': No Crowds"  [ Feb. 12 ]  tries to unravel the mystery of why a movie lauded by critics would do so poorly at the box office.
In the article, the film's director, Robert Redford, speculates that "the loss of innocence" depicted in it is something "too painful" for most Americans to admit.


Data Bank/March 3, 1995


Indian Leader Faces a Test At the Polls
Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao and his governing Congress Party, shaken by political defeats in southern India and a revolt within the party, are facing another important test as more than 130 million Indians vote in legislative elections in six states.
Two states, Maharashtra and Gujarat in western India, are traditional strongholds of the governing party.
But some analysts are forecasting a further setback for Mr.
Rao, whose party suffered defeats in January in Andhra Pradesh, his native state in southern India, and in the neighboring state of Karnataka.


How Cab Driver Reacted After Visitor Lost Purse
To the Editor:
On a visit to New York City last month I left my purse, containing my entire life (keys, credit cards, cash), in the back of a cab.
Less than three hours later, my office in Seattle called me.
Mohammed Jamil Hussain, the driver, had discovered the purse while cleaning out his cab.
He had gone through the contents of my purse (for which he later apologized!) and called the only local number in my address book -- and that person had contacted my son who contacted my office.


Bruce Nauman
ATTEMPTS TO SUM UP THE work of Bruce Nauman don't work.
Most artists of the late 20th century have "signature styles," repeating formal devices that make their art instantly recognizable.
The guy who does paintings of comic strips.
The guy who puts cinder blocks on the floor.
Nauman is the guy who makes you feel incredibly upset and existentially nervous, but he can accomplish that end with a neon sign, animal casts, a video of himself, a shadow puppet, a chair hanging from the ceiling, or a constructed triangular room lighted in a hideous shade of yellow.
You can recognize a Nauman by the way it makes you want to go home.
"They're night thoughts, the things that keep you awake and panicked at 3 A.M. with the gritty clarity of the irresolvable," says Robert Storr, a curator in the department of painting and sculpture at the Museum of Modern Art, where a retrospective of Nauman's work opens today (to remain on view through May 23).
It is Nauman's first American retrospective in 20 years, covering nearly 30 years' worth of art.
In Nauman's own words, his work is "like getting hit in the face with a baseball bat. Or better, like getting hit in the back of the neck. You never see it coming; it just knocks you down." Looking at a Nauman retrospective is like walking through someone else's psychoanalysis: it's full of patterns and recurring wishes, anxieties and obsessions; it's sometimes rather comical and often quite hostile; it keeps turning out to be about something other than what's apparently being said.
Like someone else's psychoanalysis, Nauman's work is often boring and repetitive.
Some of it doesn't make much sense and some of it is so highly personal as to exclude the viewer.
It constantly circles its most unresolved issues.
"When I was at art school," he explains, "everyone else would make art and find the best parts and then try to cover up everything else so that was all you saw. I would always become fascinated by the part that didn't appear to be working and I'd keep working on that part until it took over and became the whole piece of art."
Nauman's reach is enormous: "He may be the most influential American artist around," Michael Kimmelman wrote in this newspaper last year.
Matthew Barney, Kiki Smith, Jenny Holzer, Mike Kelley, Robert Gober, Tony Oursler: none of these catch-names in contemporary art could have arrived without Nauman, but their reinterpretations do not diminish the original.
"He was a powerful example for the rest of us, and introduced a possibility into consciousness that has entered the general domain," says Smith.
"His chairs hanging in triangles made me crazy -- there was so much strange resonance in them, I couldn't understand how they were made. His 'corridor' pieces, when I first saw them, stretched my vision of what constituted art." While the minimalists and others of Nauman's generation have tended to repeat themselves, he has pressed on relentlessly into his own future, his art never indulging itself in its own success.
I had seen Nauman's work for years and had never wanted to meet him.
I had thought he was probably sadistic and controlling and brilliant and unforgiving and  cold.
When I once asked someone what Bruce Nauman was like, he said, "Oh, he's a cowboy," and I took this as metaphor, imagining Nauman as gruff and outside civilized rules.
But it wasn't a metaphor.
Bruce Nauman lives on a 600-acre ranch near Galisteo, N.M., and he raises and breaks horses and uses them to herd cattle.
His manners are impeccable and he is gentle and serious and kind, a bit shy, very decent.
When I had first telephoned, the textual part of his work was playing in my mind, so I half-expected him to say, "PEOPLE DIE OF EXPOSURE" or "I CAN SUCK YOU DRY" or "SPIT AND DIE/SPIT AND LIVE." But in fact he gave me rather straightforward directions and suggested a restaurant in Santa Fe where we could have dinner.
Nauman can explain his work quite lucidly, but he comes much more to life for cowboy talk, especially about Ray Hunt, the trainer who taught him to break horses.
"Ray makes you let go of your ego," Nauman says, explaining what it's like to watch a real master.
He claims that he is just an amateur, that a real master like Hunt does in five minutes what takes Nauman years of experimentation.
I had seen the Nauman retrospective a week earlier at the Hirshhorn Museum in Washington.
Matisse once said he intended his paintings to give pleasure to tired businessmen, and Nauman's work does just the opposite -- it gives acute anxiety and discomfort to those relaxed art lovers who enter museums especially to see it.
Even if you understand nothing else about Nauman, the sheer intensity of his work penetrates your defenses.
He's feeling something and he's feeling it very strongly and you'd just better watch out.
Nauman explains that he is not interested in the gradual, repetitive process of much modern art: "I try to go immediately to the last step. The variations get worked through in a single work."
It is critically dubious but pragmatically convenient to group Nauman's work by media.
Some early casts are quite humorous: the wax mouth and a bit of neck and arm and hand called "From Hand to Mouth" and which literalizes the cliche, and the solid concrete block called "A Cast of the Space Under My Chair." There are many videos: My favorite is "Art Make-Up," in which Nauman slowly covers himself with white, then pink, then green, then black makeup, until by the end he looks like a negative image.
The earliest neon is "The True Artist Helps the World by Revealing Mystic Truths," from 1967 -- half ironic, half authentic, made to go in the window of Nauman's storefront studio in San Francisco, where a neon beer sign had previously hung.
Later, Nauman would do the famous "One Hundred Live and Die" -- "LIVE AND DIE/LIVE AND LIVE/DIE AND DIE/DIE AND LIVE -- the hundred sentences flashing on and off like a depraved marquee.
Other pieces are mostly aural.
In one small empty white room, a paranoiac voice crescendos, "Get out of my mind, get out of this room, get out of my mind, get out of this room" (if you stand in the middle of the room, the voice seems to come from inside your head).
Nauman once designed a series of underground tunnels that were never intended to be built, but for which he did make enormous gangly models.
There is also a series of "corridor pieces." In the one included in this retrospective, from 1970, you walk down a very narrow and oppressive hallway; video monitors show you what is going on in another piece of the installation, and you know that you are being observed by surveillance cameras, but it's hard to figure out where people are seeing you or where the people are whom you're seeing.
The experience induces severe panic.
Nauman's mobiles are about torture: the hanging steel constructions, welded triangles with empty chairs hanging inside, were inspired by the politics of South America, and the pathos of the chair, the rigidity of the steel, how it isolates and imprisons -- it'll scare you to death.
More recent mobilelike work includes "Carousel," in which casts of taxidermists' models hang like butchers' carcasses from a revolving frame, scraping the ground.
The later video installations are alarmingly complicated.
In "Clown Torture," videotapes are projected on the walls and playing on monitors, some of which are sideways or upside down.
There are five different tapes, among them a clown trying to defecate in a public lavatory, a clown endlessly repeating a cyclical joke and a clown shrieking, "No, no, no, no!" to an invisible torturer; all the clowns are at once terrified and terrifying.
In "Learned Helplessness in Rats (Rock and Roll Drummer)" -- the title comes from a Scientific American article -- a yellow Plexiglas maze sits in the middle of the room; the video alternates between scenes of rats struggling through the maze and footage of a drummer playing loudly and furiously and badly.
In the video "Shadow Puppets and Instructed Mime," an androgynous-looking mime struggles to follow harsh and humiliating instructions from an invisible commander.
In the more recent installations, video monitors sit on packing boxes, as though this maze of impossible technology had just been set up, on the spot.
The noise at the Nauman retrospective is horrendous.
You have the buzzing of neon tubes; the spoken part of video pieces; grating voices saying: "I am a good boy. You are a good boy. We are good boys" or "Get out of this room"; the rock drummer, the horrible shrieking grating sound of the metal animals of the carousel dragging along the floor (it's far worse than squeaking chalk on a blackboard).
There's a video piece in which Nauman plays tunelessly a violin tuned to the notes D, E, A and D. Lights are flashing on and off all over the place.
It's a fun house pushed way past fun.
"I don't like it here," a little girl was wailing to her mother when I went through, and when she started crying, you hardly noticed an increase in the noisy disagreeable emotion in the room.
If you haven't encountered the work, it's hard to extrapolate from what's described here the extent of the queasiness it engenders.
"Nauman's dread seems to float, suspended, above any particular anxiety," Adam Gopnik wrote in The New Yorker.
Peter Schjeldahl, Nauman's longest-term champion, has written in Art in America, "In this art there is abundant communication but no communion. . . . The question of 'liking' Nauman or not seems impertinent. Confronted with his work, the rational mind is extraordinarily clarified, and emotional responsiveness, stricken, falls in a hole." At the Hirshhorn exhibition, I felt like I was being split open by the relentless, repetitive drive of a jackhammer.
But the work is not entirely negative, either in its content or its impact.
As Nauman points out: "I wouldn't work if I were a pessimist.  You don't work if you don't have hope." N AUMAN WAS BORN IN Fort Wayne, Ind., in 1941, but his father's work as an engineer for General Electric meant that the family moved regularly.
Nauman went to the University of Wisconsin, where he began by studying science and mathematics.
After he changed his major to art, he headed off to the University of California at Davis where he studied with Robert Arneson and William T. Wiley.
Classmates from Davis recall that Nauman's artistic intensity was striking even then; a young Nicholas Wilder, already an influential Los Angeles dealer, came by the school one hot day in 1966, took one look at Nauman's work, and said, "I really need a Dr Pepper." Between sips, he offered Nauman a show.
For a while, Nauman was in the funk circle of art -- a world of ironic, playful West Coast artists.
In 1968, he was taken on by the dealer Konrad Fischer, who elevated Nauman to the upper echelon of contemporary art (Fischer still represents Nauman in Europe).
That same year, he began his long relationship to Leo Castelli, and in 1972 had a retrospective at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, which traveled to, among other places, the Whitney in New York.
Still, Nauman has always enjoyed greater popularity abroad than at home; in Europe, he is almost as well-known as Warhol, and Jan Hoet asked him to be the centerpiece of the last Documenta, an honor that he politely declined. (He also declined, also politely, to participate in this year's Whitney Biennial, which opens next month.)
Nauman has never lived in New York.
Since 1979, he has been in New Mexico, self-consciously distant from an art world whose complex social dynamics do not suit his severe view of himself.
He has none of the performative, worldly, self-promoting charm of an Eric Fischl or Jeff Koons.
Time alone in his studio is what he wants and gets.
His work is sold to museums, or to such big collectors of conceptual work as Ydeffa Hendeles, Susan and Lewis Manilow and Count Giuseppe Panza di Biumo.
He manages to tell you a great deal without giving up his air of privacy ("Self-exposure does not make good art," he remarks).
His strongest influences are Man Ray, Ludwig Wittgenstein, Alain Robbe-Grillet and Samuel Beckett.
"You have to mistrust your own skills," Nauman says, "and avoid whatever is too easy." Much has been made by critics of the visible casting marks on his animal sculptures and the indifferent picture quality of his videos (Nauman is an excellent draftsman and does beautiful, detailed drawings; it's a shame that none of these are in the exhibition).
"As soon as the idea or meaning is clear, you can stop," he says.
The rough finishes are economy, not slovenliness.
N AUMAN'S STUDIO, AN enormous shed that lies between the house and the animal pens, is very, very cluttered.
There are old pieces of furniture, chunks of steel, some casts of animals, a lot of books, a cup half-full of tea, some scraps of paper with sketches on them.
There's a typescript tacked to the wall, which Nauman says is for his next installation.
The title is "World Peace." It begins: "I'll talk to you/You'll listen to me/ You'll talk to me/I'll listen to you/ I'll talk to them/They'll listen to me," and goes on through countless variations.
"It sounds so convivial," I say, and Nauman explains that he will have two actors working on it.
If each actor reads two lines, then it's a friendly dialogue.
If each actor reads one line, then it's a hostile confrontation.
Nauman hasn't decided yet quite how he'll do it; he's got the actors coming tomorrow.
"World Peace" may end up being an ironic title, or it may end up being entirely in earnest.
Or -- more likely -- both.
Nauman is now married to the figurative painter Susan Rothenberg, whom he met at a dinner party in New York in 1988.
After two years of commuting, she gave up the New York scene, which she had never particularly relished, and moved out to Nauman's ranch.
Nauman does everything but paint, and she does virtually nothing but paint, so they suit each other perfectly.
If you're interviewing him, she keeps her distance from the professional conversation, although she occasionally wanders in to say something smart and funny or to show you the arrowheads she found when she was out walking the dogs.
They seem very much in love with each other in a quiet way.
There is nothing self-conscious in their house; the only art on the walls was made by a neighbor friend, and shows the local landscape with an endearing lack of formal skill.
There are a lot of dogs and a cat in addition to the horses and cows and the two Tibetan yaks Rothenberg bought last year; the delineation between outside and inside is vague.
Rothenberg and Nauman make dinner together and it is really good, and when I mention the long drive back to my hotel, Rothenberg tells me just to stay over, and I do.
I am in the late stages of a particularly disgusting flu, and they are very nice about it.
Lots of tea, lots and lots of alcohol, lots of warm blankets on the bed.
If you have questions, they get answered.
If you don't have questions, silence is no problem.
We can talk about Wittgenstein or about the pueblo village that used to be on the ranch site or about what we're eating -- it's all fine.
Late at night, drinks in our hands, we watch videotapes of Ray Hunt, the master, breaking horses.
Rothenberg goes to bed, but Nauman and I watch on, exchanging occasional comments, and then he turns off the sound and narrates.
"See how he's doing that?" Nauman asks.
There's a master at MOMA this month -- maybe not yet Ray Hunt, but close.
He figures out which are his viewers' vulnerable spots, where they are frightened or anxious.
And then he goes and he vexes those spots.
It seems sadistic, how he won't leave them alone, how he won't give up on whatever it is that people want to shy away from.
He's not exactly brutal because he's not that direct, but he does keep poking you where you're weakest.
At the beginning, he's gentle, but if that doesn't work, he can be rougher.
Then he'll be gentle again for a minute.
It's all instinct.
"Understanding takes the power away from terrible things," says Nauman.
An early print reads, "PLEASE/PAY/ATTENTION/ PLEASE." Nauman is always paying attention and he demands that his audience pay attention all the time as well.
You can't get away with anything here.
My last morning in Galisteo, the weather is postcard-perfect.
Nauman saddles up a couple of horses and we head across the ranch.
I am on Janie, Rothenberg's favorite, whom Nauman broke a few years ago.
The horses have hackamores hung loosely around their heads so there are no real reins to pull on, and my leg pressure is slight, but Janie somehow knows exactly what I want and she does it.
By one set of standards it is abject; by another it is a divine sympathy or empathy.
That verb, after all, is "break." Nauman's work is unpleasant and mortifying and upsetting, but when you give in to it and let him be the one in charge, then you'll be able to do things in the world that you couldn't do before.
You'll be more useful, worth more, maybe better off, once he's broken you.


CRIME
You couldn't ask for a more picturesque demise -- on a quaint covered bridge in "the prettiest town in New England" -- than the one arranged for Reg Hopkins in Justin Scott's STONEDUST (Viking, $19.95).
Not that Reg was in any shape to appreciate his artistic death scene: according to a state trooper in Newbury, Conn., the upstanding young businessman died from a heroin "hotload."
The ambitious executives and grasping entrepreneurs in Reg's smart set would like to hush up the nasty business and just get on with their P.T.A. meetings and Jacuzzi orgies.
Only Benjamin Abbott 3d, a descendant of the Yankee ministers and horse traders who originally settled Newbury, tries to clear the reputation of his childhood friend.


Call It the Hammerstein
To the Editor:
Re "Revival of Old Theaters Energizes 42d Street" (letters, Feb. 25):


The $20 Million Candidates
Senator Phil Gramm spent the evening before officially announcing his Presidential candidacy doing what he does best: raising money.
At a $1,000-a-plate extravaganza at the Dallas Convention Center, the Texas Republican raised an astonishing $4.1 million -- breaking the record, he bragged, for a night of fund-raising by a Presidential candidate.
There is nothing new about Presidential campaigns requiring tons of money.
What is different in this cycle is the tightly compressed 1996 primary and caucus schedule, which puts a premium on early fund-raising to fuel campaigns and to scare off potential opponents.
For a political system already dominated by free-spending special interests, the increased emphasis on harvesting political money is not a healthy development.


Philistinism All Over Again
To the Editor:
In the storm of mostly self-serving responses to Arlene Croce's "non-review" of Bill T. Jones's "Still/ Here" some weeks ago in The New Yorker, nothing has equaled Joyce Carole Oates's preposterous account of Ms.
Croce's position  [ "Confronting Head On the Face of the Afflicted," Feb. 19 ] .
Ms.
Croce did not argue that art doesn't or shouldn't represent human suffering.
The caricature of Ms.
Croce as a heartless formalist -- Ms.
Oates's word is "conservative" -- proclaiming her indifference to the plight of the injured and oppressed is simply ludicrous.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Hoping for Another Hit With Love Potion No. 9
Mike Stoller and Jerry Leiber are legendary for any number of catchy rock and roll standards.
Now, they're trying to appeal to another of the body's senses.


A Marriott For Philadelphia
The 23-story Philadelphia Marriott, connected by skywalk to the two-and-a-half-year-old Pennsylvania Convention Center, opened in January in the heart of Center City.
Designed by Bower Lewis Thrower Architects and built at a cost of $200 million, it houses, in addition to 1,200 rooms, more than 85,000 square feet of meeting space, including a 38,000-square-foot exhibition hall, 27 conference rooms with audiovisual equipment, a 34,000-square-foot ballroom, three permanent board rooms and a business center offering secretarial services, faxing, photocopying and notary certification.
Recreational facilities include an indoor swimming pool and a two-lane lap pool, exercise rooms, a whirlpool and a sauna.
There are two restaurants and two bars; a sports bar serving food is scheduled to open in April.


Flowers And Democracy
The opening of the Flower Show on two piers, and an award for Vernon E. Jordan Jr., both March 1.


Once There Was Shag and a Family Called Brady
Roommates  Peter Falk, D. B. Sweeney, Julianne Moore, Ellen Burstyn Directed by Peter Yates PG 109 minutes


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 A ladder man on 14th Street keeps a wary eye on thieves.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 Beyond the pec machine: The high-end gym wars are taking some curious twists and turns.
LETTERS 5 MOVIE CLOCK 11 What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 12 Women's history month: Art shows in downtown Brooklyn, Red Hook and Flushing.
GOOD EATING 12 A tour of the Midtown East.
The enticing Chin Chin; the serene Ambassador Grill.
SOAPBOX 13 An encounter with a photographer on the subway.


New York's Public Hospitals Fail, and Babies Are the Victims
Each year for the last decade, dozens of newborn babies have died or been left to struggle with brain damage or other lifelong injuries because of mistakes made by inexperienced doctors and poorly supervised midwives and nurses in the teeming delivery rooms of New York City's public hospitals.
Some of the most prestigious medical schools and private hospitals are paid by the city to provide the care in its sprawling hospital system.
But an examination by The New York Times shows that many of these private institutions have left life-and-death decisions to overworked nurses and trainee doctors who are ill prepared to make them.


Consenting Adult


One More Death Defying Act
At the request of The New York Times, the producers of "Death Defying Acts" asked me to interview Woody Allen and David Mamet, and both artists have agreed to answer the written questions I submitted.
My plan is to ask intelligent, searching questions that will give a definite portrait of the artist as distinct from the man and, at the same time, show how each artist and each man is both distinct from and similar to the other artist and man.
But that has turned out to be too hard.
I am, instead, just going to ask what I want to know.
Elaine: If you were going to die very soon of something absolutely painless, would you want to be told?


Tax Rule On Office In a Home
IRVIN Feldman, an accountant in Queens, has been dispersing some bad news to clients these days.
With income-tax season moving into high gear, Mr.
Feldman has been telling those who usually take a home-office deduction on their tax returns that, for the vast majority of them, the deduction has been all but eliminated.


Correction
Because of an editing error, an article on Jan. 22 headed "Bustling Boca Raton" misidentified a university there.
A reader's letter dated Feb. 7, initially misdirected at The Times, points out that it is Florida Atlantic University, not Florida State.


The Dynamics of Board Room Politics
To the Editor:
Bleating about committee service by woman corporate directors ("Sexism on High: Corporate Boards," Viewpoints, Feb. 5) addresses only easy-to-research questions.
Having served as a director, I found the arcane etiquette of the board room far more decisive and important.
Who presents ideas?
Who listens?
Who is credited?
Who is brave enough to question or criticize?
I am one of three female directors of Amfac Inc.
The force of our knowledge, persuasion and pragmatic tough questioning earned us not only the respect of our male colleagues and corporate officers, but important committee appointments as well.
Our experience was indeed different.
Rather than accepting any structure, business or executive as endlessly correct, our career paths -- politics, university administration and corporate management -- taught endless skepticism, and, when to make important stands.
Finally, considering public affairs as a "soft" appointment flies in the face of many recent public image messes that have unseated once powerful C.E.O.'s.
MARION K. PINSDORF  Manhattan, Feb. 6  The writer is senior fellow in communications at the Fordham Graduate School of Business.


Sports of The Times; The Revenge Of the Tuna Continues
IN the beginning, Bill Parcells didn't want David Meggett.
When the Giants were awaiting the fifth round of the 1989 college draft, their scouts were touting the 5-foot-7-inch running back from Towson State as a kickoff-return and punt-return specialist.
Parcells, then the Giants' coach, kept shaking his head.
He already had a 5-7 running back, Joe Morris.
"How else can I use this kid?" Parcells asked.


FASHION


A Busy Old Landmark Gets a Breather
For 79 years it has been a confluence of ceremony, everyday politics and high drama.
Joe DiMaggio married Marilyn Monroe there in 1954.
Mayor George Moscone and Supervisor Harvey Milk were murdered in their offices there in 1978.
It has been the setting for countless protest demonstrations, any number of gala balls and, atop the grand staircase, an endless stream of weddings.


Doris Carson, Musical Actress, 83
Doris Carson, who sang and danced in a number of Broadway musicals, died on Feb. 20 at her home in Rancho Mirage, Calif.
She was 83.
Doris Carson Weisbard began her stage career at 17 when, as understudy for Ruby Keeler in the George and Ira Gershwin musical "Show Girl," she substituted for the star for two highly successful weeks.
Her performance led to roles in shows including "Strike Up the Band" (1930), "The Cat and the Fiddle" (1931) and "On Your Toes" (1936), in which she appeared opposite Ray Bolger.
She also performed in London, where she appeared on the West End in Cole Porter's "Nymph Errant," among other shows.


Color-Bland? Purple Newsstand to Go Taupe
When a newsstand at 72d Street and Amsterdam was painted purple last year, reactions ranged from amusement to horror.
"I mean, this is a historic landmark district," said Nancy Levine, a 72d Street resident who bought a paper there last week.
"A lavender newsstand looks like a joke."


THE COUNTER COUNTERCULTURE
Imagine the outcry if a non-Jew were quoted as asking, "What's the name of our Jew from the West Coast?" or as saying that "deep down I believe that a little anti-Semitism is good for the Jews." These Jewish mini-cons are obviously spending too much time hanging around Pat Buchanan and sucking up to the religious right.
Don't they realize that religious bigots on the radical right are using them?
They will never be allowed full membership in the club they are so anxious to join.
ALAN M. DERSHOWITZ Cambridge, Mass.


Has Junkiness Been Thrust Upon Them?
To the Editor:
"Junk Bonds: Maligned Breakthrough" (Viewpoints, Feb. 12) attempts to rewrite history and extol the virtues of high-yield securities sold by Drexel Burnham Lambert in the 1980's.
An accurate analysis would have stated the following facts:


A Slow Ride on the Meggett Merry-Go-Round
The joke going around the Giants late last week was that Bill Parcells was so desperate to get a former New York player he had agreed to terms with Y. A. Title.
Humor is sometimes a way to deal with frustration and the Giants are still somewhat rattled about losing running back David Meggett to the New England Patriots.
It was one of the biggest free-agent losses for the Giants in years and there is no question it will hurt.
What makes it even more painful for the team is that it came at the hands of Parcells, who already has the former Giants Bob Kratch and Myron Guyton.
It is no secret that Parcells likes to stick it to his old team whenever he can.


Playful, Even Goofy, but What Else? It's Disney
COMPLETED LAST NOVEMBER, more than half a century after Snow White bit the apple, the new Disney Feature Animation Building symbolizes a welcome return to the company's roots.
And the building's design, by Robert A. M. Stern in association with Morris Architects, is also a return, for it brings back the liberating spirit of play that prevailed in the early years of post-modernism, before the movement congealed into pompous historical poses.
Not that the new building isn't steeped in history.
Disney's sprawling global empire of fantasy and real estate was built on animation, and the modest buildings in which Snow White and Bambi were born still stand on the company's lot in Burbank, Calif..
But in the years after Disney's death in 1966, the company's commitment to animation had faltered.
By the time Disney's chairman, Michael Eisner, revived that commitment, with the success of "Beauty and the Beast" in 1991, working quarters for the company's shrunken animation department had been split into eight different off-lot locations.
The new building, which brings together most of the department's 1,400 animators beneath one roof, thus signifies a reunion as well as a revival.


Some Added Advice On Ceiling Leaks
To the Editor:
The Q. &amp; A. item on Nov. 27 titled "A Leak From the Unit Above" gives excellent legal advice on this water leak-habitability problem.
However, great caution should be excercised by any shareholder taking this course of action.


In Loss, Republicans Find Seeds of Victory
IN a sense, the Senate's rejection last week of a constitutional amendment requiring a balanced budget was a serious defeat for the insurgent Republicans who are controlling Congress for the first time in their lives.
The amendment was the heart of the Contract With America, the campaign platform of Republicans in the House of Representatives, and the measure sailed through the House in January with considerable Democratic support.


Waiter! There's An Actor in My Soup
A wacky waiter about to spill a wobbly stack of 20 ashtrays, a pompous chef, a bumbling cleaning lady -- all are part of the act in "Pomp Duck and Circumstance." Starting this fall, the dinner theater plans to bring its 380-seat tent to DeWitt Clinton Park for with six shows a week for nearly seven months.
The show has been a smash in Europe, playing to 485,000 people in four years across Germany, where it originated, and in Paris, Milan, Venice and Madrid.


WHAT THEY SAW AT THE HOLOCAUST MUSEUM
If young American schoolchildren can leave the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, accompanied by their teacher, and believe that the Jews died because "they don't recognize that Jesus Christ is the Messiah" or "because the Jews were ruling the country," then we have failed miserably as a nation to cultivate any moral vision.
A school trip, seemingly educational in intent, that enables children to return home with these bigoted notions means that the possibility still exists that such events can occur again.
DOROTHY URMAN DENBURG New York


History From Her Side
March is Women's History Month; with it come references and odes to Medusa, Joan of Arc, office workers and domestic goddesses, as well as exhibitions by local female artists.
Here is a sampler.
FLUSHING Spring Is Blooming Early In a Painted Garden


Dancers Ask The Computer: 'Are You Joking?'
THE RUMORS STARTED SOON after Merce Cunningham began to create choreography with a computer back in 1991.
Having had his eyes opened and his imagination unleashed by technology, it was said, Mr.
Cunningham was expecting his dancers to do all sorts of torturous, impossible things.
Well, maybe and maybe not.
Dancers had been heard laughing behind the closed doors of the pristine studio in the Westbeth artists' complex in lower Manhattan where Mr.
Cunningham develops and rehearses his dances.
And the pieces into which he had tucked computer-generated phrases did not look much more difficult than most of the other complex works by this master avant-gardist.
Still, the stories persisted.


Mozart and Mendelssohn, Plus Some American Standards
MOZART and Mendelssohn lead off the schedule today with five string players -- Ida Kavafian, Ida Levin, Toba Appel, Robert Rinehart and Warren Lash -- playing quintets by those composers.
The performance will close out the series of chamber music brunches at Zenny's Restaurant in Storrs.
The times are 11:30 A.M. (brunch) and 1:15 (music).
The number for reservations is 429-7510.
More Mozart and Mendelssohn will follow at 3 P.M. at the United Methodist Church, Woodbury.
Alex Nagy will lead the Litchfield Chamber Orchestra in Mendelssohn's String Symphony No. 6, and Helen Armstrong will be the soloist in Mozart's Violin Concerto No. 5 (263-4775).


Even With Sprained Ankle, Malone Runs Blazers Down
Jazz 98, Trail Blazers 81
No sprained ankle was going to slow Karl Malone, much less keep him out of a game.


NEW YORK
IF YOU DON'T HAVE A garden of your own, don't worry.
Just get into the habit of walking through a public place like the New York Botanical Garden, 250 acres in the Bronx, to follow spring from the first snowdrop (oh, wait, that bloomed in January) to the thundering masses of azaleas and dogwoods that herald in late May.
In early March, get a map at the main gate and then head toward the rock garden to wallow in a carpet of snowdrops, glory-of-the-snow, winter aconite and grape hyacinths that make up the million or so minor bulbs planted on the path leading to the rock garden.


N.Y.U. Beaten In a Rematch
Last year, Rowan was New York University's third victim in the Violets' Cinderella-like run to the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division III final.
Despite losing all five starters from that team, N.Y.U. (22-5) finished second this season in the University Athletic Association and defeated Hunter in a first-round game on Thursday.
But this year's run has come to an end.
Rowan (23-4) gained revenge, defeating N.Y.U., 74-58, in a second-round game here today.


Gay Writer Fasts In Jail, Seeking Talk With Pat Robertson
A former ghostwriter for Pat Robertson who is now a leader of the nation's largest gay and lesbian religious denomination has been fasting since mid-February in a jail in Virginia Beach, Va., where he was arrested at the headquarters of Mr.
Robertson's Christian Broadcasting Network and charged with trespassing.
The man, Mel White, has said through intermediaries that he will continue the fast until he has the chance to meet with Mr.
Robertson, something that Mr.
Robertson has ruled out.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
GHOSTS IN OUR BLOOD  With Malcolm X in Africa, England, and the Caribbean.
By Jan Carew.
Lawrence Hill, cloth, $24.95; paper, $14.95.


Sony's Interactive Novelist
AS the son of Olaf Sigurdsson, a renowned Icelandic novelist, Olaf Olafsson was headed toward a life in the arts and literature.
For a balance, Mr.
Olafsson took a scholarship in the United States to study physics, writing a book of short stories along the way.
When Mr.
Olafsson's mentor at Brandeis University heard that he was considering a career outside physics, he introduced Mr.
Olafsson to a physicist who had made the "mistake" of going into business.
He was Michael Schulhof, then chairman of strategic planning for the Sony Corporation of America, and now its president and chief executive.
But instead of convincing Mr.
Olafsson to stay in academics, Mr.
Schulhof offered him a job.
Mr.
Olafsson joined Sony in 1984.


Sinking Hope in a Balkan Bog
It is more than two months since former President Jimmy Carter secured a cease-fire in Bosnia and raised hopes that a silencing of the guns could lead to a political breakthrough.
Those hopes have now sunk in the Balkan bog, and the region is drifting toward a fiercer, and perhaps a wider, war.
The drift is furthered by Western diplomatic confusion, Croatia's impatience, Serbian intransigence and the Bosnian Government's methodical determination to take back territory by military means and avenge the atrocities suffered by Muslim civilians.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
94.10
96.95
105.51
per Dollar
German Mark
1.4244
1.4615
1.7186
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.4065
1.3903
1.3571
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.6303
1.5885
1.4901
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$376.50
$376.25
$377.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


In a Sussex County Park, a Mecca for Cross-Country Skiers
THE theory was that the High Point Cross Country Ski Center would open right after Thanksgiving when the waters of Lake Marcia at High Point State Park in Sussex County would be frozen.
But the mostly balmy weather confounded that plan, and so the only site in a New Jersey state park specifically geared for cross-country skiers didn't start up until Feb. 5.
Then the cold weather arrived with a vengeance, dropping 12 inches of snow.
The center's president, Hans Karlsen, who was prepared to make snow and spread it along the trails, had it easy.
All he had to do was see that the 10 miles of trails, the longest such cross-country run in the country, were properly groomed and wait for the crowds.


Chicago Symphony and Club Vie Over a Fabled Aerie for Artists
For nearly 90 years, little has changed inside the Cliff Dwellers Club, a nesting place for artists and art lovers that is perched atop Orchestra Hall here.
A forum for generations of Midwestern artists, authors, architects and musicians and a showcase for their talents, the club has a membership roll that once included Frank Lloyd Wright and Carl Sandburg, and now lists Saul Bellow, Studs Terkel and the film critic Roger Ebert.


Do You Know This Man?; Michael Johnson Proves Unbeatable in the 400 Meters
Michael Johnson today set a world indoor record of 44.63 seconds at 400 meters, although the world's most consistent and versatile sprinter went largely unseen in the host city for the 1996 Summer Olympics.
The local NBC affiliate -- the Olympic affiliate -- decided not to broadcast live the national indoor track and field championships.
Instead, the meet will be shown at 2:15 Monday morning, when people are either sleeping or watching infomercials for the pan flute.
"It's strange but not surprising," Johnson, ranked No. 1 in the world at 200 and 400 meters, said over breakfast on Friday.
"These are the things we're used to in this sport."


Hoff-Barthelson School Salutes 20th Century
FOR the sixth year, the Hoff-Barthelson School in Scarsdale is throwing open its doors for a 20th-century salute beginning next Friday at 8 P.M., Saturday at 4 P.M. and Sunday at 1:30 and 3:30 P.M.
"Celebration '95: the Music of Our Time" consists of four free concerts, each with faculty and student artists performing contemporary pieces, some written by composers working at the school.
No tickets are needed, but details on the programs can be obtained by calling 723-1169.
The 17-year old pianist Albert Kim plays Brahms, Rachmaninoff and Beethoven today at 3 P.M. at Wainwright House in Rye.
The number to call for more information is 967-6080.


Reno Rejects G.O.P. Request For Prosecutor
Attorney General Janet Reno has rejected a request by Republican lawmakers who wanted her to appoint an independent prosecutor to investigate whether a top White House aide lied to a Federal judge about the group that helped design the Administration's failed health care proposal.
In a letter on Friday to Representative Henry J. Hyde, the Illinois Republican who heads the House Judiciary Committee, Ms.
Reno said the Justice Department was capable of impartially conducting its own investigation of the aide, Ira C. Magaziner, who along with Hillary Rodham Clinton led the Administration's health care study group.


A Matter of Tone
To the Editor:
In her essay in The New Yorker, Arlene Croce did not give the impression that she objected to such images as, say, Piero della Francesca's "Flagellation of Christ" or Leon Golub's transfixing scenes of torture in his "Gigantomachy" series.
The implication of her argument is that the essence of a work of art is its expressive power, which is conveyed by its tone: some paintings whine, others sing without vibrato the universal human experience of suffering.
IRMA B. JAFFE  New York


Homart Plans to Build Yorktown Retail Area
HOMART Development Company is planning to build a 395,000-square-foot shopping center on about 100 acres along the Route 202 retail corridor in Yorktown.
Plans for the one-level, open-air retail center off of the Taconic State Parkway call for a 132,000-square-foot home-improvement store, a 65,000-square-foot supermarket, a 120,000-square-foot discount department store and space for smaller retail shops totaling 67,000 square feet, all of which will take about half the site.
The rest of the area will be set aside for conservation and to serve as a landscape buffer.


This Player Has Talent, And Height To Match It
KEITH CLOSS JR. tends to slouch when he is sitting down, so it is rather startling when he gets up to greet a visitor.
He seems to unravel upward until he reaches his full height and his head is somewhere in the vicinity of the ceiling of any normal room.
Young Mr.
Closs -- he is several weeks short of 19 years old -- is simply a very, very tall person at 7 feet 2 inches.
And his height is accentuated because while he may slouch in repose, he does no such thing once he stands.
He is almost an advertisement for good posture, head erect, back straight, covering ground around the campus at Central Connecticut State University in New Britain with giant strides in size 18 sneakers.


Flying With Kids
To the Editor: "Surviving Parenthood at 35,000 Feet" (Dec. 25), was a bit different in 1952.
In that summer I made trips from New York City to Minneapolis and back by plane, singlehanded, with my daughter, who was 2 years old, and my son, 14 months.
Back then flight attendants were called stewardesses and couldn't be married.
Children were not a part of their world.
I don't think many grandmothers flew on airplanes either, and if they did, they hid from me and mine.
And there were no reserved seats.


Making a Pot au Feu for a Party of Six
IT takes time to assemble the ingredients, simmer them, trim them properly and arrange them on the table.
But a simple boiled dinner -- called pot au feu in French and bollito misto in Italian -- is a heart-warming delight.
It is best made for a minimum of six people, to permit a variety of meats to go into the pot and flavor the soup.
For this reason, and because it is actually best prepared in advance and reheated, it is excellent dinner-party fare.
Refrigerating it overnight improves the texture of the meats and makes for easy removal of most of the fat.


Peter Brook Voyages To Inner Space
AFTER THE SUCCESS OF Peter Brook's nine-hour version of "The Mahabharata," the most massive project that has yet emerged from his International Center for Theater Research in Paris, everyone he met seemed to assume he would tackle another mythological epic.
"Give us your 'Beowulf,' " he remembers people saying, "Give us 'Mahabharata 2.' "
But Peter Brook wouldn't be Peter Brook if he repeated himself.
To keep moving, seeking, changing and growing remains a basic article of his faith as he approaches what will likely be a characteristically unfussy 70th birthday on March 21.
Mr.
Brook is probably the English-speaking world's most eminent director, with productions as pivotal as the Paul Scofield "King Lear" and books as influential as "The Empty Space" among his legacies.
But he is most apt to be found quietly chatting in a Left Bank bistro in Paris, where he lives, than going by limo to a champagne reception at the George V.


Commerce Inquiry Focuses on a Brash Motivator
Here's a tip to would-be entrepreneurs from Nolanda Hill, the central figure in the investigation into Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown's dealings: One way to find start-up money is to offer to clean your neighbors' garages -- and then hold a yard sale with what you drag out.
Associates say that kind of brashness and self-reliance, offered in a self-help videotape made two years ago, are typical of Ms.
Hill, whose career has included dozens of start-up companies, many failures and enough success to win several invitations to the Clinton White House.


Bridge Returns, Starting in the Schools
EVERY Sunday afternoon, Karen Allison greets her students and then gives them a 90-minute bridge lesson -- all with a click of a mouse.
Seated at a computer in the living room of her Jersey City brownstone, she reaches players around the state and the world, courtesy of Compuserve.
Ms.
Allison, a trader of equity options on the American Stock Exchange, has won national bridge championships, but she doesn't get paid for her lectures.
She says they are a way to give back to the game something of what it has done for her.


Debra Felberbaum and Glenn August
Debra Michelle Felberbaum, the owner of Flowers Forever Inc., a designer and retailer of dried floral arrangements in New York, was married last evening to Glenn Russell August, a managing director of Oak Hill Partners Inc., a New York investment advisory company.
Rabbi Joseph Ehrenkranz performed the ceremony at the Pierre in New York.
Mrs.
August, 28, graduated cum laude from Tufts University.
She is the daughter of Roger and Barbara Felberbaum of New York.
Her father is a partner and senior managing director of Furman Selz Inc., an investment banking and asset management company in New York.


Robert Kearns, 77, Missionary in Peru
The Rev.
Robert Emmett Kearns, a Roman Catholic priest whose missionary work in Peru over five decades included development of an educational radio network, died on Monday at the St.
Teresa's Residence at the Maryknoll Fathers and Brothers Residence in Ossining, N.Y.
He was 77 and had lived in Ossining since his return from Peru last year.
The cause was respiratory failure, said a nephew, Richard Kearns, of Mount Vernon, N.Y.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Tues.
Consumer credit, Jan., chg., $ bils.
7.4
8.5
Wed.
Nonfarm productivity, 4th qtr., pct. chg.
1.8
1.8
Thur.
Wholesale trade, Jan., pct. chg.
2.2
0.6
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
331
340
Fri.
Nonfarm payroll, Feb., chg., thous.
134
230
Unemployment rate, Feb., pct.
5.7
5.6
This Week's Developments
Tues.
Johnson Redbook report released
Fri.
*4*Alan Greenspan and Robert Rubin to testify to House Banking Committee


... AND AN OUTPOST ON RODEO DRIVE
There's something unimposing about Japanese restaurants.
This is true both of the thrifty hole-in-the-wall noodle shop and the ethereal establishment with impeccable flower arrangements, tatami-mat rooms and kimonoed waitresses.
They're reassuring places, perhaps chiefly because of proportions.
The intimate smallness of servings, plates, bowls, cups, chairs and rooms enhances a sensation that everything you're about to eat -- simple or elaborate, cheap or costly -- will unfold on a human scale.
There's reassurance, too, in the Japanese penchant for dining along counters, beside strangers.
Even in the poshest of sushi bars, you feel a certain elbow-rubbing companionability.
You're not all that far removed in spiit from some small-town American diner called Joe's or Flo's.


A Gastronomic Event
James Beard Foundation benefit at Le Cirque, Feb. 26.


ATLANTA
IN SOME PLACES, SPRING is just a season. In Atlanta, it's an event.
Indeed, just when you start thinking of Atlanta as yet another generic Sunbelt city, with shiny glass buildings, overcrowded freeways and endless sprawl, spring's extravaganza reminds you that the city lies in the fertile green remains of a Piedmont forest, and that it's really Southern after all.


Once There Was Shag and a Family Called Brady
The Brady Bunch Movie  Shelley Long, Gary Cole and special appearances by RuPaul, the Monkees and original cast members Directed by Betty Thomas PG-13 95 minutes


Countdown for Trips Along the Yangtze River
With the commencement of construction late last year on the mammoth Three Gorges Dam in Hubei Province, there are fewer than 1,000 days left to cast eyes on one of nature's truly spectacular riverscapes before it is submerged by a lake 400 miles long.
Travelers who are thinking about taking a river-boat trip down the Yangtze River to see the soaring cliffs and mist-shrouded peaks of central China would be well advised to make the journey before the winter of 1997-98.
By then, if all goes according to plan, construction crews, working round the clock at Yichang, will have breached China's mightiest river with a buffer dam, or earthen berm, bringing all traffic to a halt.


Planet Orlando
Think of it as a never-never land, where kids can dress up in the latest clothes and not answer to their mothers.


Whitaker Beats Vasquez for Junior Middleweight Title
Doing his maddening dance and then punctuating it with accurate punches that frustrated his opponent even more, Pernell Whitaker captured another world title tonight when he won a unanimous 12-round decision over Julio Cesar Vasquez for the World Boxing Association junior middleweight crown.
Whitaker, the Norfolk, Va., southpaw, essentially wanted this to add to his resume.
He will go back to fighting as the World Boxing Council welterweight champion.


Tough Choices: Letting Boots Lie Down
BOOTS went for a second opinion last week.
It was only eight months ago he was a homeless doughnut eater on Houston Street, apparently abandoned by his Queens owners after a career as a garage guard, and now he was standing in the waiting room of an Upper East Side veterinarian, being snubbed by some very chi-chi dogs.
The gleaming Nora, a gorgeous Bernese mountain dog, was straining like a groupie for a glimpse of Dr.
Gerald Johnson, while Charley, a jittery Jack Russell terrier, was urinating on the floor.
Poor old fat Boots, a borough dog with upstate burdocks in his dull black coat, was having enough trouble just trying to stand in a corner with Carol Chesler, who had found him, and Virginia Jensen, a Union Square Greenmarket merchant, who had brought him home to Burdette, N.Y.
Boots was wobbly because of the tumor on his chest under his left foreleg.


Live-In Help Is Living In Style
HILDA Botero's employers just bought her a one-bedroom apartment on the first floor of their posh Greenwich Village town house co-op.
Adele Woods's employers gave her a choice of an exquisite third-floor suite or the bedroom across the hall from their own bedrooms in a 12,000-square-foot mansion on Albemarle Road near Prospect Park in Brooklyn.


Youthful Sculpture, Mature Photographs
AN athlete becoming a champion in his teens is one thing, but a 34-year-old artist deemed to have reached the mid-career watershed is something else.
Yet this is the tag attached to Rigoberto Torres on the occasion of his show at the Lehman College Art Gallery here, one of two shows under review.
It is hard to discuss Mr.
Torres without mentioning his colleague, John Ahearn, for the men's lives became entwined the moment they met at the Bronx alternative space, Fashion Moda.
That was in 1979, when Mr.
Ahearn was already producing life casts of neighborhood residents and Mr.
Torres was still at work in his uncle's casting shop, making plaster saints.
But it was not long before the two became a neighborhood attraction, casting portraits of residents on the sidewalk.


What's All the Tohubohu?
To the Editor:
I find it deeply disturbing that Robert Phillips's essay about poetry readings (" 'Are Those Real Poems, or Did You Write Them Yourself?' Adventures on the Reading Circuit," Feb. 12) makes no attempt to acknowledge that the creation of a poem and the public presentation of a poem are entirely different affairs.
If we hold poets culpable for the eccentricities of their readings, then we have surely forgotten the poems themselves.
Moreover, if our main concerns with poetry rest on a cultivation of social etiquette and the comfort of the audience, then the vast richness of contemporary poetics will certainly be endangered.
SARAH CUNNINGHAM  Nashville


With Its Marines Safely Out, U.S. Reviews the Lessons of Somalia


PICKY, PICKY, PICKY
John Tierney's essay "Picky, Picky, Picky" (The Big City, Feb. 12) was droll and perceptive, but fell short of explaining why we develop the phenomenon that he calls the "Flaw-O-Matic." I believe it is because by rejecting someone quickly we avoid the possibility of being rejected ourselves.
JOSEPH BULGATZ New York


School Board Offers Help To Parents Starting Groups
To the Editor:
Your article on parent associations ("Building a P.T.A.: The Struggle in Corona," Feb. 19) failed to mention that the Board of Education provides facilities and some funding to parent associations.
Critical information can be found in the board's publication "PA's and the Schools," which includes guidelines for forming an association, conducting elections, raising funds and performing financial accounting.


Starting From Scratch. Or Rather, Seed.
EVEN though it still appears to be winter outside, the season should be early spring indoors.
Seed sowing time is here.
This annual rite provides rich rewards.
The awakening of seed has a miraculous side, as the plant embryos, tightly packaged in seed coats of all kinds, push up and grow.
Some end up as big as trees, while others turn out to be tiny tufts that hug the ground.
Many kinds of seed should be planted now, especially those that take a long time to germinate or need a long period of infancy before they are sturdy enough to plant outdoors.
A few of those that come to mind are slow starters, like petunias, snapdragons, peppers and eggplant.
Others, like tomatoes, can be started later in the month.


Driving a Cataract, And Other Tricks Of Sitcom Writing
ONE DISTINCTIVE characteristic of our species, other than the fact that we are the only creatures prone to accidentally tucking our shirts into our underpants, is that everyone has a different opinion as to what's funny, although, in general, it would be safe to say that no one finds anything amusing about a run-on sentence, particularly at the beginning of a newspaper article.
It should also be remembered that different approaches suit different media.
Thus, the witty Salinger allusion may be undeniably pithy in a review of John Irving's new novel, but in a sample script for "Empty Nest" a reference to Nell Carter's cellulite is certainly more appropriate.
And, with all due respect, such cellulite commentary might also lead to an annual income far surpassing that of most book critics.
A funny sample script (referred to as a "spec" script) is Hollywood's calling card, and it can lead to employment as a disgustingly overpaid television scribe.


THE SAVOR OF CAIRO
"Welcome! Do you like fish?"
That was my greeting 35 years ago when I was met at the airport by two Egyptian friends.
It was my first visit and I thought their greeting might be a folkloric good-luck wish.
I instantly answered yes, in any case.
It was close to noon and I was starved, and so I was introduced to Mahmoud Soliman el Sammak &amp; Fils -- Mahmoud of the Fish and His Son -- an antiquely mellow, downtown seafood restaurant, with a huge, impassive proprietor dressed in white turban and caftan standing behind an array of sparklingly fresh shrimp and fish.
Thus began a symbolic rite: I wouldn't dream of going to Cairo without having my first meal at this faded but still appealing downtown restaurant, as I did on several visits, first in 1960 and most recently last November.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 12 about a $ 1 million bookkeeping error in the Yorktown School District referred incorrectly to Elaine McGuire.
Although a former president of the school board, she remains a member.


Who Said What?
To the Editor:
Joyce Carol Oates vs.
Arlene Croce: the match of the century!
The Superbowl of art criticism!
Or is it?
Perhaps neither boxer has laid a glove on the other.
Ms.
Croce's point was abundantly clear: putting a bunch of sick people on stage does not ipso facto create art.
Did Ms.
Oates say that it does?
Ms.
Oates's point was unmistakable: the principles of art criticism change from age to age.
Did Ms.
Croce say that they didn't?
ROBERT B. CANTRICK  Buffalo


The Whole Anne Frank
THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL The Definitive Edition.
By Anne Frank.
Edited by Otto H. Frank and Mirjam Pressler.
Translated by Susan Massotty.
Illustrated. 340 pp.
New York: Doubleday. $25.


Ranger Puzzle Pieces Are Falling Into Place
The resurgent Rangers seem to be hitting their stride as they approach the midseason mark of the 48-game schedule.
The captain has led with word, deed, guile and wiles.
After shuffling through several combinations for the second line, the first-year coach has at last settled on a permanent trio that is adding ballast to the checking and balance to the scoring.
Despite the surgery-enforced idleness of a star defenseman, the team is undefeated in the three games he has missed.
The goaltending has been adequate if not spectacular.
After starting the season at 2-5, the Rangers are 9-3-3 in their last 15 games.
Following a 3-0-1 week, there is optimism as they look toward Game 23 at Washington tonight and Game 24 against Ottawa at Madison Square Garden tomorrow night.


Pitt Keeps Seton Hall Hopes on the Wane
Three days ago, Coach George Blaney said Seton Hall played almost as well as it could in a close loss at Georgetown.
Tonight, he said a close loss to Pittsburgh was probably his team's worst performance of the season.
Pitt (9-17, 5-13 Big East) dictated a slow tempo and left Byrne Meadowlands Arena with a 76-72 victory over the Pirates (16-12, 7-11).
Seton Hall's fourth loss in a row makes a National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament bid unlikely, unless the Pirates roll off a run in the Big East tournament next weekend.


With a Record of 11-18, Florida International Is In
Trans America, Athletic Conference
Florida International won the Trans America Athletic Conference championship yesterday and will enter the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament with an 11-18 record.


Ports on a Cruise
To the Editor: This past summer my husband and I booked a Mediterranean cruise aboard the Costa Romantica sailing from Genoa to Genoa.
The cost of the cruise included airfare from New York.
Since we were interested in disembarking in Barcelona, the last port before Genoa, we paid our own air fare after a small reimbursement from the company.
Before making our plans we inquired whether we could get a rebate on the day we would miss.
The answer was no.
We also tried to make arrangements to take the ship from Barcelona to Barcelona.
The answer was no.


A Tap on Shoulder From Whaling Days
ROMANTIC historians always have this feeling they are being tapped on the shoulder from the past," Joan Druett of New Zealand, said.
A series of happenstances, including the discovery of a 19th-century gravestone, a wedding portrait and journals stored in an attic have brought the stories of "Sister Sailors" from distant shores together.
"The lives of these seafaring women seemed to be crying out to have their stories told," Ms.
Druett said.


In the Urban Maelstrom, the Faithful Persevere
A Muslim taxi driver pulls over on Riverside Drive, steps out into the early evening rain, spreads a prayer rug beneath the beams of his headlights, kneels, kisses the ground and begins to pray.
An Orthodox Jewish trauma surgeon on weekend call at Bellevue Hospital Center trudges up 15 flights of stairs, rather than desecrate the Sabbath by riding the elevator to the intensive care unit.


What's All the Tohubohu?
To the Editor:
Regarding David R. Slavitt's article "Passionate Intensity" (Feb. 12): Blurb writing is not, by and large, a genre known for its cogency or profundity.
Addressing the rather complex issue of the state of contemporary poetry by examining the subgenre of blurbs on poetry is like critiquing any other genre or medium by examining the corresponding blurbs.
What perception of the current state of cinema or the novel would one get solely by reading the blurbs in the advertisements of a typical Sunday issue of The New York Times?
FINNEGAN KERN  Providence, R.I.


Norman and Jacobsen Are Tied at 15 Under At Once-Difficult Doral
One by one they charged across the submissive Blue Monster today, firing at pins and draining putts from everywhere.
It was a full-frontal assault by the stars of the game, and when the final birdie fell at the formerly impregnable 18th hole of the once-difficult course, Greg Norman was standing over it and waving his hand at the crowd and smiling.
Who needs a World Tour?
What came to South Florida today in the form of the Doral-Ryder Open is a very good facsimile.
After three rounds, the leader board has the following names atop it: Norman, Jacobsen, Faldo, Love.
No background check is necessary to identify that foursome.
If you don't like that board, then you don't like golf.


On and Off the Grill In Turtle Bay
AMBASSADOR GRILL + (212) 702-5014; One United Nations Plaza, 44th Street at First Avenue; $$$; all major credit cards


POSTINGS: Decision Affects Nonpurchasing Rent-Stabilized Tenants; State Agency Grants Rise In Rent at New York Co-op
Applications for rent increases in co-op apartments occupied by rent-stabilized tenants are expected to increase following the grant, for the first time, of a "comparative hardship" increase by the New York State Division of Housing and Community Renewal.
The decision, issued late last year in a case filed in 1985, involves a 149-unit building at 203-205 East 72d Street.
The applicant for the increase, the sponsor of the building's co-op conversion, had retained unsold shares for 75 rent-stabilized apartments.


BEHIND THE WHEEL/Mercedes-Benz C36; Sumptuous Sedan For Serious Fun
HAVING grown up in a German family, I think I can safely say that giddy humor is not the touchstone of my ethnicity.
But now Mercedes-Benz, that bastion of Teutonic sober-sidedness, has actually yielded to a corporate giggle.
It is, after all, Janis Joplin cackling and singing in the new Mercedes commercial: O Lord, won't you buy me a Mercedes-Benz?


Habitats/Rowayton, Conn.; An Architect and His Wife Renovate a Beach House
FROM the roadside, the house seems like a tallish blond-shingled box, an obviously contemporary beach house built up as far as it can reach on a narrow lot.
From the side, seen from the beach that borders the lot on Bell Island in the Rowayton section of Norwalk, it seems more expansive, more interesting, more involved; an open front porch is delineated by metal pole railings, painted in tough automotive paint in a shade of silvery sea-green, and a compact, cobblestone-walled garden gives it scale and texture.


Amnesty International Has 3 Groups on Island
As Bill Shulz said  [ "Long Island Q&amp;A: William F. Shulz, Amnesty International Leader," Feb. 19 ]  there are opportunities for Long Islanders to get involved with human rights work.
Three Amnesty International groups meet monthly on the Island, Group 17 in Great Neck and Group 156 in Huntington meet at members' homes, and Group 74 meets in Garden City at the Ethical Humanist Society.
In addition there are numerous high school groups working, too, for prisoners of conscience and for other detainees who have been unjustly imprisoned or are tortured or threatened with death.
Anyone interested in contacting a group can call Amnesty headquarters in Boston at (617) 623-0202.
LYN DOBRIN Garden City The writer is co-leader of Group 74 of Amnesty International.


THE COUNTER COUNTERCULTURE
It will be interesting to see what the bright, plugged-in conservatives, especially those who are gay or Jewish or black or female, will come to think if, say, Phil Gramm actually gets elected President.
When the religious right has all its pieces in place, the clever ideas and rhetoric these intellectuals have used to drive conservatism into our collective heart will have done their job and the real business of creating retro-fundamentalist Amerika can begin.
Do the yuppie conservatives, bright as they are, really believe that they and their cultural awareness will be welcomed in the new Eden?


Ideas &amp; Trends: The Trading Culture; Winning Is the Only Thing
NICHOLAS W. LEESON, the 28-year-old trader who brought down Barings P.L.C., was captured last week after an international manhunt spanning from Asia to Europe.
Now, Barings' former rising star is being detained by police in Frankfurt.
But if the Japanese markets had simply held steady or gone up on the right days, the story's end would have been far different.
Mr.
Leeson would be at his trading desk, awaiting a multimillion-dollar bonus and perhaps a promotion for the money his firm earned from his audacious -- and risky -- bets.


Innumeracy
NEWSPAPERS AND newscasts that would never permit reports on "President Bill" and "Mayor Rudy" without their family names seem to have no compunction about regularly omitting the family names of vital news statistics -- the denominators without which most numerical facts are just mush.
So Bill has reduced the Federal payroll by 98,000 jobs: yes, but out of how many?
Is that an impressive saving or a drop in the bucket?
And yes, Rudy has vowed to close a gap of $2.7 billion: in how large a budget?
In a whole page about the deficit one day last month, The Times never said.
That gap, by the way, is only a projected deficit -- dependent on estimates of future tax collections, about which Rudy was wrong last year.
It is also dependent on future Federal and state subsidies, about which President Bill and Governor George must still bargain with Congress and the New York Legislature.
The gap will be further affected by inflation and maybe also by Yankee batting averages (if Owner George and his colleagues permit a proper pennant race that will draw crowds).


Pied Piper
The appeal of a savory pie (on a cold winter night, with a blizzard in the forecast) is not a primitive one.
Making pastry crust, after all, is an expression of a settled (and presumably civilized) society, requiring time to confect and a flame to bake.
Nevertheless, the urge to envelop a hearty filling in dough and bake it until it's bubbly hot is almost universal.
The British have their steak and kidney pie, the French their quiche Lorraine, the Italians their calzone.
Even Americans can lay claim to a crusty morsel, that nostalgic favorite: chicken pot pie.
That these pies endure says something about their satisfying, one-dish efficiency.
They're also an ode to their tribe.
In the medium of a savory pie, the flavors of a culture are layered and baked, then offered up for a communal experience.


Ms. Northshield, Mr. Thompson
Liana Cope Northshield, the director of marketing at the New York publishers John Wiley &amp; Sons, and Myles Conway Thompson, the executive editor for finance books there, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Mark S. Anschutz performed the ceremony at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
Thompson, 45, graduated from Knox College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles E. Cope of Barrington, Ill.
Her father retired as a chemical engineer at Bell &amp; Howell in Evanston, Ill.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


A New Congressman Finds It's Harder Than It Looked
Sam Brownback, who had never held elective office, beat a former two-term Democratic Governor by 32 points last fall and became a Congressman from eastern Kansas.
"Reduce, reform and return" was his slogan.
But 60 days into the much-heralded 100 days of the new Republican-controlled Congress, the 38-year-old Mr.
Brownback, who rode into office largely on a wave of voter anger, has found the wave a bit trickier to ride now that he is Representative Brownback.


A 53-Year Bond Between Breakers of Rules
IT WAS A MARRIAGE OF TRUE minds, with scarcely an impediment.
Well, language may have been a problem at first.
In 1915, when Marcel Duchamp and Man Ray met on Duchamp's first trip here from France, they could barely communicate in the usual way, which was seldom their primary interest anyway.
At their first meeting, they played tennis without a net, carefully keeping score.
Robert Frost would compare free verse to playing tennis without a net, meaning that rules were necessary to give resonance to art; Duchamp and Man Ray made careers out of breaking rules in pursuit of new resonance and new ways of playing the game.
By the time they met, Duchamp (1887-1968) had already contributed to the founding of Dada in Europe.
His "Nude Descending a Staircase" had caused a scandal at the 1913 Armory Show in New York; one newspaper called it an "explosion in a shingle factory," and even Teddy Roosevelt berated it.
Man Ray (1890-1976) did not have his first one-man show until a month or so after their meeting, but he was already operating on a Dada wavelength.
Their free-verse tennis match initiated a 53-year friendship.


World Markets; Thinking Positive About Paris Stocks
MORGAN STANLEY is bullish on France.
Very bullish.
Last year it took a seat in the vast stone building resembling an ancient Roman temple that houses the Paris bourse and set up in business as a French stockbroker.
Then last week it brought some of its European analysts, officials of the Paris stock market and senior executives from four French blue-chip companies to New York and Boston to tell American institutional investors to buy French equities in 1995.


Playing With the Words In the Product Liability Bill
In the hallways of Congress, no legislative provision is too short, no sentence too succinct, no word too insignificant to be manipulated by lobbyists for advantage.
But tracing the language of the product liability legislation that is working its way through the House of Representatives offers telling lessons in the riches that can be found in obscurity.
The nip and tuck of a word here or a sentence there in the bill that would set new Federal standards for lawsuits over personal injuries and defective products could have profound implications for the hundreds of thousands of lawsuits filed annually in the nation's Federal and state courts.


Corporate Term Limits: 2 Views
To the Editor:
Unfortunately the idea of term limits for chief executives is only a dream for many companies because of the often ruinous tenure of C.E.O.'s who are also in control of the directors and hold a substantial stake in the company.
In such cases, even when the chief outlives his useful business career, he continues to maintain autocratic control.
Under such C.E.O.'s, individual corporations stagnate.
When many C.E.O.'s start their term their only objective is to die in office; many times the company dies with them.
NELSON MARANS  Silver Spring, Md., Feb. 23


Karen Rappaport, Noah G. Estrin
Karen Jane Rappaport, the daughter of Jill Saperstein of Montvale, N.J., and Dr.
Marvin Rappaport of Ho-Ho-Kus, N.J., was married last evening to Noah Gabriel Estrin, the son of Linda and Charles Estrin of Owings Mills, Md.
Rabbi Morris Dembowitz, an uncle of the bride, officiated at the Essex House in New York, and Rabbi Marc Sirinsky, the bride's cousin, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Estrin, 27, graduated from Johns Hopkins University, as did the bridegroom.
She is the research supervisor at EDS Management Consulting Services in Bedminster, N.J.
Her father is a dentist in New York.
Her mother, a psychologist in Montvale, is known professionally as Dr.
Jill Rappaport.
The bride is the stepdaughter of Norma Rappaport and Dr.
Lewis Saperstein.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: March 5, 1995
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
6
TOM CLANCY'S OP-CENTER, created by Tom Clancy and Steve Pieczenik. (Berkley, $6.99.) The operations of a secret Government agency.
2
3
ACCIDENT, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) A car collision involving four teen-agers tragically alters the lives of five families.
3
6
THE DAY AFTER TOMORROW, by Allan Folsom. (Warner Vision, $6.99.) A doctor stumbles into a tangle of conspiracies.
4
1
INCA GOLD, by Clive Cussler. (Pocket, $6.99.) Dirk Pitt contends with a ring of thieves for possession of ancient artifacts in the Andes.
5
5
FAMILY BLESSINGS, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove, $6.50.) A widow's affection for the close friend of her late son creates familial tension.
6
6
ICEBOUND, by Dean Koontz. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The world's future is threatened by a tidal wave, storms and a psychopathic killer.
7
1
NIGHT PREY, by John Sandford. (Berkley, $6.99.) Lucas Davenport investigates a case involving a body found in a wildlife preserve.
8
3
AMBUSH AT CORELLIA, by Roger MacBride Allen. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The first volume of a new "Star Wars" trilogy.
9
2
HEARTSTONE, by Phillip Margolin. (Bantam, $6.50.) A New Hampshire detective and district attorney probe a seven-year-old murder.
10
2
THE CAT WHO CAME TO BREAKFAST, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Jove, $5.99.) Jim Qwilleran and his cats investigate catastrophes.
11
6
FATAL CURE, by Robin Cook. (Berkley, $6.99.) A series of mysterious deaths haunts a couple who practice medicine in a Vermont town.
12
38
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
13*
1
THE ROBBER BRIDE, by Margaret Atwood. (Bantam, $6.50.) A woman who long manipulated three friends suddenly reappears.
14
2
THE THRILL OF VICTORY, by Sandra Brown. (MIRA, $4.99.) A reporter's attempt to destroy the reputation of a tennis star leads to romance.
15
6
PRINCE CHARMING, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $6.50.) A lady in Victorian London discovers the man of her dreams, a Montanan.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
24
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
60
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Everyday spirituality.
3
11
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $5.99.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of "Seinfeld."
4
23
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) The reminiscences of two black sisters.
5
12
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Love and relationships.
6
6
HOW WE DIE, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Vintage, $13.) A surgeon reflects on "life's final chapter."
7
591
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott
Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
8
2
MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Vintage, $12.) The life of a young black man in America: the memoirs of a Washington Post reporter.
9
8
CONTRACT WITH AMERICA, by Newt Gingrich, Dick Armey, et al. (Times Books/Random House, $10.) The Republican program.
10
33
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) Innovation in business.
11
27
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.
12
1
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Pocket, $5.99.) An analysis of canine behavior.
13*
19
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $5.50.) Essays on life and death, good and evil.
14
105
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
15
16
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A discussion of spiritual growth.
16*
17
DAKOTA, by Kathleen Norris. (Houghton Mifflin, $9.95.) A celebration of the Great Plains.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
23
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) Stories meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."
2
201
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
3
3
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY: An Experiential Guide, by James Redfield and Carol Adrienne. (Warner, $8.99.) Ways to apply the inspirational message of the novel "The Celestine Prophecy."
4
4
WHAT TO EXPECT THE TODDLER YEARS, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $15.95.) Counsel.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Feb. 18, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


The Executive Computer; A Dinosaur in Open Systems Clothing
PROPONENTS of personal computers, workstations and that catch-all term for the new world order of information technology, "open systems," like to call mainframes and minicomputers dinosaurs.
But some of these denizens of computing's Jurassic era have shown a remarkable ability to evolve, and none, perhaps, as successfully as the I.B.M.
AS/400.
In today's game, the seven-year-old AS/400 would seem to have three strikes against it.
It's a minicomputer.
It's based not on open systems but on so-called proprietary technology.
And it's made by I.B.M.


There's a Gleam In the Darkness
A high gloss has been added to the all-black style of dress so prevalent in fashion.
What gives the look a fresh spirit is the mix of shiny black jackets, jeans, tote bags and shoes with plain black wool, black fake fur or even black boas in chenille.


Tiny Satellites Aim to Please the Bean Counters
IT was a low-tech way to make a high-tech point.
Aero Astro, a start-up company specializing in small spacecraft, wanted to get the Air Force's attention on a proposal for the world's smallest satellite.
So last fall, an Air Force colonel, Aero Astro's president and several colleagues took a three-pound prototype and bicycled 479 miles over the mountains from Colorado Springs to Albuquerque, N.M., to present the idea to officials at the Phillips Laboratory space research center.
The Air Force got the point, and last month gave Aero Astro a contract to develop a trio of the tiny satellites, which might be launched within two years for experimental use.
"When a colonel and I walk into a general's office in biking clothes and pull a satellite out of a saddle bag, he remembers," said Rick Fleeter, president and founder of Aero Astro, a seven-year-old privately held company based in Herndon, Va.


The Real Thing
To the Editor:
In criticizing Arlene Croce's reluctance to review Bill T. Jones's dance work "Still/Here," Joyce Carol Oates fails to note a distinction that gives Ms.
Croce's position some ethical standing.
Mr.
Jones has crossed a line.
He is not presenting art about victims.
He is presenting victims as art.
These victims are not just subjects of a documentary film, photographic insight, choreographic vision; they are the performing artists.
How can one presume to criticize them?
PATRICIA CLARK  Hellam, Pa.


BACKTALK: Skiing and Safety: There's More to the Story; Ouch!
To the Sports Editor:
Three weeks ago our daughter, 22, blew out an A.C.L. skiing.
We appreciated John Underwood's article, the information and the frustrated anger.
That she seems to be one of 20,000 this season does make us wonder how accidental was her accident.
SHIRLEY McRAE  Providence, R.I.


Barings Knew Of Big Gamble, Officials Assert
High-ranking executives of Barings P.L.C. were aware that a trader in Singapore had made an extraordinary financial bet at least two weeks before the company collapsed as losses mounted from that gamble, officials in Singapore said today.
A Barings official from London and the head of the firm's Singapore office told the Singapore International Monetary Exchange on Feb. 8 that the company was aware of large investments made by Nicholas W. Leeson, its futures trader in Singapore, and had enough money available to cover them, Government and regulatory officials said at a news conference.


The Misfits


On Sunday; Liberal Voices Against A Rising Tide
STEVE POST, New York's ranking iconoclast across 30 years of radio broadcasting, looked haggard, fairly staggering away from the microphone after his sixth day of fund raising on the air in behalf of the endangered ether of public radio.
He had sparkled some across the pleadings of his four-hour stint Wednesday on the municipal airwaves of WNYC-FM.
He gibed easily at the "Newtists" in the Republican Congress who aim to starve public radio of all Federal subsidy.
"I love Ah-Muhrrica," he said, trumping imagined Newtists by playing "The Battle Hymn of the Republic" and a Woody Guthrie protest song before the usual Schubert.


From Lumpy Blue Mass To Chic Blue Line
DOWNTOWN -- If your job required risking your life while wearing a uniform you had to pay for yourself, wouldn't you want it to look nice?
Police Commissioner William J. Bratton thinks so.
That's why those light-blue 100 percent polyester shirts and unshapely equipment belts are going to be eliminated by next fall, gone the way of the .38-caliber revolver, the pouf dress and evening grunge.


A Caller on the Line and a Hand on the Wheel
IF Henry Ford and Alexander Graham Bell ever met, it is unlikely that they ever talked about marrying their creations.
But millions of people do so every day, with some awkwardness.
All phones are difficult to use while driving, but hand-held models are the most awkward of all.
Hand-held phones do require a hand; holding one between the ear and the shoulder, as an office worker might do while taking notes, is next to impossible.
Using one while driving with a manual transmission is out of the question except on an open interstate.
Using one with an automatic transmission is possible but tiring after a while.


Before Ives, There Was Gottschalk
DURING ONE OF HIS TOURS OF CUBA IN THE mid-19th century, the American pianist and composer Louis Moreau Gottschalk produced a gigantic festival, writing three new pieces requiring a total of 650 performers.
A military band and a Caribbean drumming group joined 198 choristers, 68 clarinetists, 33 tuba players and assorted other musicians on a Havana stage.
A newspaper warned that "young ladies who are easily frightened or nervous should bring smelling salts, as we predict faintings."
The record does not reveal how many survived the onslaught of sound, but Gottschalk certainly knew his public.
In an extravagantly detailed new biography, "Bamboula!" (Oxford University Press), named after a Caribbean drum that inspired Gottschalk's most famous composition, S. Frederick Starr chronicles Gottschalk's entrepreneurial adventures.
He once conducted 56 pianists in his transcription of the March from Wagner's "Tannhauser." He wrote fantasies and variations to suit national tastes, taking on "God Save the Queen," "Yankee Doodle" and the Brazilian national anthem.
To heighten interest in his recitals, he took the stage wearing doeskin gloves and demonstratively removed them finger by finger before beginning to play.


Has Junkiness Been Thrust Upon Them?
To the Editor:
Your essay on junk bonds was long overdue.
When will the financial world correct the insipid concept that BBB- bonds are investment grade but BB+ is junk -- with nothing in between?
Surely there are bonds that deserve a new name better than poor investment grade or excellent junk.
High-yield bonds have existed for generations.
No one "invented" them.
Drexel Burnham Lambert saw a marketing opportunity and did more good than harm.
Ed Hart of the old Financial News Network deserves credit for the following clarifying pardody of Shakespeare:


The World: Washington's Bad Vibes; Welfare Bashing Finds Its Mark
ABOUT two months ago, Carol Gagnon began slipping into grocery stores late at night to avoid other shoppers, who she says sometimes yell at her when she pulls out her food stamps.
"There's so much more of that now, I've started going in the middle of the night," said Ms.
Gagnon, a formerly upper-middle-class mother in Eastham, Mass., who said she left an abusive relationship five years ago and now receives public assistance to support herself and her 7-year-old daughter.


What's All the Tohubohu?
To the Editor:
The youngster at the poetry reading who asked, "Were those real poems you read, or did you write them yourself?" seems to me a real-life equivalent of the child in "The Emperor's New Clothes," who expresses his astonishment at the Emperor's nudity while the populace applauds his finery, each person thinking that everyone else can perceive his supposedly splendid attire.


Republicans Clear-Cut Regulatory Timberland
LAST week Republicans, without amending a single environmental law, finished work on a package of anti-regulatory legislation that would undo major provisions of almost every pollution control law passed in the last 25 years.
Instead of repealing the Clean Air Act's requirements that national air quality standards be set on the basis of health considerations alone, the House simply declared that all the law's regulations would have to adhere to a new cost-benefit standard.


Leonard Shure, 84, Pianist, Dies; Noted as Performer and Teacher
Leonard Shure, a pianist known for both his elegant performances and his skills as a teacher, died on Tuesday at his home on Nantucket, Mass.
He was 84.
He died in his sleep after a long illness, said his wife, Judy.


SUNDAY, March 5, 1995; ANIMAL OF THE WEEK: Iguanas in Trouble
Jack Russell terriers look out.
America's hot new pet is the Latin American green iguana.
Since 1989, over two million live iguanas have been imported, mostly from Colombia and El Salvador.
Too bad for the iguanas.
According to Robert Ehrig, president of the International Iguana Society, hundreds of thousands of the creatures are dying of malnutrition and stress.
That's probably because a minimum investment of $100 is necessary to buy an adequate tank, heater and lighting system for a lizard that can grow up to five feet.


The Message Is Clear: Jaspers Mean Business
Just before the opening tap of today's Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference tournament opener between top-seeded Manhattan and eighth-seeded Niagara at Knickerbocker Arena, a handful of Jaspers fans were screaming "Shutout! Shut them out."
Nearly four minutes into the contest, Manhattan showed it was willing and able to oblige that request.
The Jaspers had raced out to a 10-0 lead, and by going on to an 83-60 rout of the Purple Eagles, they sent a frightening message to the six other teams competing here for an automatic bid to the National Collegiate Athletic Association Tournament.


Savannah
About 25 minutes by car from the grace and gentility of historic downtown Savannah is a rickety, rusty, screened-in-porch of a place with luscious boiled shrimp, a jukebox full of oldies and a waitress you'd better treat nice or else.
Set beside a marshy creek in the beautiful low country, it has signs warning visitors to leave their pretensions at the door.
"Where the Elite Eat in Their Bare Feet," says one.
The tables have holes in the middle, so you can toss your shrimp shells straight into a trash can.
The restrooms, of course, are outside.


The End Of Dignity
The American Museum of Natural History in New York City plans to tear down the old Hayden Planetarium and replace it with something snazzier: an 80-foot sphere in a glass box.
The outside of the sphere will function as a giant projection screen, capable of flashing thousands of images simultaneously.
The museum wants to become interactive; it has already remade one of its galleries into what The New York Times described as a "miniature theme park." It's about time, too, according to The Times, which reported that the museum is "dogged by a reputation for stodginess" and known for its "musty corridors and dreary dioramas."


Purdue Goes to the Head of Big Ten Class
Purdue 69, Illinois 56
Cuonzo Martin scored 29 points, and 17th-ranked Purdue took over first place in the Big Ten Conference with a 69-56 victory yesterday over Illinois at Champaign, Ill.


SCIENTISTS FEAR ATOMIC EXPLOSION OF BURIED WASTE
Debate has broken out among Federal scientists over whether the planned underground dump for the nation's high-level atomic wastes in Nevada might erupt in a nuclear explosion, scattering radioactivity to the winds or into ground water or both.
The debate, set off by scientists at the Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico, is the latest blow to the planned repository deep below Yucca Mountain in the desert about 100 miles northwest of Las Vegas.
Opponents of nuclear power and Nevada officials have long assailed the project as ill-conceived and ill-managed, and it has encountered numerous delays.


Leonard Shure, 84, Pianist, Dies; Noted as Performer and Teacher
Leonard Shure, a pianist known for both his elegant performances and his skills as a teacher, died on Tuesday at his home on Nantucket, Mass.
He was 84.
He died in his sleep after a long illness, said his wife, Judy.


F.Y.I.
Seaside Twilight Zone Q.  When I want to see some ocean, I take a subway to Edgemere, Rockaway.
All the land there looks odd.
I see curbs, hydrants, street signs, all covered with weeds, yet no buildings, except a spooky-looking school that looks like its from the movie "The Birds." Who owns this land and what are the future plans?
A.
If Hitchcock had made a film about city planning, he could have called it "Arverne."


Streetscapes/Readers' Questions; The Old U.S. Army Building on Whitehall Street
This is another in a series of columns answering questions from readers about New York's changing streetscapes.
Red, With a Dome
Q.
In our collection we have a painting by Colin Campbell Cooper, "Downtown New York" (1917).
It shows a large, red structure with a dome on top but I am unable to identify it.
Do you recognize the building? . . .
Carol Lowrey, curator, permanent collection, National Arts Club, Manhattan.


End Bank Law and Robber Barons Ride Again; Depositors at Risk
To the Editor:
I am concerned about the proposed legislation that would allow banks, brokerage houses and insurance companies to merge.
I do not know what it would mean for securities firms and insurance companies, but I do know that it poses an unacceptable risk to banking customers.


U.S. Holds Mexican in Assassination Case
The former chief investigator into a politically charged assassination in Mexico was arrested Friday night in Newark as he boarded a flight for Madrid, Mexican officials said today.
The federal authorities said the former official, Mario Ruiz Massieu, who was carrying $46,000 in cash, would be charged with having falsely claimed to be carrying only $18,000 in Mexican and American currency.


Even for Party-Boy Painter, 3 Nights of Celebrating Are a Lot
For three nights in a row last week, a cross section of New York's art, news media and fashion worlds celebrated the opening of the Ross Bleckner retrospective at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum on Fifth Avenue.
"Even for a party boy like me, it's a lot," Mr. Bleckner said.


Editorial Notebook; The Presumption of Stupidity
Brent Staples is a waspish name: A few times a year, every year, readers write in to tell me this.
Most of the writers are good-natured folks who imagined me a white Anglo-Saxon Protestant until something put them wise that I am black.
Some are rabid, and even accuse me of faking the name to pass for white.
Though different in intent, the two sets of letters have something in common: surprise that a preconception related to race has failed to be true.
Preconceptions about race are often deeply held -- even unconscious -- and thoroughly blinding.
By way of example, consider the psychologist Gordon Allport's pioneering studies on prejudice.
Allport would begin his classes by showing two pictures: one of a black man unarmed, one of a white man holding a knife.
After the lecture, he asked the class who had the knife.
The black man, of course.
The presumption of criminality had caused the knife to take legs and walk.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT IN AMERICAN HISTORY By Lawrence M. Friedman.
Basic Books, $15.
The principles and methods of the justice system in the United States have varied through the ages, but crime itself has been an unhappy constant.
Surveying more than 300 years, the author shows why wrongdoers are never really deterred.
In 1993 our reviewer, Yale Kam isar, called this study "a major achievement."  SOULS RAISED FROM THE DEAD By Doris Betts.
Scribner Paperback, $12.
Few events are as wrenching as the loss of a child.
In this novel, it is clear almost from the beginning that Mary Grace Thompson, the pubescent daughter of a North Carolina state trooper, is going to succumb to kidney disease.
The book explores the reactions of the people surrounding the dying 13-year-old, from her divorced parents to her father's girlfriends.
"If you like poignancy laced with pungency, social comment and the reassurance that sorrow does not finally sever the connection between survivors, this moving novel will make you happy," Rosellen Brown said here last year.


How Dubinsky Spent Hillman's Funeral Day
To the Editor:
In your story on the merger of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union with the Amalgamated Clothing and Textile Workers Union (Business Day, Feb. 20), you note the accomplishments of David Dubinsky of the Garment Workers and Sidney Hillman of the Amalgamated.


CHICAGO
GRANT PARK IS THE formal face Chicago presents to the world.
It smells of lilacs in spring, roses in summer and is painted red with tulips in their half-hour of bloom.
Its 320 acres stretch grandly under a roof of elm and linden along the shores of Lake Michigan.
On warm nights, jazz and Bach rise among its hedgerows, while Buckingham Fountain is bathed in light.
But there is more.
The park's honey locust and hackberry trees have witnessed history.
It was here that antiwar demonstrators blindfolded the bronze figure of General Logan during the 1968 Democratic National Convention, and here that a pope once offered Mass.


People With Disabilities Are Still People
To the Editor:
The Cedar Grove Homeowners Association, described in the Jan. 29 "Queens Up Close," spent an inordinate amount of time, energy and money trying to block a seven-bed residence for people with developmental disabilities in the neighborhood.
Their time could have been better spent meeting people with these disabilities and seeing how such facilities are run in different neighborhoods.
They might have seen and learned some very positive things.


Metro-North Vows No Fare Rise in New York
BUDGET and labor worries notwithstanding, Metro-North has announced that its New York State customers will be spared a 4 percent fare increase in July and possibly another one at year's end.
There has not been an increase at the ticket window since 1990, and this year the commuter railroad is facing reduced subsidies, a mandate from Albany to cut spending and possible job actions by its unions in the fall.
The railroad's management said last week that it chose to defer fare increases rather than risk losing riders.
"Our customers," said Genevieve T. Firnhaber, executive vice president of Metro-North, "should be blind to any cuts or internal concerns."


Style and Sizzle
CHIN CHIN ** (212) 888-4555; 216 East 49th Street; $$$; all major credit cards


Scenic Virginia
A new road map offered by the state of Virginia will show you how to lose yourself on some of its most scenic roads.
The map highlights almost 1,200 miles of roads designated as Virginia Byways for their views and historic significance.
Another 1,100 miles of scenic roads are also included.
A free copy of the map is available from the Virginia Division of Tourism, 901 East Byrd Street, Richmond, Va. 23219; call (800) 825-6831 or (804) 786-4484.
JOSEPH SIANO


Treating the Ailing Spirit
IN THE MIDDLE OF THIS ROAD WE CALL OUR LIFE The Courage to Search for Something More.
By James W. Jones. 213 pp.
San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco. $20.
BREAD &amp; SPIRIT  Therapy With the New Poor.
Diversity of Race, Culture, and Values.
By Harry J. Aponte. 257 pp.
New York: W.W.
Norton &amp; Company. $27.


Separated at Birth
Tt was an autumn Saturday, Parents' Weekend on the campus of Bard College.
The students were out walking their families around, and I, a tourist who was neither student nor parent, was enjoying the foliage and the promenade of generations.
Apparently, Bard is a good place to look psychotic.
Many of the students had facial tattoos, pierced lips, intentionally matted hair and grotesque outfits.
One student in particular captivated me.
Her purple coiffure made the fall foliage look dull.
She had on so much black eye liner that when she took off her bad-girl sunglasses, she looked like a hung-over raccoon.
She had the motorcycle jacket, the studded leather, the S-and-M bracelet, the pierced everything.
And of course her parents were the picture of understated propriety.


House Fire in Brooklyn Kills 2-Year-Old
A 2-year-old boy was killed in a fire in Brooklyn early yesterday, fire and police officials said.
Several other children in the home escaped unharmed.
The fire, which started in the rear of the second floor of the house, was labeled suspicious because of the death of the child and the speed with which the fire grew, said George Semidey, a Fire Department spokesman.
The designation enables fire marshals, who had not determined a cause last night, to investigate further, Mr.
Semidey said.


Manager's Profile
Larry Callahan Fund: Lindner Bulwark; $87 million in assets.
Lead manager since February 1994 inception. (Sponsor: Ryback Management Corporation, St. Louis.)


Defending Freud and Reich
To the Editor:
As the president of the American Psychoanalytic Association, I would like to clarify two points in Robert Stewart's otherwise informative review of Nathan G. Hale Jr.'s book "The Rise and Crisis of Psychoanalysis in the United States: Freud and the Americans, 1917-1985" (Jan. 29).
Mr.
Stewart repeats the assertion that between 1960 and 1985 "doubts were raised about the scientific validity of psychoanalysis . . . with its endlessly spiraling fees."


A Pair Of Passes In the Alps
THE Bernese Oberland is the high country -- literally, the upland -- of the Swiss canton of Bern, home of the Swiss capital.
Probably a laconic old Swiss mountaineer with a wry sense of humor named it an upland, for this is a mountain chain extending nearly the length of the country, studded with great peaks that include the fabled Eiger and Jungfrau.
The long-distance walking tour generally known as the Bernese Oberland Pass Route is a series of linked trails that traverse passes across this famous range.
Many of the trails are really ancient shortcuts, once used by shepherds, farmers and peddlers as a steep but faster way to get from one village or one valley to another.
James Fenimore Cooper, during a sojourn in Switzerland in the 1820's, hiked part of the route, and by the middle of that century the tour was popular with British visitors.
I have walked on it several times, and last August my husband, Philip, and I repeated its highest part, between Kandersteg and Murren.
This two-day segment leads over the two toughest passes of the route, Hohturli and the Sefininfurke.


Making a Pot au Feu for a Party of Six
IT takes time to assemble the ingredients, simmer them, trim them properly and arrange them on the table.
But a simple boiled dinner -- called pot au feu in French and bollito misto in Italian -- is a heart-warming delight.
It is best made for a minimum of six people, to permit a variety of meats to go into the pot and flavor the soup.
For this reason, and because it is actually best prepared in advance and reheated, it is excellent dinner-party fare.
Refrigerating it overnight improves the texture of the meats and makes for easy removal of most of the fat.


Feb. 26 - March 4: 'Megan's Law'; Judges Put Brakes On Identifying Sex Offenders
"Megan's Law," which requires officials to notify people if a dangerous sexual offender is living nearby, zipped through the New Jersey Legislature last fall.
But now it has been crippled by judicial misgivings.
Perhaps 40 alerts have been made under the law, but officials say at least 3,000 more must wait because of a Federal court ruling last week and a state court ruling in late February.
The law was enacted in memory of Megan Kanka, a 7-year-old who was assaulted and murdered last July; a neighbor who had been convicted twice of sex crimes was accused in the case.


Starting From Scratch. Or Rather, Seed.
EVEN though it still appears to be winter outside, the season should be early spring indoors.
Seed sowing time is here.
This annual rite provides rich rewards.
The awakening of seed has a miraculous side, as the plant embryos, tightly packaged in seed coats of all kinds, push up and grow.
Some end up as big as trees, while others turn out to be tiny tufts that hug the ground.
Many kinds of seed should be planted now, especially those that take a long time to germinate or need a long period of infancy before they are sturdy enough to plant outdoors.
A few of those that come to mind are slow starters, like petunias, snapdragons, peppers and eggplant.
Others, like tomatoes, can be started later in the month.


WASHINGTON
MOST OF WASHINGton's parks are long, flat or well known, from the Mall to Rock Creek Park.
And most are crowded, at times very crowded.
But Battery Kemble Park, part of a watershed that cuts through some of the most affluent neighborhoods in the northwest part of the District, looks like a bit of the Vermont woods.
Just three miles from the White House, it is all trees and trails, a place to escape for a walk along a bubbling creek crisscrossed by wooden bridges.


Variations on the Self-Image
IN an examination of female self-image, Ariane Smith takes a trip through the ages.
In her fusion of dance, video and drama, "Venus of Willendorf," Ms.
Smith plays a modern corporate woman contemplating a face-lift who travels through time and realizes that she is far from the first to consider a reconstruction.
She sees that women from Medusa and Joan of Arc to those tried as witches and Victorians struggling with bustles are constantly being called upon to reform and reshape themselves.
The play takes its name from a sculpture from the Paleolithic period, 35,000 B.C., of a zaftig woman, which was discovered in Austria.
It is the first known human-made representation of the female body.


Crack Trade Making Way For Heroin
When 48 suspected members of a powerful drug gang in Manhattan Valley were indicted last June, the police confiscated the type of vials and packets of crack that are the staple of the neighborhood's drug trade.
But they also found something else, both new and familiar: heroin.
Since then, the police say they have seen a resurgence of heroin use and sales on the Upper West Side.
"We're seeing a lot of areas that were predominantly crack locations that are now selling heroin also, or just heroin," said Deputy Inspector John P. McDermott, commander of the 24th Precinct.


SUNDAY, March 5, 1995; QUESTIONS FOR: Tipper Gore
Q: Do you think in this new ultrapartisan atmosphere in Washington it's still possible for spouses of warring politicians to meet on issues?
A: Of course, it's possible.
I have a bipartisan, bicameral coalition going with the Congressional Spouses Group on Mental Health.
Marianne Gingrich is a member.
And Ann Simpson and Nancy Domenici.


Ole Barneys!
On Madison Ave., a Cuban Night to honor the designer Isabel Toledo, Feb. 28.


Gamma Globulin In Short Supply
Travelers leaving the United States for developing countries may have a hard time finding gamma globulin shots at the moment.
The shortage, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the manufacturers, is the result of demands by the military for use in the Middle East, Somalia and Haiti.
Manufactured in the United States by Armour Pharmaceuticals and the Michigan Department of Public Health, gamma globulin, also known as immune globulin, is made from human blood plasma, and provides antibody protection against hepatitis A, a viral inflammation of the liver.
Symptoms of the disease, which is caused by contaminated food or water, include severe fatigue, nausea, vomiting and fever.


Wall Street; Fund Risks Come Out of Hiding
EVERYBODY knows that the scary stuff about investment products belongs deep in the fine print at the bottom of advertisements.
So what does it mean when the caveats pop up in places where you can actually read them?
A handful of mutual fund companies have begun to discuss the uglier possibilities of investing right in the main text of their ads -- commendable for the honesty, but dopey business by most marketing standards.
The new disclosures come as regulators are increasingly leaning on fund companies to tell more about risk.


At Work; A Level Playing Field, for Just $121
THE degree to which companies have trouble complying with civil rights legislation on behalf of disabled people appears to have more to do with their cultures than with the demands of the law.
In an assessment of compliance at Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company, Peter D. Blanck, a psychologist at the University of Iowa who has studied people with disabilities, found that the large retailer had little trouble bringing its own efforts into sync with the Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990 and spent little money doing so.
The law bans discrimination and requires employers to make "reasonable accommodations" to employees and job applicants with a range of illnesses and disabilities.
Trade associations and business groups have long complained that the law opened up a potentially infinite horizon of expense, especially burdening small business.
Disability rights groups argue that the "reasonable accommodation" clause of the law by definition prevents the Government from imposing ruinous requirements on business.
Most accommodations, they contend, can be made with little cost.


FILM: Bucking the System, but Still Part of the Buzz; In a Departure, John Sayles Turns A Myth Into a Hit In 'Roan Inish'
SEVERAL YEARS AGO, AT A library sale in Williamstown, Mass., Maggie Renzi paid 25 cents for a book she had fallen in love with as a child.
"The Secret of the Ron Mor Skerry," a 1957 novella by Rosalie K. Fry, conjures up the legend of the Selkies, mythical Celtic sea creatures who are half-human and half-seal.
The book tells of a young boy swept out to sea and raised by seals.
And it tells of a 10-year-old girl, enthralled by her grandparents' mythic tales, who leads her family back to an abandoned home on an island off the Scottish seacoast.
This is not the sort of tale one associates with the film maker John Sayles, who has made his reputation as a realist.
But Ms.
Renzi is his co-producer and companion of more than 20 years.
And their movie "The Secret of Roan Inish," which opened to rave reviews last month, is on its way to becoming one of their most successful films.


Morocco, Defending Claim in the Desert, Exerts a Hand on Neighbor's Vote
The Moroccan Government has been accused of interfering in United Nations planning for a referendum to determine sovereignty in the Western Sahara, a former Spanish colony the size of Colorado that Morocco claims.
Former and current United Nations officials say that Morocco is trying to control the outcome of the vote and to maintain its hold on the area.
Morocco has tapped United Nations phones, confiscated voter documents from residents here in the largest city in the region and denied others the right to enter registration centers, these officials and local residents said.
It also is sending thousands of people from Morocco, who Moroccan authorities say have roots in the area, to the region to register.


Alice Shooman, Mark Lebowitz
Alice Shooman, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Martin Shooman of Glen Cove, L.I., is to be married today to Mark Lebowitz, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Elliot Lebowitz of Brookline, Mass.
Rabbi Carl Feit, an uncle of the bridegroom, is to perform the ceremony at Temple Bnai Sholom in Rockville Centre, L.I.
The bride, 27, graduated cum laude from Tufts University and received a law degree from Yeshiva University.
She is a staff lawyer with the Legal Aid Society in Brooklyn.
Her father is a professor of computer science and electrical engineering at Polytechnic University in Farmingdale, L.I.
Her mother teaches French in the public schools in Glen Head, L.I.


Sports of The Times; The March Madness Has Already Begun
WHAT'S in a name?
It's always fun when an agent for the mighty International Olympic Committee starts strong-arming some humble Olympic Diner or Olympic Cleaners for horning in on that glorious word.
Usually, the I.O.C. is satisfied when the moussaka-maker or shirt-ironer takes down the five rings, the Olympic logo that just happens to be featured in the shop's advertising.
But sometimes the I.O.C. agents pressure the establishment into dropping the word "Olympic," too.


Relief for Chauffeur Mom
THERE is a bumper sticker occasionally sighted on the ubiquitous station wagons and minivans cruising county roads that reads, "If a mother's place is in the home, why am I always in the car?"
The sentiment reflects many parents' frustration over the constant chauffeuring required as part of the average suburban child's day.
When the afternoon school bell signals dismissal, children begin to fan out to countless activities, and almost all of them require transportation.


Stephanie Rosen and Howard Halpern
IT wasn't until Rabbi Jack Bemporad was concluding the marriage ceremony -- declaring that Stephanie C. Rosen, formerly of South Orange, N.J., and Howard M. Halpern, of Riverdale, the Bronx, and Monterey, Mass., were now husband and wife -- that the bride remembered the long-stemmed roses in the refrigerator.
She had planned to carry them during the ceremony, but in the excitement of their at-home nuptials on Feb. 19 on Blackstone Avenue in Riverdale, flowers were pretty much forgotten.
Not that it was impossible to misplace three pale-pink roses in a refrigerator crammed with wedding fare like bagels, cream cheese, croissants, whitefish, sablefish, pasta salad and, especially, smoked salmon.
Not to forget the white-iced chocolate-filled wedding cake.


The World; Arabs, Too, Play the Ethnic Card
AS secular Arab regimes tremble under enormous pressures for change, dormant ethnic and religious hatreds threaten to disrupt the Middle East even as they tear apart fragile new nations in Central Asia and the Balkans.
Despite the best efforts of pan-Arabist dreamers or Islamic militants, the truth is that this part of the world is anything but homogeneous.
Each Arab country is a composite of different groups, and in none can it be said that the groups share power happily.
This is, after all, a part of the world where rulers are still afraid to seek the consent of the governed by inviting everyone to participate.
In the more benevolent regimes, patronage is a more typical tool of control; terror is, of course, also available.


Banned From Baby-Sitting
"YOU can't be trusted," we were told.
And with that, we were banned from being alone with our first grandchild.
Michael's parents feared we would endanger his life.
We had already committed the unthinkable: we had put him to sleep on his stomach.
"Don't you know about SIDS!?" our son-in-law cried.
In fact, we did know about Sudden Infant Death Syndrome and the Surgeon General's warnings that babies should no longer sleep prone -- on their stomachs.
And we'd tried to comply.


Summer Renters, Some From Coast, Buoy the Hamptons
IT is house-hunting time in the Hamptons, and brokers say business is brisk.
From Westhampton to Montauk, real-estate brokers and salespeople credit mild winter weather and encouraging economic news for a summer rental season that they say is shaping up as a strong one.
But people in the industry cite other factors, too.


June Havoc, Off Stage
NETTY is standing on the corner watching all the buses go by -- as watchfully as she can.
It's hard to say whether she keeps missing them or they keep missing her.
"I see what I have to see," Netty rationalizes, concluding that potholes and street signs are not among the necessary things to see.
But buses?
It's just that Netty can't make out the numbers and, besides, she feels -- well, invisible is her word.
Another bus goes by, not noticing her.


Just Rolling Along


Mutual Funds; 1 Win, 1 Loss, in Bear Market Bet
SEEKING refuge in a mutual fund designed for bear markets would have made good sense last year -- if you picked the right one.
Your two choices use antipodal approaches to a financial markets meltdown.
The Robertson Stephens Contrarian Fund aims to profit, while the Lindner Bulwark Fund seeks to preserve capital.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Feb. 19 about Somers High School athletes who were arrested for burglary but continued to play football referred incorrectly to the period in which they were later sentenced to wear electronic ankle monitors.
All five began wearing them in January, not while playing football; one continued to wear his monitor while wrestling.


For Homeless, a Place To Relax and Get Clean
Six days a week, about 60 or so men and maybe a dozen women come.
They come to be in a warm place, to talk to one another, to stand for endless minutes under fine hot water, to cover their impossibly tired bodies with soap and scrub off the residue of a night on the streets.
"I'm a very clean person," said a woman who identifies herself only as Nancy.
"Being homeless doesn't mean you don't have to take a shower."


Senior Aide in Rwanda Coalition Is Killed
Ethnic unrest in Rwanda has claimed the life of a provincial Governor and prominent spokesman for a party in Rwanda's governing coalition, a top-level Government official said yesterday in a telephone interview from New York.
The Governor, Pierre-Claver Rwangabo, was killed yesterday, said the official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.
Mr.
Rwangabo, a Hutu from Butare and spokesman for the Social Democratic Party, was shot in his car while traveling with two companions after meeting with the Minister of Internal Affairs, Seth Sendashonga, in Kigali.


Storyteller Takes On The Book of Genesis
IN its mission statement, the Playwrights Theater of New Jersey means to be dedicated to developing new stage works by new writers.
Like the Book of Genesis?


Let's Not Forget Poor Children in the Welfare Reform Debate
To the Editor:
Any welfare reform effort must give highest priority to protecting affected children by helping their parents obtain jobs with adequate wages.
That's the surest way to improve youngsters' chances for a stable family life, the most precious advantage of all.
A relatively modest investment in children today can spare us the far greater expenses -- fiscal and otherwise -- of dealing with them as damaged adolescents or adults in the years ahead.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-10  U.S.
CITES IRAQ MILITARY BUILDUP  New evidence of an Iraqi military buildup has helped the U.S. beat back an effort to lift U.N. sanctions against Baghdad, senior Administration officials said. 1  FIRM SAID TO KNOW OF BET  Officials in Singapore said senior executives of Barings P.L.C. were aware that one of its traders had made a huge financial wager at least two weeks before the firm collapsed from his lost gamble.  1


Defending Freud and Reich
To the Editor:
As the president of the American College of Orgonomy, I was pleased to see a review of Wilhelm Reich's "Beyond Psychology: Letters and Journals, 1934-1939" (Jan. 29).
Unfortunately, the reviewer, Rosemary Dinnage, appears to have a bias against Reich and his work.
She repeats the well-worn view that Reich was mentally unbalanced.
Instead of focusing on the person of Reich and the story of his life, Ms.
Dinnage uses this biographical material to cast aspersions on his work.
Both Reich and the areas of investigation to which he devoted himself were controversial, but this is not a basis on which to judge the results of his labors.
Regardless of who Reich was as a personality and despite anyone's opinions about him and his theories, his accomplishments have stood the test of time through practical application.


Commercial Property/Garages; As an Investment, Parking's Attractive
A DECADE ago, when Rockefeller Center began assembling land at Seventh Avenue and 49th Street, it had in mind a 1.6 million-square-foot office tower.
Four months ago, it opened a parking lot instead.
Edison Parking, which has the contract to manage it, agreed to a 30-day cancellation clause.
That means that Rockefeller Center can quickly revert to Plan A as soon as it pre-leases enough space in the proposed building to warrant breaking ground.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CHELSEA &amp;335,000
117 West 17th Street  (Brooks Van Horne)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft. condo in a loft building; dining area, breakfast bar in kitchen, high ceilings; common charge $267; taxes $2,364, listed at $349,000, 4 weeks on market (Broker: Delson-Ginsberg)


Tennis and Sponsors
To the Editor:
As the co-author of a book about women and heart disease, and a heart patient myself, I have long deplored the association of Virginia Slims with woman's professional tennis.
Virginia Slims greatly enhanced the sport, but the price was too high.
Heart disease is the No. 1 killer of American women and lung cancer the No. 1 cancer death.
Experts trace the increasing incidence of both to cigarette smoking.
So while I was applauding the news of the ending of the link with Virginia Slims in a Business Diary item ("Women's Tennis, Poor but Proud," Feb. 19), I was very puzzled to read that the leaders of women's tennis believe that being sponsored by a purveyor of tampons would be more unseemly than being represented by a purveyor of the nation's leading cause of women's death by disease.
If there is an explanation for this, I would love to know it.
CHARLOTTE LIBOV  Bethlehem, Conn., Feb. 20  The writer is the author with Dr.
Fredric J. Pashkow of "The Women's Heart Book" (Dutton, 1993).


JAPANESE TRADITIONS ANCIENT KYOTO . . .
There is no lobby, there is no dining room, there are no bellmen, and there is no fitness center at the Tawaraya, the nearly 300-year-old ryokan in Kyoto that is, by common agreement, the greatest traditional inn in Japan.
There is, however, a fax machine, and when I checked in, a fax that had preceded me was sitting on the table in my room, as naturally as if I lived there.
And that is the point of Tawaraya: you do live there, as if you were in a traditional Japanese house, and you are attended to by a staff whose overriding mission is to care for you while being as close to invisible as possible.
There are no rough edges at Tawaraya.
There are almost no edges at all.
But there is silence, peace, tranquillity.
The 18 rooms (eight of which are small suites) are almost always fully booked, and the inn almost always feels empty: I had been there for more than a day before I even saw another guest.


In San Diego, Eating Well Without a Tie
IT is little exaggeration to say that just 10 years ago in the sun-blessed port city of San Diego some of the better dining was found aboard Navy ships based in the expansive harbor.
Of course, you had to enlist to join that eating club.
San Diegans explain their mundane food history by pointing to the splendid weather, which encourages outdoor activities (including cookouts) at the expense of fine dining, and a tradition of entertaining at home.


Chief of E.P.A. Says She Didn't Illegally Lobby
The head of the Environmental Protection Agency denied a Congressman's accusation that she had illegally lobbied against legislation curtailing Federal regulations, calling the charge an effort to silence her during a crucial debate on whether to roll back health and environmental protections.
"We serve the public's right to know, in full compliance with all legal mandates, including lobbying restrictions," Administrator Carol M. Browner said in a letter on Friday to Representative David M. McIntosh, Republican of Indiana.


Skiing and Safety: There's More to the Story
To the Sports Editor:
On behalf of the National Ski Areas Association, I was disappointed when I read the Backtalk column "It's Pretty, It's Trendy, but Skiing Is Also Much Too Dangerous" (The Times, Feb. 26).
John Underwood painted his negative picture based on numerous half-truths and gross errors.


POSTINGS: An Award for Empire State Building; Sidewalk Shed Wins Honors
The plywood sidewalk shed around the Empire State Building -- a monument, however fleeting, to the building's sleek black and silver Art Deco lettering -- has been awarded "Best in Shed" by the New York Landmarks Conservancy.
The award is one of five informal citations -- another applauds the Rudin Foundation for making downtown's Trinity Church a Manhattan light show -- announced by the nonprofit group last week.
The announcement coincided with the group's formal Lucy G. Moses Awards, presented Tuesday night.


Word for Word / Blues Journals; Down at the Crossroads, There's a Devil of a Debate
THE question is not so much "Can white boys (and girls) play the blues?" but "What does it matter if they do?" At a time when blues-influenced white artists like Eric Clapton, Bonnie Raitt and the Rolling Stones are winning Grammy awards, as all of them did last week, an argument continues to fester over whether whites can ever be an authentic part of the painfully born blues tradition.
The debate (which has its counterpart in jazz) is thrashed out sometimes in the pages of the country's two leading blues journals, Living Blues and Blues Revue.
The magazines have contrasting philosophies: Living Blues focuses on blacks and the black blues tradition, while Blues Revue covers blues music by blacks, whites -- whomever.


Feb.26-March 4; Physicists Weigh In: The Quark Is a Porker
ONE of the biggest surprises last week in the satisfying end to the long, frustrating hunt for the top quark is how obscenely obese this most elemental particle has turned out to be.
The only, rather dissatisfying reason the physicists can give for its heft is that if the particle were any lighter it would have been found long ago.
The top quark, this overgrown cousin to the tiny quarks (called up and down) that make up what we consider ordinary matter, is said to be heavier than an entire atom of gold.
Believed to have made a cameo appearance at the creation of the universe some 10 billion years ago, the top quark can now be coaxed back into existence only under conditions of intense energy (and immense amounts of Federal funding) inside the manmade beam of a particle accelerator.


Can Owner of Forlorn Movie Palace Buck Multiplex Trend?
The now-dilapidated Sanders Theater at Prospect Park West and 15th Street stands as a forlorn reminder of the days when Brooklynites flocked to opulent first-run movie palaces with velvet portieres, balconies and mosaic tiles to view Gable and Garbo.
The Sanders has been closed for more than a decade, but a Manhattan theater exhibitor, Norman Adie, whose company bought the historic theater last September, hopes to win approval to restore it to something close to its former glory.
Mr.
Adie, a native of Scotland who operates the Times Square Movieplex 42, said he believes that bringing an upscale theater to Park Slope would fill a need in a neighborhood that contains few movie houses.


Nassau Drops Assault Charge Against a Westbury Teacher
The Nassau County District Attorney's office has dropped assault charges against a Westbury High School teacher accused of deliberately slamming a door on a Haitian student's finger and severing the tip.
David Dahle, 49, a teacher for more than 25 years, was charged with second-degree reckless assault in early December.
On Friday, investigators concluded they could not prove that a crime had been committed.


Capitalizing on Managed Care's Popularity
WHEN Jean Marra, the office manager at Westchester Tool Rentals in Elmsford, was asked to choose a health insurance plan for her company five years ago, she looked at six different plans before picking Independent Health, a nonprofit health maintenance organization in Tarrytown.
"We thought an H.M.O. was the way to go," Ms.
Marra said.
"It seemed to be the best way to get high-quality health care at a good price. Another one of the reasons we picked Independent Health is that they had good geographical representation of their doctors and drug stores throughout the county, which was important to us, because most of our employees are young, single men who live all over Westchester."


RESULTS PLUS
HIGH SCHOOL BASKETBALL  Runco Breaks Record  Gina Runco of Adelphi Academy in Brooklyn may have played her last high school basketball game yesterday as her team lost, 75-35, to Long Island Lutheran in the Private Schools Athletic Association final.
However, she did not go out quietly as Runco broke Kenny Anderson's city record -- 2,621 points for Archbishop Molloy -- on her team's first basket.
Runco, who sprained her ankle in the third quarter, finished with 24 points and a career total of 2,645.
Long Island Lutheran moved on to the New York Association of Independent Schools tournament.
Adelphi could also receive a tourney bid.


Helga Cepeda, Paul Piscitelli
Helga Cepeda, a daughter of Adela and Diogenes Cepeda of Freeport, L.I., was married yesterday to Paul Piscitelli, a son of Marie and Ralph Piscitelli of Palm Coast, Fla.
The Rev.
Kevin Lawlor performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Cathedral of St.
Agnes in Rockville Centre, L.I.


Guess Who's Not Coming To Dinner. Go On, Guess.
DEPENDING on your point of reference, Bowery Bar is this year's -- take your pick -- Cafe Tabac, 150 Wooster, Canal Bar.
Since opening in October, the restaurant, in a former Gulf service station at the Bowery and East Fourth Street, has been repeatedly described as the hottest spot in New York.
And apparently, it can stay that way only by making sure the right tables aren't occupied by the wrong people.


When Wal-Mart Pulls Out, What's Left?
THIS is a city that Wal-Mart ditched.
Hundreds of communities have wrestled with Wal-Mart coming to town as it raced across rural America to become the nation's biggest retailer.
For years, the script has been familiar.
Wal-Mart arrives in a city creating both excitement and trepidation, a sign of a community's stature but a threat to its local shopkeepers.
Small stores often shut down, unable to match the big chain's prices.
Across the country, town after town has struck the same bargain by embracing the retailing juggernaut: the downtown is Wal-Mart.


Mets vs. Yanks: Guy Named Bubba at 2d, Guy Named Sisk on the Mound
George Steinbrenner, meet Bubba.
And Marcus, the card dealer.
And Chris Walpole, the third baseman who impersonated a Thunder Bay Whiskey Jack to get the job.
Angry over the Yankees' two losses to clubs stocked with minor league talent, Steinbrenner, the team's owner, released six replacement players on Friday and called for a change from what Gene Michael, his general manager, termed "a true replacement team."


Foreign Affairs; Global Mandate
Bob Dole remarked the other day that voters sent Washington a "loud and clear" message last November but no one is quite sure "what the precise message was." That is particularly true in foreign policy.
Yet, despite the absence of any clear foreign policy mandate, the Republicans (and many Democrats) have simply assumed that the public wants to shrink America's role in the world, along with shrinking the Federal Government.
They are wrong.
The American people are not nearly as isolationist as the moronic politicians who speak in their name.
The Chicago Council on Foreign Relations has been tracking American attitudes on foreign policy since 1974.
Its latest poll, conducted by Gallup and released today, shows the following: 65 percent of those surveyed said the U.S. should "take an active part" in world affairs rather than "stay out." That is up from the 1980's.
Although the poll shows that the public also wants to avoid unnecessary entanglements abroad, approximately half the respondents believe the U.S. plays a more important role in the world today than it did a decade earlier -- the highest number ever recorded by these surveys.


THE COUNTER COUNTERCULTURE
This is the context of my statement that "a little anti-Semitism is good for the Jews, if it reminds us of who we are."


Starting From Scratch. Or Rather, Seed.
EVEN though it still appears to be winter outside, the season should be early spring indoors.
Seed sowing time is here.
This annual rite provides rich rewards.
The awakening of seed has a miraculous side, as the plant embryos, tightly packaged in seed coats of all kinds, push up and grow.
Some end up as big as trees, while others turn out to be tiny tufts that hug the ground.
Many kinds of seed should be planted now, especially those that take a long time to germinate or need a long period of infancy before they are sturdy enough to plant outdoors.
A few of those that come to mind are slow starters, like petunias, snapdragons, peppers and eggplant.
Others, like tomatoes, can be started later in the month.


LOS ANGELES
SPRING IS COMING TO Griffith Park, and, for the first time in several years, rain -- lots of it -- is ushering it in.
So even Los Angeles residents who grew up visiting the place and are now inculcating its wonders in their children will see colors and contours they may never have seen before.
With its dusty, craggy slopes and scrubby vegetation, Griffith Park -- 4,017 acres in the foothills of the Santa Monica Mountains -- is a rich reminder of what all Los Angeles once was: a desert.
But deserts do bloom, and park officials expect that an unusually rich array of colors will sprout this spring.


Making a Pot au Feu for a Party of Six
IT takes time to assemble the ingredients, simmer them, trim them properly and arrange them on the table.
But a simple boiled dinner -- called pot au feu in French and bollito misto in Italian -- is a heart-warming delight.
It is best made for a minimum of six people, to permit a variety of meats to go into the pot and flavor the soup.
For this reason, and because it is actually best prepared in advance and reheated, it is excellent dinner-party fare.
Refrigerating it overnight improves the texture of the meats and makes for easy removal of most of the fat.


A Voice as Raw as the City She Sings About
THERE'S NO GENTRIFICATION in Joan Osborne's neighborhood.
None, at least, in the places she sings about on "Relish" (Blue Gorilla/Mercury; CD and cassette), one of the strongest major-label debut albums of 1995.
Osborne's songs are about a drug-addicted hooker and a suicidal friend, about fighting over an unpaid telephone bill, about walking home past the marijuana dealer and the cops on the corner.
They're also about sex, heartbreak, sin and hope.
And they are showcases for a singer who'll scrape her voice raw to make a line ring true.
Osborne was born in Anchorage, Ky., and came to New York to attend film school at New York University.
Since the late 1980's, she has worked her way up the bar-band circuit of New York City and the East Coast.
Her voice -- with its Bonnie Raitt curves and its Ray Charles growls, its ache and its syncopated timing -- immediately sets her above most happy-hour serenaders, even in blues and soul chestnuts.
Then she added her own songs to her sets.


What's All the Tohubohu?
To the Editor:
David R. Slavitt does not do poetry a service by using the word "tohubohu" to describe today's poetry.
It is this sort of thing that turns away would-be readers of poetry.
He could just as well have written "empty and formless."  LAWRENCE HOMER  New York


Bankruptcy for Silver Palace
After a bitter labor dispute, the Silver Palace, Chinatown's only unionized restaurant, has filed for bankruptcy protection, saying it cannot meet debts totaling $3.5 million.
"We have no choice," said Richard Chan, co-owner of the restaurant.
"The cost of operating is too high."


Anita Lubetsky, Jonathan Marshall
Anita Lubetsky, the daughter of Stella Lubetsky of Pomona, N.Y., and Dr.
Herman W. Lubetsky of New York, was married last evening to Jonathan Paul Marshall, a son of Lorraine and Dr.
David Marshall of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Daniel Alder performed the ceremony at the Carlyle in New York.
Ms.
Lubetsky, who is keeping her name, is a lawyer in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Tufts University and received a master's degree in real estate development from Columbia University and her law degree from Hofstra University.
Her mother is a clinical social worker in Pomona.
Her father is the director of emergency radiology at Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center in New York and an associate clinical professor at Columbia University.


SUNDAY, March 5, 1995; TALES OF THE UNIVERSE: Giving Birth to the Stars
The Tarantula nebula, above, the largest and most fecund star factory in the known universe, is providing new offspring for astronomers.
The Tarantula stretches for over 1,000 light-years across the Large Magellanic Cloud, a galaxy 160,000 light-years from Earth, and its distance from us has long frustrated scientists.
But last year, the improved optics of the Hubble Space Telescope yielded an image of almost mythological import: In the cluster known as R136 (upper right), where once only a handful of supermassive stars were thought to shine, 3,000 smaller new stars could be seen.
Scientists hope this gift will shed new light on stellar formation.


Corporate Term Limits: 2 Views
To the Editor:
The concept of having term limits for executives is naive.
The fact is that every executive employed by a major corporation is on a term limit.
They perform well and keep their jobs, or they do not perform and are terminated; it's a built-in checks-and-balance system.
To mandate this would be foolish, setting up a "lame duck" relationship between the corporation and the individual running it.
In fact, my experience with major corporations has proved that when there is a continuing rotation program, (i.e. executives know that they will only be in a position for one or two years), they are actually ineffectual at the end of the term and are more concerned with their success in the next assignment rather than their current assignment.
STEPHEN SCHIFFMAN  Manhattan, Feb. 21  The writer is president of the DEI Management Group.


Amy M. Weiner, Marc D. Puntus
Amy Michelle Weiner, the daughter of Nina and Herbert Weiner of Forest Hills, Queens, was married last evening to Marc David Puntus, a son of Martin Puntus of Forest Hills and the late Audrey G. Puntus.
Rabbi Leon Chait officiated at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
Mrs.
Puntus, 27, graduated cum laude from the State University at Albany.
She is the director of sales for Collegiate Marketing Inc., a sales and marketing company in New York.
Her mother is the director of administration for the Queens division of the American Cancer Society, in Forest Hills.
Her father, who works in New York, is the vice president of sales for M&amp;R Imports, footwear importers.


'I Gave So Much to Others?'
ANAIS NIN A Biography.
By Deirdre Bair.
Illustrated. 654 pp.
New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons. $39.95.


My Town, Our Town, Motown
THERE WAS A TIME WHEN BLACK music was expected to supply black audiences with all the plots, characters and dramas, all the distinctions of class, region and style that in a reasonably integrated America would have found their way into white mainstream plays, movies, novels and television shows.
That may be one reason the music took so many forms (jazz, blues, gospel), and why the offshoot of each form had its own name (rhythm-and-blues, doo-wop, soul), and its own musical, and social, twist.
But none of these forms had lived an entirely segregated life: to one degree or another they had all taken what they wanted or needed from white music.
With its youthful postwar brashness, aimed at teen-agers, rock-and-roll sped up this process.
The black pioneers of rock-and-roll were not giving America unfettered race testimony or self-expression.
They were giving America calculated entertainment in bright racial Technicolor.
Rock-and-roll was show business.
To secure a mass audience it had to appeal to young blacks across class lines: be funky but suave too; primal, then languid, then ironic.
And it had to lure young whites across both class lines and the great racial divide: it had to be exotic enough to thrill them but familiar enough to make them feel at home.


Lynne Rathe and Christopher Laibe
Lynne Euxenia Rathe, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Rathe of Covington, La., and Christopher J. P. Laibe, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John W. Laibe of Greenwich, Conn., were married yesterday in New Orleans.
Msgr.
Joseph Chotin performed the ceremony at the chapel of the Academy of the Sacred Heart.
Mrs.
Laibe, 25, graduated from the University of Maryland.
She is a former sales representative for MMD Inc., a pharmaceuticals company in Atlanta.
Her father is the founder and chairman of the Southern Microfilm Corporation, an information services company in New Orleans.


Filling the Del Toro Seat: Litmus of District's Priorities
When Assemblyman Angelo Del Toro died of a heart attack in December, many East Harlem residents assumed his brother William would inherit the seat he had held for almost 20 years in a district where almost half the residents receive some form of public assistance.
But with a special election scheduled for March 14, William Del Toro is facing a formidable challenge from Francisco Diaz Jr., the district manager of Community Board 11, whose candidacy is backed by the neighborhood's most powerful unions and political leaders, including Congressman Charles B. Rangel.


BENEFITS
Baryshnikov and Hines  TUESDAY -- Mikhail Baryshnikov and Gregory Hines will be among those performing in a fund-raiser for the tuition-free programs of the New Ballet School.
The evening begins at 6 with a cocktail party and buffet dinner at the studios of the Feld Ballets/NY at 890 Broadway (19th Street).
The 8:30 performance will be at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue (19th Street).
Tickets, $350, from (212) 777-7710.
Preventing Family Violence  TUESDAY -- The Jewish Board of Family and Children's Services will use proceeds from a musical evening at Tavern on the Green to help provide shelter for families and prevent family violence.
A cocktail reception at 7 will be followed by dinner and a performance by Mary Cleere Haran, a cabaret singer.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 632-4714.
Cathedral School Fund-Raiser  TUESDAY -- A fund-raiser for the tuition assistance program of the Cathedral School of St.
John the Divine will be held at the school, 1047 Amsterdam Avenue (111th Street).
A 6 P.M. dinner in the Cathedral House will be followed by an auction at 8 o'clock.
Dinner tickets, $60, from (212) 316-7500.
Come as You Like It  WEDNESDAY -- The Shakespeare Project, which produces a free summer theater program in New York, is holding a party at the Duke-Semans House, 1009 Fifth Avenue (82d Street).
The party, which begins at 7:30, is to include cocktails, a buffet dinner and performances by a comedian and a cellist, among others.
Guests may dress as they like.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 387-7929.
Masked Purim Ball  WEDNESDAY -- A masked ball at the Waldorf-Astoria will celebrate the Jewish festival of Purim, which falls on March 15 and 16.
The beneficiary will be the programs of the Jewish Museum.
A 6:30 P.M. cocktail reception will precede dancing and dinner.
Black tie or costume.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 843-1749.
Women's Project Cabaret  THURSDAY -- The cabaret singers Julie Wilson and Mary Cleere Haran are to perform at a benefit for Women's Project and Productions, a theater company.
The evening begins at 8:30 with a cocktail party, followed by the performances, all in a SoHo loft at 362 West Broadway (Broome Street), Apartment 2.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 873-3040.
Dancing in the Deep  THURSDAY -- The Young Friends of the New York Public Library are to hold a black-tie dance party with an ocean-life theme from 9 P.M. to 1 A.M. at the main library, Fifth Avenue at 42d Street.
Proceeds are to benefit the Young Friends' Fund for International Fiction, which supports collections at the library.
The organization asks that "aquatic headgear" be worn.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 930-0730.
An Anniversary Ball  FRIDAY -- The 42d annual ball of the Staten Island Mental Health Society will be held at the Pierre.
The event will benefit the organization's psychological services for children.
Dinner and dancing will follow a 7:30 cocktail reception.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 442-2225, extension 215.
A Casino Evening  SATURDAY -- The young professionals group of the New York chapter of the National Multiple Sclerosis Society is to sponsor gaming and dancing from 8:30 P.M. to 1 A.M. at the Grand Hyatt.
Cocktails and a buffet dinner will be served.
Black tie.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 463-7787.


BACKTALK: Skiing and Safety: There's More to the Story; Ski Responsibility
To the Sports Editor:
Skiing is not a riskless sport; injuries, even to the most skilled, will occur.
However, let us not blame the ski resorts and equipment manufacturers unless dangerous trails are not properly marked and unless equipment is faulty.
Let the skier take responsibility for being knowledgeable of the risks involved and how to limit them, as well as using good common sense, or suffer the consequences.
HARRY E. COMNINELLIS
New York


BACKTALK: Skiing and Safety: There's More to the Story; Can't Ski, or Walk
To the Sports Editor:
I severely injured my medial cruciate ligament skiing several years ago.
I could not even walk for several weeks, let alone go to work, or run, which was, and still is, my first passion.
I have not skied since.


A Mansion With a Forbidden Room
MOVING HOUSE Stories.
By Pawel Huelle.
Translated by Michael Kandel. 248 pp.
New York: A Helen and Kurt Wolff Book/ Harcourt Brace &amp; Company. $18.95.


Feb. 26 - March 4: Show of Command; Mandela's Police Raid His Wife's House
During the apartheid years, Winnie Mandela, the wife of the world's most famous political prisoner, was a symbol of invincibility.
The police arrested her, harassed her, isolated her, slandered her and banished her to rural exile, but they never tamed her.
Last week the police were back, this time with the blessing of President Nelson Mandela.
They raided her Soweto mansion seeking evidence of bribe-taking and influence-peddling.
Democracy, it seemed, had not tamed her either.


Somalia's First Lesson For Military Is Caution
The world's armed mission to aid Somalia came to an end on Friday when 1,800 marines steamed away from Mogadishu after one last firefight with the populace that previous American forces had come to help.
But even before the departure of the United Nations troops and their American escort, the 26-month intervention had forced a new approach to the kinds of missions the United States military is likely to face in years to come.


ABOUT BOOKS
New Look at Edison
WHAT makes an often-told tale of a famous figure worth reading one more time?
Obviously when the author has discovered -- or rather been made privy to -- a wealth of significant biographical information.
"Edison: Inventing the Century," by Neil Baldwin, is more than a tribute to Thomas Edison, long considered America's greatest inventor; it grapples with the changing stages of Edison's personal life, past the familiar exploits of a rambunctious youth to the complex work and family crises of a compulsive achiever.


Solving the Eternal Vexation of the Highway: The Left Turn
In the great tradition of such highway marvels as the exit ramp, the cloverleaf and the jug handle has come the latest advance in mankind's never-ending quest for a more perfect road system:
The world's first Continuous Flow Intersection.


A Humorous Primer On Mating Politics
OF course, there are marriages, relationships, even first encounters of a brainier kind than those glimpsed in the world premiere musical at the American Stage Company.
But it's the medium connection, the normal or, perhaps, the norm that is goodheartedly charted by the songs and sketches in "I Love You, You're Perfect -- Now Change," an off-base title for an audience-friendly show.
Don't expect a look at love among the intellectual, sophisticated or artistic set.
No such enlightened variations as same-sex attraction or multicultural coupling, either.
Joe DiPietro has written a humorous primer on the politics of mating for conventional players, and Jimmy Roberts's music is a skillful grab bag of show tunes, according to the tradition of tried, true and tuneful eclecticism.


THE COUNTER COUNTERCULTURE
No one is ever satisfied with journalistic treatments of a subject he knows well.
Naturally, I wish Atlas had printed some of my more interesting comments, particularly concerning the loss of a distinction between politics and culture ("To write 'The Real Anita Hill' was a political act; to publish it was a cultural one").
But I would like to make one point.
While numerous conservatives are identified as having contracts with the Free Press, the article is silent when it comes to Michael Lind, who is presented as a defector from the right and a critic of the Republican establishment.
This compounds the impression that the Free Press is nothing but a conservative publisher, intolerant of all dissenting views.
That is simply wrong.
Erwin Glikes, the publisher of the Free Press until just before his sudden death last spring, daily contended with the impulse of the press to push a challenging or independent thought into a crude political box.
He never argued with this liberal intolerance.
Instead, he artfully exploited it.
ADAM BELLOW Editorial Director, The Free Press New York


Schools Relying on Foundations
CONFRONTED with diminishing tax bases and state-aid cutbacks, more and more school districts are turning to private foundations to pay for programs that would otherwise be a casualty of a tight budget, and districts that do not have foundation support are exploring ways to obtain it.
"There just isn't enough in a budget," said Judith Gluckstern, president of the year-old Dobbs Ferry School Foundation.
"Dobbs Ferry has strong support from the community on the budget, but the budget can only be stretched so far, and you can't keep expanding that number upward."


Bridge as a Parable For the Rest of Life
What a welcome change to read an article about bridge that stresses the positive!  [ "An Evangelist on Playing Bridge Seeks Out the Younger Set" Feb. 12. ]  Too many people have gotten turned off to the game because of all the negative publicity and cutesy cartoons about bickering partners and nasty opponents.


Park, in Difficult Circumstances, May Welcome 'Pomp'
Critics growled when Bryant Park was taken over for a few days for fashion shows and MTV awards.
They railed when Fox cable began morning telecasts from a corner of Madison Square Park.
Already some are wagging their fingers over Disney's premiere of "Pocahontas," scheduled for Central Park in June.
But those events will soon be dwarfed by one of the longest running entertainments ever in a city park: a dinner comedy in a tent in DeWitt Clinton Park, starting in October for a seven-month run.
"It's novel, it's unique," said the Parks Commissioner, Henry J. Stern, whose agency is planning the event.


Corrections
The Votes in Congress chart last Sunday misstated the position of Representative Amo Houghton, Republican of New York, on a Democratic-sponsored proposal that sought to cap rather than repeal tax breaks designed to encourage the sale of broadcast stations to members of minority groups.
He voted against the proposal.


Rye Police Merger Scrapped at Outset
IN what would have been the first merger of its kind in the state, the City of Rye and the Village of Rye Brook announced plans last month to combine police departments.
But the controversial proposal, which was designed to streamline operations and save taxpayer dollars, was scrapped late last Tuesday because of opposition from the police union and many residents.
It was estimated that a combined Sound Shore Police District would have saved the two governments up to $1.2 million a year -- mainly through a 23 percent reduction in employees.


Prescriptions for Housing Programs
NO city comes close to New York in its spending for housing development.
Focusing mainly on restoring the tax-foreclosed housing stock for low-income people, the city has spent $3.6 billion over the last eight years.
The results are visible in far-flung neighborhoods, where once-abandoned apartment buildings have been restored.
In addition, hundreds of new houses have gone up on vacant city-owned land.


Gypsy Group Seeks Allies: Jews


FILM: Bucking the System, but Still Part of the Buzz; Atom Egoyan May Have His Breakthrough In 'Exotica'
"YOU DON'T SET A FILM IN A strip club without being aware that it's going to make a lot of people uncomfortable," says Atom Egoyan, whose "Exotica," which opened on Friday, actually turns unease into a dramatic virtue.
Fascinated by the rituals and obsessive patterns in his characters' lives, the Toronto-based Mr.
Egoyan has long been admired on the festival circuit for his exquisite gamesmanship and stubborn, cerebral intensity, not to mention his sneaky wit.
His films are structured as puzzles, cunningly meting out fragments of information as a way to manipulate perception.
"It's not as though I have a linear story and I fracture it," says the film maker, a recent juror at the Sundance festival, who is small, wry, owlish and intensely analytical even in conversation.
"In my mind, it's always been that way."


How the Study Was Conducted
To study deaths and injuries to newborns at New York City public hospitals, The New York Times reviewed all records of births, infant deaths, miscarriages and stillbirths filed in New York City in 1993, as well as hospital records for mothers and newborns.
More than 130,000 birth certificates and 830 death certificates were used to calculate death and injury rates.
Then death rates were adjusted for demographic and medical differences between mothers delivering babies in public and in private hospitals.


Ms. Seymour, Mr. Rakowski
Dana E. Seymour and Matthew J. Rakowski, vice presidents in the securities industry in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Dr.
Thomas K. Tewell performed the ceremony at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church in New York.
Ms.
Seymour, who is 33 and is keeping her name, works in the high-yield bond group of Bankers Trust.
She graduated cum laude from Wellesley College.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


Shoppers' Choice? The Bus Terminal
In the 1980's the Port Authority Bus Terminal was filled with homeless people and besieged by Times Square's tawdriness, the crack epidemic and street crime.
Scam artists lurked about its pay phones "shoulder surfing" to steal credit card numbers.
Lindy's restaurant, with its coterie of male hustlers, was known as much for quick pickups as for short-order cooking.
"I don't think we could have gotten any lower," said the Port Authority's real estate manager, John F. Brendlen Jr.


An Afghan Leader Is Warily Hopeful About Peace
For much of this week, Ahmad Shah Massoud has watched from a window in an old Soviet military camp near here as the crimson sunset has spread, a few minutes later every day, across the snowbound mountains of the Hindu Kush.
Spring is afoot in Afghanistan, heralding a new season in the 15-year-old war.
But for Mr.
Massoud, the former resistance commander who has gone from being the Afghan leader most feared by Soviet troops to the most powerful figure in the Kabul Government, success is no longer measured by the number of mountain villages won from Soviet forces.


Karen Reid and Gregory Weiss
Karen Ann Reid, a product manager at I.B.M. in Somers, N.Y., was married yesterday to Gregory Alan Weiss, a partner in the New York law firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett.
The Rev.
William Pindar performed the ceremony at Central Presbyterian Church in New York.
Mrs.
Weiss graduated from Duke University and received an M.B.A. from American University.
She is a daughter of Miriam M. Reid of Lancaster, Pa., and John W. Reid of Downingtown, Pa.
The bride's father is the president of Four Rams Inc., a real estate development company in Downingtown.
Her mother is a reading teacher at Pequea Valley School in Intercourse, Pa.


Corrections
A report in the Nation's Table column of The Living Section on Feb. 22 about La Casa del Pane, a bread bakery in St.
Petersburg Beach, Fla., cited the bakery's ownership incompletely.
It is two-thirds owned by Dino Clemente, the owner of Clemente and Central bakeries in South Hackensack, N.J., and one-third owned by Nicholas Castronuovo.


For Pataki, a Gruff Protector; Communications Chief Is Also Influential Adviser
George E. Pataki's squinty eyes grew wide with amazement when he first watched Zenia Mucha in action last fall.
Aboard a small campaign plane, reporters were grilling Mr.
Pataki about allegations of financial conflict that had been published in that day's Village Voice.
Ms.
Mucha, who had just taken a leave as Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's spokeswoman to become director of communications for the Pataki campaign for governor, allowed a question or two and then abruptly cut off the interrogation, curtly dismissing the Voice's credibility with a choice expletive or two.
"That's it," she snapped.
"We're not discussing this anymore."


Corrections
A table in Science Times on Feb. 21 about the possible health benefits of nutrients called carotenoids misidentified one substance.
It is lycopene, not lyocene.


Scandal Besets Chinese Markets
China's emerging securities markets are mired in their worst financial scandal since the Communists reopened a stock market here in 1990, weakening the markets at a time when the country badly needs them to raise capital.
In a trading disaster that bears some eerie similarities to the collapse of the British investment bank Barings P.L.C., China's biggest and most prestigious securities firm made a huge gamble in the bond market late last month and lost.
It pushed the firm, Shanghai International Securities, to the brink of bankruptcy in a single day.


Sun, Surf, Replacements
The attractiveness of replacement baseball continued to be minimal as the team owners George Steinbrenner and Fred Wilpon and only about 1,000 fans filed into Fort Lauderdale Stadium to watch the Yankees play the Mets on a gorgeous Sunday afternoon.
The beach looked better than baseball.
While the announced crowd was 1,682, that included some season-ticket holders who didn't show up.
Last spring, the first matchup here between the two New York teams attracted 6,664 fans.


Walbro Corp.(WALB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Transactions
WEEKEND Basketball  National Basketball Association
ATLANTA HAWKS -- Placed Jim Les, guard, on the injured list.
Signed Morlon Wiley, guard, to a 10-day contract.
DALLAS MAVERICKS -- Placed Jim Jackson, guard, on the injured list.
Activated Doug Smith, forward.
INDIANA PACERS -- Released John Williams, forward.
Signed Mark Strickland, forward, to a 10-day contract.


Lobo's Impact Resonates Far Beyond the Court
Mom never made it past midcourt.
That is neither the fault of Rebecca Lobo's mother nor a fair measure of her ability.
It is just the way the game was played when RuthAnn Lobo was in high school; six on a side, restricted by added boundaries that forced defenders to advance the ball halfway down the court and then stop to watch.
But when her daughter achieved a national reputation as a high school player in the fullcourt game for women, RuthAnn Lobo was able to slice through the recruiting rhetoric.
The coach at Connecticut, Geno Auriemma, had assembled a program strong enough to reach the Final Four, and was part of the race, with Notre Dame, Stanford, Virginia and others, for a player who would make an impact on the women's game.


Wolverine Tube Inc.(WLV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Jaspers Regroup With Rally and Notch Victory No. 25
Manhattan hit a major bump along its road to the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament tonight.
But the Jaspers were able to continue on that course by rallying to defeat Fairfield, 82-69, in a semifinal contest of the Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference tournament at Knickerbocker Arena.
The top-seeded Jaspers (25-3), who got a game-high 23 points from guard Ted Ellis and 18 from center Jamal Marshall, fell behind the fourth-seeded Stags (13-15) by as many as 8 points early in the second half.
They needed to increase the intensity of their nationally ranked defense to get back into the contest.


Buddy Guy, Blues Master, On the Audience Wavelength
Buddy Guy is one of the handful of great living bluesmen.
His albums, like his current "Slippin' In" (Silvertone), show off his strengths: a voice that moves from plush and pained to a near-hysterical rasp, and guitar playing that can tickle quietly, slash in broad strokes or jitter in frantic, speedy splotches.
But in concert, where bluesmen used to prove themselves, Mr.
Guy has turned into a peculiar amalgam of blues master and showboating celebrity, devoted more to working a crowd than to playing the blues.
On Thursday night at the Academy, he faced a typical current blues audience: overwhelmingly white, largely male and out to party.
It's an audience that both appreciates the performer and treats him like a gifted freak or a servant.
Mr.
Guy was dressed for the part, in overalls and a flannel shirt, with a polka-dotted guitar and a rhinestoned strap.


A U.S. Look For Lessons In Barings
Whether the failure of Barings P.L.C. was a regrettable but instructive accident or a sign of a growing weakness in the world's financial system was the subject of an uneasy debate this weekend by regulators, financiers and academicians who gathered here for an annual Federal Reserve conference on markets.
The Barings collapse, involving losses of $1 billion from speculation about the direction of the Japanese stock and bond markets, followed precisely a script that had been the biggest worry of many regulators: a trader careens out of control and in a matter of weeks loses enough money to bankrupt a major financial firm.


Talks in Denmark to Discuss All the Ways the World Hurts
Under a bleak gray sky, with the streets and marshlands swept by icy North Sea winds, this stolid Danish capital is preparing to play host to an unusual gathering of world leaders who are to discuss poverty, unemployment, uncontrolled migration and the kind of social disintegration that leads to civil war.
The United Nations World Summit for Social Development, which opens on Monday, is expected to draw more than 100 world leaders.
Vice President Al Gore is scheduled to take part, and Hillary Rodham Clinton is to join the meeting -- known mostly as the Social Summit -- on Tuesday, staying on for Wednesday's commemoration of International Women's Day.
More than 70 percent of the world's poorest people are women.


Food Stamp Cuts
House Republicans say they want to cut $16.5 billion from the food stamp program over five years by trimming the growth in benefits and by requiring that able-bodied recipients who have no dependents find work within 90 days.
Article, page B7.


Is NASA Among the Truly Needy?
With politicians in Washington combing through the budget looking for programs to eliminate, it is astonishing that no one has taken aim at the manned space program.
The recent space linkup of American astronauts with Russian cosmonauts -- and the shuttle flight now winging through the skies above us -- should be a reminder of the costly nature of the venture on which the U.S. is embarked.
The space agency is spending more than $5 billion a year to fly its shuttles and build a space station leading nowhere.
This page has long been skeptical of the value of the proposed space station, largely because it will deliver so little for so much.
The station makes minimal sense unless it is part of a broader plan of space exploration -- a manned mission to Mars, for example, or a trip back to the moon for extended exploration or habitation.
Yet the date when the nation will have the resources to finance such enormously costly space exploration is receding faster than you can say "balance the budget."


A Brand-Name Consistency Can Still Produce Surprises
Two of the most celebrated brand names in music -- the Vienna Philharmonic and Georg Solti -- came together at Carnegie Hall this weekend for three sold-out concerts.
And like brand-name products, they guaranteed a certain amount of consistency and reliability, particularly when taking on such mainstream repertory as Beethoven's Seventh Symphony, Strauss's "Till Eulenspiegel," Stravinsky's "Petrouchka" and Tchaikovsky's "Pathetique" Symphony.
It would almost have been possible to catalogue their virtues in advance.
The Vienna showed off its familiar warm string sound, which can make ordinary orchestral legato seem quirky and edgy, along with a melting, penetrating brass sound that burnishes ordinarily blaring climaxes.
It also had the sort of proprietary confidence about the repertory that early-music groups usually possess.
Mr.
Solti, during climaxes, displayed the kind of driving energy that takes no prisoners; robust phrasings in which each note was both accented and part of a penetrating proclamation, and an unpredictability that celebrated the sensations of the present moment.


Can't New York Learn From Rockefeller Drug Policy Failures?
To the Editor:
Gov.
George E. Pataki is bent on dismantling Nelson A. Rockefeller's misguided New York State recidivist sentencing laws, only to replace them with Rockefeller's misguided drug-addiction treatment facilities.
Can nothing be learned from history?


Pall Corp.(PLL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Need to Sell Public Hospitals Is Underscored, Giuliani Says
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that a report in The New York Times detailing a high death rate among newborn babies in New York City public hospitals demonstrated the need for the city to reduce its ownership of these hospitals.
The Times's report said that dozens of newborns have died or been injured each year because of mistakes made by inexperienced doctors and poorly supervised midwives and nurses.


Small Fire at Hospital
A fire broke out yesterday morning in an administrative building at Lenox Hill Hospital on the Upper East Side, but the blaze was quickly contained and there were no injuries.
The fire, which started in a storage area on the ninth floor of the building at 1086 Lexington Avenue, at 77th Street, caused only minor damage, said Karen J. Zipern, a hospital spokeswoman.
She said no one was in the building when the fire began.


Belfast Journal; A War Widow's Thoughts at Peace's Dawning
Pauline Hegney, the mother of four young children whose husband was slain three and a half years ago by Protestant paramilitaries on a Belfast street, prays every day that the Government peace effort will work and that there will be no more killings here in the name of patriotism.
She is among the tens of thousands of survivors of the 3,172 Protestants and Roman Catholics who have been killed in sectarian warfare here since 1969.
She speaks with a soft Ulster lilt and there is passion in her voice and in her writings about her husband's death, but no hatred.


Wife of State Senator Commits Suicide
Johanne Padavan, the wife of State Sen.
Frank Padavan, committed suicide in the couple's home in Jamaica Estates, Queens, yesterday afternoon, the police said.
Senator Padavan, a Republican, found Mrs.
Padavan, 56, hanged in the attic about 1:30 P.M., said Sgt.
Nicholas Vreeland, a police spokesman.


Europeans Oppose American as Next Director of Unicef
In a bitter behind-the-scenes diplomatic battle, the 15 nations of the European Union have frustrated the Clinton Administration's efforts to have an American public health specialist selected as executive director of Unicef, the United Nations Children's Fund.
The agency has been headed by an American since it was founded in 1946, and until recently the Administration was confident that its candidate, Dr.
William H. Foege, a former director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, would become the agency's new executive director.


Many Faces of Witness in Terror Trial
When Emad Salem takes the stand this week in the terrorism trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and 10 others, the jury must decide which version of the man to believe.
Is he an undercover hero who infiltrated a gang of Arab terrorists bent on blowing up the Lincoln Tunnel and other landmarks, as the prosecution says?
Or is he an Egyptian double agent who came to the United States expressly to frame Mr.
Abdel Rahman and keep him from returning to Egypt, as the defense claims?


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; In ratings scramble, networks' quick-change act becomes quicker.
LIKE Yul Brynner's character in "The Magnificent Seven," the television producer Steven Bochco is a gunslinger for hire, one who prefers to work for the oppressed, the downtrodden, the needy.
And who in the television business best fits that description at the moment? CBS.


Remembering a March for Voting Rights


Abroad at Home; 'Sorry, I Forgot the Truth'
An investor buys securities that turn out to be worthless.
He sues for fraud, showing that the seller omitted critical facts in describing the offer.
In court, the seller says "I forgot." With that, he escapes responsibility.
A ludicrous notion?
Not at all.
It will be the law if a bill that reaches the floor of the House today wins final passage.
It is the latest installment of the Newt Gingrich Contract: H.R. 10, to change the country's civil damage and securities law.


A Fight Is Due Over Pact on Nuclear-Arms Spread
The Clinton Administration's decision to drop its insistence on the right to withdraw from a nuclear test-ban treaty after 10 years encouraged new hope for the treaty, but it came too late to prevent a tough fight over a related treaty to stop the spread of nuclear weapons, arms experts said.
Progress on the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty being negotiated here could help reduce opposition to an indefinite extension of the separate 1968 Treaty on the Nonproliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Vladimir Petrovsky, secretary-general of the international Conference on Disarmament said in an interview here this week.


William E. Clancy, Assemblyman, 82
William E. Clancy, a former New York State Assemblyman who championed enhanced pensions for public school teachers, died on Tuesday in Sarasota, Fla.
He was 82.
The cause was a heart attack, according to the Roman Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn.


Whitman to Speak at Blight Site
A 150-foot granite column honoring the Colonial Army's first victory, at the Battle of Trenton, also marks one of the capital's most blighted neighborhoods.
Today the Battle Monument, as it is known, and its troubled environs will be the backdrop as Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman outlines her "Urban Initiative," an effort to develop programs to deal with the problems of New Jersey cities.
For starters, the plan will focus on Trenton, Camden, Elizabeth and Asbury Park, said Rita Manno, a spokeswoman for the Governor.


Former President of United Way Going on Trial
For 22 years, William Aramony worked to make United Way one of America's best known and most efficient charitable organizations.
But in the end, he also made it one of the most notorious.
In 1992 he was forced out as president of United Way of America under charges that he had misused its finances to support a lavish life style that included a long-distance romance with a young woman recently out of high school.
Now Mr.
Aramony, 67, is fighting not only for his reputation, but also to stay out of prison.
Today, he and two former aides will go on trial for what the Government says was the theft of more than $1 million from United Way, as well as for fraud, conspiracy, tax evasion and money laundering.
The trial, which will be before Judge Claude M. Hilton in Federal District Court in Alexandria, Va., is expected to last several weeks.


AutoZone Inc.(AZO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 11


For Bratton, An Echo Of Battles In History
Exactly 23 days after he was appointed, the New York City Police Commissioner quit on a January day in 1918, claiming that the newly inaugurated Mayor, John F. Hylan, had presumed to meddle in his department.
Within a few days, the Governor was involved, and the young Hylan administration was enmeshed in its first full-blown crisis.
Back then, it was the Mayor's brother-in-law, Police Officer Irving O'Hara, who provoked the situation by giving Commissioner Frederick H. Bugher orders on whom to hire and fire.
But as other crises over the years have made clear, the volatility between a tradition-bound Police Department and a strong-willed mayor does not require the spark of a meddling in-law.


Arbor Drugs Inc.(ARBR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Isabel Wilder, 95, Novelist, Is Dead
Isabel Wilder, a novelist and a sister of the author and playwright Thornton Wilder, died last Monday at her home in Hamden, Conn.
She was 95.
Miss Wilder published three novels in the 1930's: "Mother and Four" (1933), "Heart Be Still" (1934) and "Let Winter Go" (1937).
In later years, she contributed introductions to several of her brother's posthumously published works, including "The Alcestiad" (1977), "American Characteristics and Other Essays" (1979) and "The Journals of Thornton Wilder 1939-1961" (1985), selected and edited by Donald Gallup of Yale University.


No Headline
"The one thing the Barings episode illustrates is the productivity for making losses has gone up very significantly in the last 25 years. You couldn't write the execution slips fast enough 25 years ago to lose as much money as was lost by one individual, aided by terrific technology." -- ALAN GREENSPAN, chairman of the Federal Reserve.  [ D2:4. ]


POP
The Essence of Punk, In Sound and Manners  Rancid Limelight
In the rebellious world of punk rock, values clamor over glamour and speed over melody, Rancid has managed to achieve the near-impossible.
This California quartet, which performed on Wednesday night, plays catchy, accessible songs that don't seem to violate punk's strict anti-pop stance.
It does so by wielding its melodies and harmonies like weapons, spitting out fast, angry choruses in unison, and by singing about the neighborhood and scene from which it rose.
The band's credentials are also helpful: two members used to play in Operation Ivy, an influential underground band that fused ska with punk, and another served briefly in the English punk band the U.K.
Subs.


Otis Stuart Is Dead; Dance Critic Was 43
Otis Stuart, a dance critic and the author of the first major biography of Rudolf Nureyev written and published in the United States, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 43.
The cause was AIDS, said Sarah Pettit, a friend.


We Have a Boardwalk, Too
There's more than gambling: That's the message the Atlantic City Convention Center Authority will try to convey by radio beginning this spring.
The authority will have its own low-power station, which will be receivable only around the city, intended especially for tourists approaching on the Atlantic City Expressway, the Black Horse Pike and the White Horse Pike.
Road signs will advertise the broadcast, which will tell listeners about fairs, festivals and big-name entertainment.


DANCE
Sun and Moon as in Haiku But It's Movement, not Words  Erick Hawkins Dance Company Joyce Theater
"Black Lake" is one of Erick Hawkins's most ingenious dances.
To think of the night sky as a black lake is to understand the choreographer's approach to metaphor.
Like the dancing, the work's original score by Lucia Dlugoszewski fuses Asian and Western elements and the entire piece has the measured confidence of a time-honored ceremony.
And like its haikulike episodes that speak of the sun and moon, the work as a whole celebrates the eternal in nature.


New Roll of Dice For Atlantic City's Development Plan
An ambitious plan to make the casino district a more attractive vacation destination for families and nongamblers is in peril, and accusations are flying that two of the biggest casino interests in town are trying to scuttle it because they don't want the competition.
The original design for the project created a landscaped corridor with a new 1,000-room hotel, amusements and retail pavilions reaching from a state-financed $254 million convention center, under construction at the eastern end of the Atlantic City Expressway, to the casino district on the boardwalk and ocean five blocks away.
Weedy lots and dilapidated buildings -- the first things a visitor to the island resort now sees -- would be eliminated in the corridor, and hopes were riding high that these improvements would encourage private investment in adjoining downtrodden neighborhoods.


What a Difference Affirmative Action Has Made
To the Editor:
I am saddened by Shelby Steele's critique of affirmative action (Op-Ed, March 1).


CLINTON TO FIGHT MEASURE REVISING RULES ON LAWSUITS
The Clinton Administration has decided to wage a vigorous fight against legislation that would drastically reshape the nation's legal system, including changes that would make it more difficult to sue for damages in injury cases.
In a letter to be delivered on Monday to Speaker Newt Gingrich, the Administration will warn that central provisions in the landmark legislation are too extreme and would "tilt the legal playing field dramatically to the disadvantage of consumers and middle-class citizens."


Oregon Steel Mills Inc.(OS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


RESULTS PLUS
ALPINE SKIING  Street Rallies to Win  Picabo Street came from behind yesterday in Saalbach, Austria, to win her third consecutive World Cup downhill race.
"I'm a little bit surprised," said Street, a 23-year-old from Sun Valley, Idaho.
"I was lucky." Street won her first World Cup downhill at Lake Louise, Alberta, early this season and added victories in the previous two races, Cortina d'Ampezzo, Italy, and Are, Sweden.
A teammate, Hilary Lindh, has two victories in the downhill.
Street finished the downhill in 1 minute 37.87 seconds, 16-hundredths of a second ahead of both Italy's Isolde Kostner and Russia's Varvara Zelenskaya.
Lindh was 14th. (AP)


Puccini in Rare Form, But Also Pure Puccini
The New York City Opera's spring season continued on Friday night with that Puccinian problem child, "La Rondine." It is much to the company's credit that this later work, finished in 1916, is before the public at all.
Even if its third act betrays the limits of Puccini's attention span, "La Rondine" represents a typically sweet, lyrical and self-indulgent take on Viennese popular style.
It is, in fact, an operetta turned tragic, as if Puccini was as reluctant as ever to let one of his heroines walk away happy.
Here she is Magda, who abandons luxurious courtesanship for the love of Ruggero.
He is young, respectable and not terribly bright.
After two months of sinful bliss on the Mediterranean (during which time he seems never to have asked where Magda came from) Ruggero proposes marriage.
Knowing she will have to tell his family the truth, Magda goes back to Rambaldo, her former keeper.


Iraq Can Choose To End the Suffering
To the Editor:
Nizar Hamdoon, representative of Iraq to the United Nations, tells us that "The suffering of Iraqi children, the elderly and the public at large because of sanctions is horrifying" (letter, Feb. 27).
This is nonsense.


Excellent With the Rich and Famous
THE X FACTOR A Quest for Excellence  By George Plimpton  170 pages.
W.
W.
Norton &amp; Company. $18.95.
One's heart sinks a little upon reading George Plimpton's explanation of how his latest book, "The X Factor: A Quest for Excellence," came into being.
He writes that a publisher asked him to do a short work on a "subject of importance to managers and policy makers in business and the public sector." Mr.
Plimpton mused, then decided "to write an informal study of the ingredient that appears to be a constant for those who are enormously successful," or what he calls the X factor.


A Tobacco Case's Legal Buccaneers
Here, in the former playground of pirates, a new alliance of lawyer-buccaneers has banded together in quest of fabulous treasure.
They have mounted against the tobacco industry the largest and potentially the most lucrative class-action suit in history, one that could win billions of dollars for smokers and their lawyers.
The cigarette companies, with more than $48 billion in annual revenues, have never had to pay as much as a penny of monetary penalties in a court of law.
But Okla B. Jones 2d, a Federal judge in New Orleans, has just cleared the way for the first class action against the tobacco industry in a Federal court.
The potential for booty is so enticing that the high-profile stars of the plaintiffs' bar have put aside feuds about client fees and jurisdiction to take aim at the common enemy.


Norrell Corp.(NORL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Red Storm Arrives On Time for Post-Season
A month ago, St.
John's was a team headed nowhere.
It had lost 9 of 10 games and the operative word was survival.
There was talk of players transferring to other schools, of coaches not being in control, of a program in a free fall.
What a difference a month can make.
Now the team that was headed nowhere is talking of post-season tournaments.
Not just the Big East or the National Invitation Tournament either.
No, the Red Storm is brimming with confidence after an 86-77 triumph over 23d-ranked Georgetown yesterday at Madison Square Garden.
Now there is talk about qualifying for the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.
And somehow, that doesn't sound as silly as it once did.


Zeneca Group PLC(ZEN,N) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


METRO DIGEST
LACK OF HOSPITAL OVERSIGHT TAKES A TOLL
The thick medical texts that Love Njoku consulted seemed to confirm what she had suspected -- her pregnancy was not proceeding as smoothly as the midwife at North Central Bronx Hospital was saying.
So she called the midwife, who told her not to worry.
Two months later, Mrs.
Njoku's baby was born dead.
The 8-pound 14-ounce boy's heart had stopped beating a day before he was delivered on Jan. 17, 1993.
It was the first time during her pregnancy that she was examined by an obstetrician.
If there is a lesson to be learned from Mrs.
Njoku's journey through New York's public hospital system, it is that even the most diligent of expectant mothers can be defeated by a medical bureaucracy that sometimes provides only minimal care.
A1.
Mayor Giuliani said that a report detailing a high death rate among newborn babies in public hospitals demonstrated the need for the city to reduce its ownership of these hospitals.
B5.


Cigar Adds to Victory Campaign
No, that wasn't Holy Bull out there taking the lead as they turned for home and driving easily through the homestretch to win by 7 1/2 lengths.
It was Cigar, the big bay horse who won the 50th running of the Gulfstream Park Handicap today for his fifth straight victory and the clear lead in the larger race to succeed Holy Bull as the best handicap horse in America.
It was just four weeks after Holy Bull dueled Cigar in the Donn Handicap before breaking down with leg injuries that forced him into retirement, the Horse of the Year in 1994, suddenly gone in his second start in 1995.
Cigar went on to win that race by 5 1/2 lengths.
And today, while Holy Bull waited in Kentucky for the verdict of history, Cigar picked up the pieces and roared straight ahead.


Corrections
A brief report by The Associated Press in Business Day on Wednesday about a reorganization of Delphi Internet Services, a unit of the News Corporation, misstated the first name of the executive who will head the company's international expansion.
He is Jaan Torv, not Joan.


This Week's Debt Issues
The Treasury's schedule of financing this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of new three-and six-month bills.
At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 5.70 percent and the rate on the six-month issue was 5.91 percent.


A Triumphant Whitaker Moves to Claim Next Title
Officially, George Foreman was stripped of his World Boxing Association heavyweight title today, and unofficially, Pernell Whitaker simply walked away from his W.B.A. junior middleweight belt.
Whitaker waited only a few minutes Saturday night after he captured a unanimous 12-round decision from Julio Cesar Vasquez -- a verdict Vasquez endorsed -- to say, "I'm giving Julio back his belt."


Corrections
Because of a production error, several lines were omitted yesterday from an article in the Week in Review about affirmative action.
The paragraph that began at the bottom of the first column of the article's continuation, on page 16, should have read: "If income replaced race entirely as a qualifier for preferences, whites would be the major beneficiaries, and racial integration would probably decline."


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week: MONDAY  Cincinnati Bell Inc TUESDAY  Brush Wellman Inc Philadelphia Subn Corp Pioneer Int Shs Inc Premier Indl Corp York Intl Corp WEDNESDAY  Capstead Mtg Corp CBI Inds Inc Quaker Oats Co RLI Corp South New Engl Telcom Transco Energy Co Vestaur Secs Inc THURSDAY  Atlantic Energy Inc NJ Hancock Fabrics Inc HRE Proptys Idaho Pwr Co Lincoln Natl Corp Rowe Furniture Corp FRIDAY  Aluminium Co Amer BMC Inds Inc Minn Criimi Mae Inc Hudson Foods Inc


Staten Island Is No Longer An Oasis From Crime
A woman is shot in a parking lot and her car stolen by a man the police say wanted money for heroin.
Four members of a family are found murdered after what investigators say was a domestic fight.
A convicted drug dealer dies in a confrontation with the police, touching off a night of disturbances and months of racial discord.
The incidents did not happen in high-crime areas of Brooklyn or the Bronx.
Instead, they occurred on Staten Island, New York City's last frontier, a place that has drawn residents who want to escape the worst of urban living.


DANCE
Social Issues In Solos and Duets  Susan Roebuck Caligaris Merce Cunningham Studio
A good editor can be a writer's best friend.
Choreographers sometimes need editors, too.


Off Chile's Southern Tip, Shellfish Harbor New Peril
Ever since its discovery by the Portuguese navigator Ferdinand Magellan in 1520, the 350-mile strait around South America that bears his name has been a prime fishing ground for shellfish.
But the emergence of deadly toxins in the Strait of Magellan's water in the past three years has brought an abrupt end to the unrestricted harvesting of shellfish here.
The poisons come from a natural phenomenon known as "red tide," which has been increasing in recent years worldwide and moving south.


DANCE
Inspiration From Nature, And From Eartha Kitt,  Amos Pinhasi Dia Center for the Arts
Amos Pinhasi presented an odd but ultimately enjoyable evening of new and recent dances on Thursday.
The program opened with "Shards," an evocative 1994 solo in which Mr.
Pinhasi and his lighting designer, Mark London, created an atmosphere of desert heat and light.
In "The Apple Basket," a new dance set to anonymous 16th-century English songs, bird and cricket sounds, and percussive music by Dead Can Dance, three women and a man fashioned a community onstage with the help of wooden furniture, two logs, branches and a basket filled with green apples.
But Mr.
Pinhasi offered a sort of creative U-turn in "For Eartha," in some ways a tease of what had come before.


Tessim Zorach, 79, Collector and Donor
Tessim Zorach, an art collector who donated extensively from his collection of pre-Columbian Ecuadorean art and gave from the works of his parents, the artists William and Marguerite Thompson Zorach, died on Feb. 26 at the Mid Coast Hospital in Bath, Me.
He was 79 and lived on Georgetown Island, Me.
The cause was a hemorrhage caused by a fall in his home, said his wife, Peggy.


Titan Wheel Intl.(TWI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Knicks Appear Ready For Another Late Surge
There is a general feeling in the Knicks' locker room that they are ready for a late-season surge.
Patrick Ewing and Charles Oakley are finally healthy at the same time.
Anthony Mason has played some of the best basketball of his career recently.
And despite a season that has featured injuries, inconsistent play, and controversies, the Knicks still have the second-best record (37-19) in the Eastern Conference.


Sponsors Aren't Buying The Replacement Game
Beyond dropped balls, inept double plays and a rotund Pedro Borbon, replacement baseball now means lost advertising.
If replacement players open the season, 95 percent of the MSG Network's advertisers will stay out.
Some advertisers have refused offers of free advertising to stay in.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  CHINA'S ECONOMIC 'MISTAKES'
In comments that appeared to lay the groundwork for economic retrenchment, China's Prime Minister told the National People's Congress that "mistakes" had allowed inflation to soar.
A1


Ben &amp; Jerry's Homemade Inc.(BJICA,NNM) reports earnings for 14wks to Dec 31


Yacht Splinters and Sinks in America's Cup Race
In the 144 years of America's Cup yacht racing, through all the international disputes on shore and cutthroat competition on the water, calamity has never struck with the drama it did today.
Halfway into an 18.5-mile race, being sailed here two miles offshore in the Pacific Ocean, the 75-foot Australian race boat broke apart and sank within two minutes.


Entertainment Weekly Defies Critics
Five years after the much-publicized start-up of Entertainment Weekly -- and the widespread predictions of its imminent demise that quickly followed -- the magazine has become a smart, confident publication known for its tough and timely reporting on the entertainment industry.
Advertising pages were up 28 percent in 1994 from the previous year.
Circulation passed the million mark two years ago; newsstand sales in 1994 were up 30 percent.


Men's Wearhouse Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Dr. Donald A. Holub; Physician and Professor, 66
Dr.
Donald A. Holub, a professor of clinical medicine and attending physician at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, died on Feb. 20 at White Plains Hospital.
He was 66 and lived in Scarsdale, N.Y.
The cause was a cerebral hemorrhage, said Dr.
Hans Neuberg, a colleague at Columbia-Presbyterian.


National Health Laboratories Holdings Inc.(NH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Retailer Of Artifacts Starts Over
Gump's, the emporium of recherche housewares and Asian artifacts, will reopen here on Tuesday with one eye to high-end catalogue shopping.
The new $7 million store, near the old Union Square site, has 22,000 square feet of retail space.


Lack of Oversight Takes Delivery-Room Toll
The trip from Love Njoku's gritty neighborhood in the northern Bronx to the college library takes 45 minutes on an average day, ample time to ruminate as the subway cars rattle along elevated tracks, then swoop deep underground in the South Bronx.
Seven months pregnant and with a growing sense of dread, Mrs.
Njoku made the trip each day for a week in 1992, slowly climbing the 75 steps to street level at the stop near Hostos Community College.


Dole Says Hatfield Offered to Quit Over Balanced-Budget Vote
Senator Mark O. Hatfield of Oregon, the only Republican to vote against the balanced-budget amendment when it fell one vote short of passing the Senate last week, offered to resign before the vote, the majority leader, Bob Dole, said today.
Mr.
Dole said he had turned that offer down.
But today, he did not rule out punishing Mr.
Hatfield for his vote by taking away his committee chairmanship in the Senate.


A System to Protect Electronic Publishing
The Folio Corporation is expected to announce today the first details of a proposed new system for electronic publishing, which could allow information providers to sell copyrighted articles over the Internet and other wide-area networks.
The company expects the system, Information Marketplace, to be fully operational next year.
As described, it appears to offer possible solutions to some of the most vexing problems hindering the growth of global electronic publishing.


CHRONICLE
There is no question that ERNESTINE SCHLANT BRADLEY , the wife of Senator Bill Bradley, exemplifes the theme of a luncheon, "Celebrate Life," at which she will be honored next week.
A breast cancer survivor, whose disease was diagnosed two years ago, she will receive the Circle of Strength award from the National Alliance of Breast Cancer Organizations at its third annual luncheon on March 16 at the Plaza Hotel.


Speaker's Sister Now Speaking Out
With her brother's election as Speaker of the House last fall, Candace Gingrich's homosexuality became a matter of public record.
Now, in her first official role as a representative of gays and lesbians, she has come to Washington to lobby Congress to preserve money for AIDS programs.
But Ms.
Gingrich, a 28-year-old computer technician from Harrisburg, Pa., has not even scheduled a visit with her brother, Newt Gingrich, the most powerful Republican on Capitol Hill these days.


Helpful Dutch Dots
To the Editor:
In "Let's Break the Drab Dollar Bill Habit" (letter, Feb. 28), Calvin B. Webster, while suggesting that the United States take a cue from the Netherlands, known for attractive and forge-resistant bank notes, omits a high-tech graphic feature that does more to help the blind distinguish between denominations than differences in size.


The Clamor in Mexico: Sullied Name Stirs Salinas
Former President Carlos Salinas de Gortari is assured of a place in Mexican history, but the baffling events of the past week make it almost certain that it will not be the place he so desperately tried to attain.
Close friends of Mr.
Salinas are puzzled by his recent actions, but they say that he has long been driven by a sense of destiny.
That helps explain why he would take such unusual measures to defend his name, including breaking a long tradition of silence by former Presidents and undertaking a hunger strike.


Brown Group (BG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Bird Food Could Be Jail Bait
It is not a matter of disliking geese or ducks.
It is a matter of what they leave behind.
So next month, it will become illegal to feed waterfowl in Parsippany-Troy Hills.
Violators could be fined up to $1,000 or sentenced to 90 days in jail.
The bird droppings contribute to algae growth in lakes around the township.
"Migratory birds would leave in a day or two if people didn't feed them," said Bob Mittermaier, vice president of the Lake Parsippany Property Owners Association, which lobbied for the ordinance.


CHRONICLE
MARGO FEIDEN , owner of the art gallery that bears her name on Madison Avenue, has found a new way to raise money for Citymeals-on-Wheels, the program that feeds the homebound elderly, and it simply popped into her head one day.
Ms.
Feiden is the kind of person who perpetually hears from other women, "Where did you buy that?" or, "I love the way you dress."


Ex-Boxing Champ Urges Peace
From a church pulpit, Evander Holyfield, the former heavyweight boxing champion, urged forgiveness yesterday over the shooting of a black youth, Lawrence Meyers, by a white police officer during a drug arrest.


Tuesday Morning Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bon-Ton StoresInc.(BONT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Patents; New Legislation Seeks to Exclude Surgical Procedures from Patent Protection
TWO Congressmen introduced a bill on Friday that would encourage the sharing of medical knowledge by prohibiting patents for surgical procedures.
Representative Greg Ganske, Republican of Iowa and a surgeon, and Representative Ron Wyden, Democrat of Oregon, said physicians increasingly appear to be seeking patents on new procedures that were previously considered the evolutionary product of the entire medical profession.


The Mayor Makes His Pitch


How to Teach About O. J. Trial
Call it a civics lesson.
The New Jersey Bar Association is distributing free O. J. Simpson trial curriculum guides to teachers to help them teach students how the criminal-justice system works.
The guides discuss issues like the definition of murder and reasonable doubt.
PETER S. YOUNG


NCH Corp.(NCH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


House Republicans Propose Using a Work Requirement to Help Cut Food Stamp Costs
House Republicans said today that they wanted to cut $16.5 billion from the food stamp program over the next five years by establishing strict new work requirements for recipients and by trimming the growth in benefits.
The proposal represents a fundamental shift in the design of the program, which serves as the ultimate safety net for more than 27 million poor Americans.


C. Hart Schaaf, 83, U.N. Official, Dies
C.
Hart Schaaf, a former United Nations official, died on Feb. 24 at his home in Silver Spring, Md.
He was 83.
The cause was congestive heart failure, his family said.


INSIDE
New Currency Threat To European Unity
In a move that may doom efforts to create a single European currency before the end of the century, officials of the European Union agreed at an emergency meeting early today to devalue the Spanish peseta and the Portuguese escudo.
Page D1.
The Bells' Latest Rival
MCI Communications plans local phone services for businesses in 10 cities, including New York, the biggest assault yet by a long-distance company on local Bells.
Page D1.
A Mexican and His Destiny
Friends of Carlos Salinas de Gortari are puzzled by his recent actions, but they say the former Mexican President's sense of destiny may explain them.
News analysis, page A3.
Hatfield Under Fire for Vote
The Republican defector on the balanced-budget vote offered to resign beforehand.
His committee chairmanship is in doubt.
Page A11.
Japanese Balk at Apology
Many members of Japan's Parliament are opposing a move to apologize for invading other Asian countries in World War II.
Page A9.


Essay; 5 Weltanschauungen
"The new isolationists," President Clinton told the foreign policy audience at the Nixon Center for Peace and Freedom last week, "would have us face the future alone."
That was an apt theme for the occasion.
I recall writing a speech to the Air Force Academy a quarter-century ago taking a pop at the same straw man: "It would be easy," President Nixon told the graduating cadets, "easy for a President of the United States to buy some popularity by going along with the new isolationists."


The State Department: A Snail in Age of E-Mail
While many politicians talk these days about propelling the nation into the new information age, State Department officials often feel stuck in the Dark Ages as they wait two hours for electronic mail to make its way to an Under Secretary one floor above.
"In the morning it's not so bad, but from noon to three, when the E-mail traffic picks up, it can take two or three hours," said David Johnson, a State Department press officer.


Two Streaks Collide, And the Rangers' Ends
The streaking Rangers ran into another team on a roll tonight, and New York's lackluster performance translated into a 4-2 loss to the Washington Capitals.
Jim Carey, the Capitals' rookie goaltender, won for the third time in three starts, ending New York's four-game unbeaten stretch.
The Rangers rarely challenged Carey, mustering only 17 shots to Washington's 29.


Obstetrical Chief Fights Fatigue in Overworked Ward
To Dr.
Joanna F. Shulman, the seventh-floor delivery suite at North Central Bronx Hospital is a war room.
As the head of obstetrics, she is a high-ranking officer leading beleaguered troops into perpetual battle against fatigue, overcrowding and the emergencies, big and small, that flare up during a typical day.
"It is an endless triage system," she said. "And it works fine when people are fresh."


A Management Shift At Young &amp; Rubicam
Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. and its public relations subsidiary, Burson-Marsteller, have made a series of top management changes, effective May 1.
Larry Snoddon, 49, president and chief executive at Burson-Marsteller in New York for the last three years, was named on Friday as vice chairman of Y.&amp; R. in New York.
He assumes many responsibilities of Thomas J. Mosser, the executive vice president and general manager of Y.&amp; R. who was killed in December when a mail bomb exploded at his home in North Caldwell, N.J.


Environment Agency Has Pollution Problem
Uncovering pollution and making sure it gets cleaned up is the job of the state Department of Environmental Conservation.
Sometimes, it seems, the department does not have to look far.
Ward B. Stone, who works for the agency as a wildlife pathologist, disclosed recently that he had tested the grounds of the department's regional headquarters here and discovered "greatly elevated levels" of lead, arsenic and DDT, a result of the spraying of pesticides on the property more than 25 years ago, when it was an apple orchard.


Dutch Concern Is Set To Take Over Barings
ING, a Dutch banking and insurance company, won the bidding tonight to acquire the remains of Barings P.L.C., bringing to a close 233 years of independence for the British investment house exactly a week after it was plunged into bankruptcy.
ING beat out a rival bid from Smith Barney, the New York investment firm, and ABN-Amro, another Dutch banking company.


Loss Means Maryland Must Share First Place
"We've got an A.C.C. title," Joe Smith of Maryland said this afternoon.
The words were a distant possibility when Gary Williams returned to his school to become the Maryland basketball coach six seasons ago.
But when a program once beaten down by scandal and defeat ended its regular season with a share of first place in the Atlantic Coast Conference, the words Smith spoke in a quiet dressing room held more consolation than triumph.
With Williams still hospitalized with a case of pneumonia, the Terrapins lost their chance to gain sole possession of first place when they were overwhelmed by Virginia, 92-67.


Europeans Devalue 2 Currencies
In a move expected to doom efforts to create a single European currency in the next few years, finance officials of the European Union agreed at an emergency meeting early this morning to devalue the Spanish and Portuguese currencies against those of eight other European countries.
The two Iberian currencies have come under enormous pressure as concerns about Spanish politics, and the broad global uncertainty about the Mexican financial crisis and the recent collapse of the British investment bank Barings P.L.C., have led investors to turn to German marks in a search for a safe haven.


Never Too Early or Too Young for a St. Patrick's Dance


Amid Sinking Feeling, Faldo Edges Norman
All day long they had fought a war of attrition, Nick Faldo, Greg Norman and Peter Jacobsen, trading blows and the lead as they struggled around a Blue Monster course that had been awakened by the wind.
And just as it always seems to do here, the whole Sturm und Drang boiled in a crescendo at the final hole.
What Norman needed was a par at the final hole.
Just a 4 on the 18th.
If he could do that, he would be in a playoff with Faldo for the Doral-Ryder Open title and the $270,000 first-place check.


A Love Duet by the Middle Aged
Since the 1930's, Anna Sokolow's dances have often been choreographic poems of despair, portraits of the alienated and manifestoes against oppression.
Yet on Thursday night, when Anna Sokolow's Players' Project performed at Playhouse 91, she offered a premiere that was for her something out of the ordinary: a love duet.
Yet while this work, "September Sonnet," depicted affection, its hero and heroine were not dewy-eyed young innocents but worldly middle-aged people.
As portrayed by Jim May and Lorry May, dancers who have often worked with Ms.
Sokolow, the lovers became survivors of many emotional crises.


Chinese Leader Says 'Mistakes' By Government Fueled Inflation
Prime Minister Li Peng acknowledged today that "mistakes" made "at all levels" of his Government had allowed inflation to reach its highest point since Communist rule began in 1949 and that this increase last year had "aroused great resentment among the masses."
The declaration, in Mr.
Li's opening address to this year's National People's Congress, appeared to lay the groundwork for an overall retrenchment of the economic reform program that was begun by Deng Xiaoping in 1979.


New Contender Rises From Italy's Center-Left
A year after Silvio Berlusconi burst onto Italy's political scene and became Prime Minister, the country is mesmerized by yet another new player: Romano Prodi, a 55-year-old economist who is widely perceived as a leading contender in the next national elections.
In the month since he announced his candidacy as head of a new center-left coalition, Mr.
Prodi, less brash than Mr.
Berlusconi but just as ambitious, has already shifted the political kaleidoscope.
After a half-century of revolving-door governments and two years of scandal and turmoil, there is now hope that the next elections will offer a real choice at the center of the political spectrum, and that the next government will be able to stay in office more than a year.


Algeria, and the Islamic Challenge
In Algeria, Islamic terrorists assassinate feminists, journalists and secular intellectuals in the streets.
Their goal, which they have a realistic chance of achieving, is to topple an equally brutal military government that three years ago cheated an Islamic political party of victory at the polls.
That power grab, shamefully endorsed at the time by European governments that feared Islamic fundamentalism more than they cherished democracy, cannot now simply be undone.
Hard-line military elements have grown stronger on both sides of a conflict that has so far killed more than 40,000 people.
With the struggle now apparently headed toward a bloody denouement, those same European countries fear a hostile regime could soon come to power with hundreds of thousands of refugees crossing the Mediterranean.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Stretching Beyond An Instrument's Repertory  Yolanda Kondonassis, harpist 92d Street Y
Yolanda Kondonassis is a young harpist who handles the limited and problematic repertory of her instrument with considerable poise and musicianly energy.
To be fair, only a fraction of her Saturday program consisted of piano transcriptions.
Here, the harp's excessive resonance was an intermittent distraction, but Scarlatti's weird harmonic shifts in the A-major Sonata (K.208) were actually heightened because of it.
Ms.
Kondanassis' confident personality notwithstanding, I did not find her fluctuating speeds in Debussy's "Bruyeres" and the Romantic effusiveness of her Scarlatti wholly convincing.


Lyman B. Kirkpatrick Jr., 77, Longtime C.I.A. Official, Dies
Lyman B. Kirkpatrick Jr., a former executive director of the Central Intelligence Agency and later a professor of political science, died Friday at his home in Middleburg, Va.
He was 77.
Mr. Kirkpatrick died from complications of pneumonia, his wife, Rita, said.


Village Super Market Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Anderson Gets Back On Track For Nets
Kenny Anderson wants something made clear: He had no personal problems.
He had professional problems.
"I'm A-O.K.," he said, placing his thumb and forefinger together to make a circle.
"I'm fine."
Twenty-two points. Twelve assists. One wink. A begrudging smile.
He is fine.


Rockies' Zimmer Hospitalized
DON ZIMMER, a Colorado Rockies coach, was resting comfortably yesterday in a Tucson, Ariz., hospital after experiencing a temporary loss of blood flow to the brain.
Zimmer, 64, suffered Saturday evening what the Colorado trainer DAVE CILLADI called a transient ischemic attack.
Zimmer, in intensive care, was receiving medication to lower his blood pressure.


What a Difference Affirmative Action Has Made; 30 Years of Failure
To the Editor:
Re "The Nuclear Wedge Issue" (editorial, Feb. 28):


Market Place; AT&amp;T Faces Contradictions In Its Effort to Acquire Lin
In any big-business acquisition, the buyer must balance two contradictory goals: cheapen the goods by haggling down the price while also convincing investors that it is gaining a valuable property with long-term potential for a payoff.
That is why, in its current negotiations with the Lin Broadcasting Corporation, the cellular telephone company, AT&amp;T is trying to buy Lin dirt cheap even while trumpeting the cellular business as a golden key to AT&amp;T's future.


Bronco Owner Injured Skiing
PAT BOWLEN, the Denver Broncos owner, who crashed into a tree while skiing, remained hospitalized yesterday with a bruised breastbone.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week:  Monday  None  Tuesday  Consumer Borrowing . . .
Jan.
Wednesday  Productivity . . . 4th Qtr.
Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Wholesale Trade . . .
Jan.
Friday  Employment . . .
Feb.


Colombia Oil Spills Net Fines for All but Rebels
With oil surpassing coffee as Colombia's largest export, a new team of environmental protection officials keeps meticulous track of oil company spills -- the 40 barrels in a field near here in December, for example, and the 25 barrels at a Caribbean refinery in January.
But most pollution from Colombia's oil industry is well out of reach of the new Ministry of Environment.


Corrections
An article on Friday about public reaction to the killing of Vladislav Listyev, a popular Russian television personality, referred incorrectly in some copies to Sergei M. Kirov, a Stalin aide whose assassination some compared to Mr.
Listyev's.
Kirov was killed in 1934, not 1937.


A Bird in Hand Is Worth a Mild Day


For a European Best Seller, a U.S. Taste Test
It hardly sounds like an automatic winner, or even a book that very many people would want to read.
But "Sophie's World," a peculiar Norwegian novel about a teen-ager given a crash course in the history of philosophy by a man who starts leaving sheaves of paper in her mailbox, has become one of the most extraordinary publishing successes in Europe.
In Norway, it has been the No. 1 best seller for more than a year.
In Germany, the book has already sold a staggering one million copies in hard cover.
"Sophie's World" is on the best-seller lists in Spain, Italy and Korea, and will be published in a total of 33 countries, including Latvia, Brazil and Slovenia.
And in Great Britain, where people are thought to be too literal-minded for fuzzy books about metaphysics, the book sailed directly to the top spot on The Sunday Times of London's best-seller list, where it has firmly remained the last two months.


Coach Wins N.C.A.A. Bid After 41 Years
Northeast Conference
Among active coaches, Jim Phelan is first in games and second to Dean Smith in victories, with 737.
Now Phelan, who has coached Mount St.
Mary's of Maryland for 41 years, has another distinction: his first trip to the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.


Cutting School Funds, Unfairly
In New York's budget battles each year, the scramble for state school aid is usually one of the most contentious.
That will undoubtedly be true again this year as Gov.
George Pataki proposes to make an already inequitable system even more unfair.
He would inflict considerable pain, particularly on New York City, which is already shortchanged by the state.
It will be up to the State Legislature to strike a better balance.
Each year, aid to the state's more than 700 districts is distributed on the basis of complex formulas that reflect each district's average daily attendance and relative wealth.
Relying on attendance rather than enrollment hurts urban districts with many high-risk students who do not attend class every day.


Law Lets Midwives Supervise Only Low-Risk Cases
The increasing use of midwives at many public hospitals in New York City comes as there is renewed interest in the age-old profession across the country.
Their focus on the most natural and least invasive methods of childbirth is attractive to women who are put off by the more clinical approach of some doctors.
They have become popular among some healthy, young middle-class women who can expect uneventful pregnancies and deliveries that are not likely to require the technology available in modern maternity wards.


Rutgers's James Sparks George Washington Upset
Rutgers did Massachusetts and Temple a favor today.
The Scarlet Knights upset George Washington, 80-73, in the quarterfinals of the Atlantic 10 tournament at the Palestra.
Before a capacity crowd of 8,722 spectators, Rutgers won on the perimeter shooting of Robin James, the senior guard from Bergenfield, N.J., who set a tournament record by shooting 6 for 6 from 3-point range and was the game's scoring leader with 23 points.


Islanders Experience Back-to-Back Embarrassments
About the only thing worse than losing at home to the only team in the league without a road victory is losing your next game anywhere to the National Hockey League's worst team.
The Islanders (8-10-3) completed that rare quinella here this evening by dropping a 3-1 decision to an Ottawa squad that was 0-4-1 on the previous 5 games of its now completed homestand.
On Thursday, the Islanders lost at Nassau Coliseum to a Washington team that had been 0-7-4 away from home.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
In a move that may doom efforts to create a single European currency before the end of the century, officials of the European Union agreed at an emergency meeting early today to devalue the Spanish peseta and the Portuguese escudo.  [ Page D1. ]


Scandal-Ridden Canadian Regiment Disbands


Hotel Housing Unites Unlikely Allies
JULIE SANDORF admits she is surprised.
She did not expect to find an ally in Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
His politics are not hers, he has been cutting aid to the poor with an enthusiasm she finds disquieting, and the tone of his campaigning two years ago troubled her.
She didn't even vote for him.
Yet in an often uphill effort to build housing for the homeless, she has indeed found support from the Mayor.
"Sometimes, you've got to give credit where credit is due," said Ms.
Sandorf, president of the Corporation for Supportive Housing.


Bridge
How do you respond to a major-suit opening with four-card support, a balanced hand and opening values?
Half a century ago, the question did not need to be asked: It was automatic to jump-raise to the three-level.
Nowadays, almost all good players play limit raises, so a jump to the three-level is invitational.
The stronger hands must bid something, and a majority favor two no-trump, the Jacoby idea to ask for opener's short suit.
The British idea is to bid a new suit and then raise to game.
Some bid three no-trump, and a hypermodern fringe group choose three clubs or four clubs.


Triple Murder Causes Alarm About Hate Groups' Growth
Along Walker Road here, Mark Thomas's compound of hate is easy to find.
Amid the trash, mud, rusted vehicles and sagging buildings a little more than a mile off the main road, the 44-year-old Mr.
Thomas operates a ministry for racists where he teaches weapons skills on a rifle range and where, last April, he played host to a weekend Hitler Youth Festival that attracted 200 neo-Nazi skinheads and other white supremacists.
Mr.
Thomas also publishes The Watchman, a monthly newsletter that in one issue last year preached, "It is the trademark of the Jew to make us feel dirty and unworthy."


Reservations Negotiations
Negotiations are continuing between executives of Europe's largest computer reservation system, Amadeus, and Continental Airlines' System One to create the world's largest computer reservation network.
The proposed alliance, first announced in December by Continental, calls for Amadeus to buy a one-third interest in System One, and for the Electronic Data Systems Corporation, the information technology company, to buy a third as well.


House to Vote on Fraud Bill
A proposal by Representative Dick Zimmer of Lawrenceville to crack down on interstate welfare fraud was approved by a House panel on Wednesday and should see action on the House floor this week.
Mr.
Zimmer introduced the bill after the Port Authority police caught welfare recipients jumping PATH turnstiles last year and found that they were posing as homeless people in New York to collect benefits from both states.


Ex-Teacher Gets Legal Help
The battle isn't over for Christina Gordon, the special education teacher so determined to run the Boston Marathon that she quit her job.
Mrs.
Gordon resigned when the Dover Board of Education, citing a teacher contract that prohibits taking personal days on Mondays or Fridays, refused to grant time off for the marathon on Monday, April 17.


Markets Are Holding Up Despite Dollar's Drops
Unless the value of the dollar goes into a free fall against major currencies, economists and portfolio managers say they do not expect its latest bout of weakness to have much impact on prices in American financial markets.
That assessment would have been unthinkable during the latter 1980's, when Japanese investors financed a large chunk of the United States' soaring trade and budget deficits through purchases of everything from financial assets to real estate.
In those days, bond traders looked at any prolonged period of dollar weakness against the yen with genuine alarm.


Brady (W.H.) Co.(BRCOA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Unilever Plc(UL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Loewen Group (LWNGF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Simpson Defense: Source of Black Pride
At the opening of new offices here last month for Johnnie L. Cochran Jr., O. J. Simpson's chief lawyer, an impassioned and revealing toast was offered by Earl Graves, the publisher of Black Enterprise magazine.
Recalling how a generation ago millions of blacks listened to boxing matches on radio, hanging on the outcome when Joe Louis fought, Mr.
Graves called Mr.
Cochran "our new Joe Louis," and added "he has made us all proud."


Museums
March has made yet another untriumphant entrance.
Grey skies and cold temperatures.
It is a month that seems to fit nowhere.
Dreariness takes control and there are few signs of brightness.
A flash of brilliance may be enough to get through, though, and New York's museum's provide it.
Following is a look at how some of the bigger museums have fared over the past four years.
These four museums have experienced decreases in attendance.
The 1993 attendance boom at the Museum of Modern Art can be explained in one word: Matisse.
Henri Matisse: A Retrospective, drew record crowds to the museum.


Rights Violations in Turkey Said to Rise
To the concern of Western allies and international human rights organizations, reports of rights violations in Turkey have increased markedly in recent months, along with attempts by the Government to crush the Kurdish separatist insurrection in the southeast.
The number of people who have been disappearing while in the custody of the police and security forces, the reports of torture, killings by unknown assailants that appear to be political and arrests and convictions of writers, intellectuals and politicians under a law against separatist propaganda are all on the rise, Turkish human rights groups say.


THEATER
A Hearty Helping Of Culinary Nostalgia  'Spoonbread and Strawberry Wine' American Place Theater
Food and family impel the proceedings at the American Place Theater, where Norma Jean Darden's "Spoonbread and Strawberry Wine" has set the table.
Part reminiscence, part cooking lesson, part book party, part snack, part cabaret, part black history lesson, poetry reading and good-natured bridge across the generation gap, it all spins out of the engaging Ms.
Darden's life as what she calls an "actress slash model," which eventually led to her becoming a cookbook writer and a "caterer slash funeral home owner."


Burger King Plans Taste-Test Spots
In the newest skirmish in the fast-food wars, the Burger King Corporation has begun a weeklong television teaser campaign to promote the "Whopper Invitation," taste tests pitting the chain's Whopper sandwich against the Big Mac sandwich sold by the McDonald's Corporation and the Wendy's Single hamburger sold by Wendy's International Inc.
The second phase of the campaign, offering results of the taste tests, will begin Sunday.
"It's the 'battle of the burgers,' 90's style," said Duncan Pollock, executive vice president at Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas in New York, the Burger King agency; his reference was to a 1982 campaign that emphasized taste tests showing that consumers preferred the Whopper.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Coleman Wood Products Inc., Omaha, an initial public offering of 340,000 units, each representing three shares and one warrant.
Dillion-Gage Securities Inc.


What a Difference Affirmative Action Has Made; Juggling the Numbers
To the Editor:
Shelby Steele, in "Affirmative Action Must Go" (Op-Ed, March 1), correctly notes the perniciousness of affirmative action.
However, his suggested remedy, eliminating affirmative action and making discrimination a felony, would not correct the preference-ridden system.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Pop music takes center stage in a 'Good Morning America' campaign to attract younger viewers.
MUSIC, it's said, hath charms to soothe the savage breast.
But hath it capacities to sway the merciless finger, poised restlessly on the remote control?
The ABC television network hopes so.
The popular song "You Gotta Be," performed by a 26-year-old newcomer known as Des'ree, is the centerpiece of a promotional campaign that seeks to attract younger, and more male, viewers for "Good Morning America," ABC's weekday wake-up show.


U.S. Arrests Transplant Donor
Winston Reinoso was dying, that was clear.
A bone marrow transplant could save his life.
So on Christmas Day, his brother, Luis, of Ecuador, was granted special permission to enter the United States for 30 days, to be the donor.
But Luis overstayed his welcome.
And Winston died on Feb. 5, apparently without ever receiving the transplant.


Talks Stall as Two Sides Go Their Separate Ways
The lead negotiators for the baseball players and the owners traveled in different directions today, geographically symbolizing the status of the two sides in their negotiations.
Donald Fehr, the union chief, announced he was going home to New York.
Jerry McMorris of the Colorado Rockies, having no further reason to stay, said he was going to San Diego to be with his hospitalized son.
The talks were going nowhere.


Why Microsoft and Justice Dept. Settled
To the Editor:
"Microsoft Back in the Dock" (editorial, Feb. 20) reflects an apparent misunderstanding of the antitrust investigation of Microsoft.
The phrase "in the dock" refers to a holding area in British courts for people accused of criminal conduct.
This is a civil, not criminal case.


Many in Japan Oppose Apology to Asians for War
Half a century after World War II, the Japanese Parliament is considering whether to apologize for invading other Asian countries and killing millions of people.
But after thinking about it, many members of Parliament are saying that an apology is not really necessary after all.
Support for the resolution is foundering, as opponents gain ground and suggest that Japan's aim in World War II was simply to liberate Asia from Western colonialism.


Albert B. Alkek, 85, Texas Philanthropist
Albert B. Alkek, an oilman and philanthropist whose $77 million helped expand the nation's largest hospital complex, died on Wednesday in San Antonio.
He was 85 and lived in Bandera, Tex., about 40 miles west of San Antonio.
The cause was a fall in which Mr.
Alkek struck his head, said Sheriff James MacMillan of Bandera County.


MCI Maps Plan for Local Phone Services
The MCI Communications Corporation plans to establish a full range of local telephone services to business customers in New York and 10 other cities by the end of this year, in what will be the biggest assault yet by a long-distance company on the local Bell companies.
MCI, based here, said its primary focus would be on business rather than residential customers, at least initially.
Smaller companies that have offered such services have been able to offer business customers sharply lower rates.


Villeneuve Uses Fast Pit Stop To Win the Miami Grand Prix
The Miami Grand Prix had all the elements of its counterpart in Monaco today: yachts floating in the harbor a few yards from speeding race cars, a babel of languages being spoken in the grandstands and no place for the drivers to pass each other.
Like the race in that tiny European principality, this race today -- the opener of the 1995 Indy-car season -- was high on glamour.
But for every driver except the winner, Canadian Jacques Villeneuve (who, by coincidence, grew up in Monaco), it was frustrating to some degree or another.


Nissan Plans to Accelerate Cutbacks
The Nissan Motor Company said today that it would accelerate its efforts to reduce its work force and cut its costs in the face of continued huge financial losses.
The statement reflects a sense of crisis at Japan's second-largest auto maker, which has lagged behind some rivals in benefiting from the upturn in Japan's automobile sales that began in the middle of last year.


Hoyas Capture IC4A Title Again
Georgetown's middle-distance runners overcame Seton Hall's speed to win the IC4A indoor track championships for the third straight year at Princeton's Jadwin Gym today.
Georgetown had 86 points to 74 for Seton Hall and 61 1/2 for Princeton.
The Hoyas were paced by Bryan Woodward, a junior, who successfully defended his title with a 1:49.92 victory in the 800 meters, and then came back to anchor the winning 3,200-meter relay team.
Another Georgetown winner was Mark Sivieri, who won the mile in 4:09.65.


Spring Music Festival Announced for Berlin
This city, already one of the world's most vibrant musical capitals, will be the site of a new annual festival that is to open in 1996 with Wagner's "Ring" cycle and three concerts of symphonic works by composers associated with Wagner.
Plans for the springtime festival, called Festtage, were announced in late February by Daniel Barenboim, the music director of the tradition-shrouded Staatsoper.
He said he hoped to attract visitors from outside Berlin who are willing to pay hefty prices for a first-class musical experience.


Sports of The Times; Lopez-Iverson Rivalry And Lessons Learned
IN a crowded, steamy Georgetown locker room at Madison Square Garden yesterday afternoon, the players dressed quietly and quickly.
Patrick Ewing sat on one side of the room with his son.
Ralph Dalton, Ewing's backup at Georgetown more than a decade ago, sat with his infant son.
Seeing them briefly took me back to the years when Dalton and Ewing sat in this very room either jubilant after a harrowing Big East victory over St.
John's or somber after a razor-thin loss.
A decade later, Ewing dresses across the hall with the New York Knicks, Dalton is the vice president of a Wall Street securities firm and Georgetown's locker room is occupied by a new budding star: Allen Iverson.


Oldenburg Again: Whimsy and Latent Humanity
The National Gallery is by its nature august.
But its exhibition entitled "Claes Oldenburg: An Anthology" has turned out to be one of the rare occasions on which visitors without exception are seen to relax from the moment they come through the door.
Smiles break out all over.
Beaming strangers reach out to one another.
Old and young are as one.
Feeling comes close to carnival, and yet the work looks perfectly at home in the museum.
This is the more remarkable in view of what Mr.
Oldenburg wrote in 1961, when some 60 of these works were first seen in New York: Oldenburg said he was for an art that would do something other than sit on its backside in a museum.


States Seek to Let Citizens Carry Concealed Weapons
A powerful movement to allow ordinary citizens to obtain permits easily for carrying concealed weapons is taking hold across the country, a product of both the new Republican control of many state Governments and of increasing fears that the police are incapable of protecting citizens from criminals.
In the last few weeks alone, Legislatures in Virginia, Arkansas and Utah have passed laws that would make it far easier for law-abiding adults to obtain permits to carry handguns.
Several other states, including Texas, the nation's second largest, are expected to pass similar bills soon.


UConn, Hall Reach Finals
It was easy for Connecticut.
It was not that tough for Seton Hall once its speed and strength took over.
In the semifinals of the Big East women's tournament today, Connecticut, the nation's No. 1 team, routed Pittsburgh (17-11) by 95-63.
In the first game at Seton Hall's Walsh Gymnasium, the host team overcame Villanova, 66-53.


The Scourge of Whitechapel in Old New York
Jack the Ripper, the role model for a century of serial killers, obviously had his flaws.
But there is no denying that even by the sophisticated standards of today's media manipulators, he was a master at grabbing headlines.
No less a critic than George Bernard Shaw praised the Whitechapel murderer as "an independent genius" in claiming the attention of the press.
And in the Ripper's calculated baiting of the newspapers and the police, through a trail of gruesomely patterned slayings and tantalizing notes, the ungodly precedent of the Killer as Superstar was established.


Inside Barings, a Clash of Two Banking Eras
During the banking crises of the 1920's and 1930's, the managing director of Barings, Cecil Baring, who was the third Lord Revelstoke, rode out the vicissitudes of international finance by sitting at his large desk, reading Homer.
Sent to Spain at one point to strike the terms for a huge loan, he cabled back urgently to demand not the latest interest rate, but the location of certain nesting birds that he was anxious to catch in his binoculars.


The Memorial Roosevelt Had in Mind
To the Editor:
Jack Valenti (letter, Feb. 23) quotes from "Combing the Century for a President to Honor" (Week in Review, Feb. 19) that Franklin D. Roosevelt has "no memorial larger than his desk" and then mentions a memorial in progress for which Congress has appropriated $42 million.
It may be of interest that F.D.R. expressed himself in favor of something closer to the former.


Mexico Links Ex-Aide to Assassination Cover-Up


Christie Is Out of Indoor Championships
The world indoor championships, already missing many top stars, lost another marquee name yesterday when LINFORD CHRISTIE, the world and Olympic sprint champion, withdrew.


U.S. Envoy Calls, but Croatia Seems Firm on U.N. Ouster
A senior United States envoy failed tonight to secure any discernible public shift in demands that United Nations peacekeepers leave Croatia -- a move that many here say would accelerate the drift toward broader conflagration in the Balkans.
The development coincided with a warning issued in London by the Bosnian Foreign Minister, Irfan Ljubijankic, that the region was "dangerously close to a resumption of all-out war." He added, "At the moment we have a diplomatic vacuum."


Parcells, Knight May Buy Double-A Team
New England Patriots Coach BILL PARCELLS and Indiana basketball Coach BOBBY KNIGHT are interested in buying the Birmingham Barons minor-league baseball team, The Birmingham, Ala., News reported yesterday.
LARRY SCHMITTOU, president of the Class AAA Nashville Sounds, said he would also would be part of the group along with the NBC sportscaster BOB COSTAS.
But he said Parcells and Knight would be the principal owners of the Class AA Barons if the deal is completed.
"He (Parcells) wanted me to find him a team," said Schmittou, who heads a group that has owned nine minor-league franchises across the country.
"I've been working on it for a couple of years."


Market Place; A deal to buy Maxus may signal more oil industry takeovers.
WILL the oil industry begin looking for oil and gas on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange as it did in the early 1980's, when there was a flurry of takeover activity?
Some analysts foresee a repeat, but they caution that there is still little evidence that the stronger companies are gearing up to make bids.


Nedved Completes Rangers' Comeback
Yesterday morning, several hours before the Rangers played host to the Ottawa Senators, Coach Colin Campbell met in his office with Petr Nedved, the slumping forward.
They looked at some videotape the coach had selected and they talked.
It wasn't an entirely complimentary conversation, and they didn't spend equal time talking.
"I'd have to say that he did more than I did," Nedved said, "but we kind of communicated back and forth."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  DOLLAR CONTINUES SLIDE  The dollar continued its slide, falling to a new low against the Japanese yen.
The dollar's weakness is worrying the Clinton Administration, which seems to be running out of palatable options.
A1


In Haiti, Carter Won Praise on Accord
To the Editor:
When former President Carter, Senator Sam Nunn and Gen.
Colin L. Powell completed negotiations in Haiti on Sept. 18, 1994, most people applauded, but some were skeptical that the agreement would assure the return of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide and the departure of Haiti's military leaders.


Looks Like a Blowout


Marriott to Acquire a Ritz-Carlton Stake
Eager to add a luxury chain to its portfolio, Marriott International announced yesterday that it had agreed to acquire about 49 percent of the Ritz-Carlton Hotel Company.
Marriott is not buying any of the Ritz hotels, which are mostly franchised, only the right to manage them.
The proposed acquisition, which also includes several minority partners, is scheduled to close this spring, and Marriott could later acquire the rest of the company.


Patterns
Taking His Title With Him
If fashion is entertainment, there are probably few players left who could upstage Andre Leon Talley, who last week resigned as creative director of Vogue in what he described as a "creative Chernobyl."


When It Flows, Water Flows Freely in Haiti


DOLLAR CONTINUES TO PLUNGE AS U.S. PONDERS STRATEGY
The dollar plunged more than 1 percent today to a new post-World-War-II low against the Japanese yen and briefly touched a historic low against the German mark as the currency accelerated a decline that began in the middle of last month.
The dollar's weakness is clearly worrying the Clinton Administration, as demonstrated by the effort it led on Friday, when more than a dozen central banks bought dollars in currency markets to try to support the value of the currency.
But that coordinated effort failed.
And as officials scramble for a strategy that would revive the dollar without running the risk of tipping the American economy into a recession, they appear to be running out of palatable options.


Questions Rise About Cup's First Sinking
The day after the $3 million yacht One Australia sank in only two minutes in choppy seas, America's Cup race organizers and competitors mulled over whether the boats should have been racing at all.
And if so, why it was that 75-foot racing yachts apparently couldn't cope with conditions that might not seem so extreme for cruising yachts.
Sunday night, the team from One Australia asked the other challengers for a few days' reprieve from racing after it suffered the first sinking in the 144 years of the event.
Four of the seven teams, including One Australia, voted to allow time to regroup.
But after a protest from France, the event's International Yachting Jury ruled time off was not allowed.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; In the artificial world of Madison Avenue, a few campaigns dare to embrace reality in their pitches.
ADVERTISING is replete with all manner of artificiality, from a lying Joe Isuzu to pink battery bunnies to a faker who asserts, "Yes I am," whenever his identity is challenged.
So it is perhaps a welcome change for marketers to use real events to anchor sales pitches.
The use of reality in ads, intended to infuse them with credibility, has clearly grown because of an idea that truth is stranger -- or at least more likely to attract consumers' attention -- than fiction.
It mirrors a trend in the media in which the ads appear: television series like "The Real World" offering up real events, AM radio programming increasingly devoted to live listener call-in shows and publications focusing on the lives of celebrities.


U.S. Inquiry On Dump Risk Is Suggested
Nevada officials yesterday accused the Federal Department of Energy of trying to cover up a debate over whether a planned dump in the Nevada desert for high-level atomic wastes might erupt in a nuclear explosion, and called for an independent Federal investigation of the danger.
Nevada has long criticized the project as ill-conceived and ill-managed, as have some opponents of nuclear power.


Nets Hoping Road Won't Remain Bumpy
It may be the Nets' most important three-game road stretch of the season.
Butch Beard admitted as much today.
The Nets are at Philadelphia on Wednesday, Boston on Friday and Washington on Saturday.
Never mind their 7-23 road record.
With Orlando and Utah visiting the Meadowlands next week, they need those victories badly.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  NEW YORK YANKEES -- Agreed to terms with Guillermo Hernandez, pitcher, on a minor-league contract.


A Romantic Sings Out In Mozart
In his recordings of Baroque and Classical violin works, Vladimir Spivakov has generally found ways to temper his essentially Romantic approach with a measure of almost scholarly restraint.
But on Sunday afternoon at Avery Fisher Hall, Mr.
Spivakov and his pianist, Sergei Bezrodny, offered a view of Mozart's Sonata in G (K. 379) -- or at least, its Adagio -- that had a late Beethovenian expansiveness.
Its opening piano chords were not merely rolled but were also suffused with dramatic portent, an effect that Mr.
Spivakov turned to his advantage at the violin line's entrance.
Throughout the Adagio, Mr.
Spivakov played with a rich, centered tone and a focused, thoughtfully regulated vibrato.
The Allegro and the closing variations were slightly leaner and more conventionally Mozartean, although Mr.
Spivakov's singing tone, the breadth of his coloristic palette and his interaction with Mr.
Bezrodny remained the reading's principal attractions.
Similar charms enlivened the extroverted reading of Schubert's Fantasie in C (D. 934), which closed the program.


Works Famous And Not
The Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center has presented its share of indifferent programs in the last few years, but its concert on Sunday afternoon at Alice Tully Hall ought to count as one of the brighter moments of David Shifrin's regime as artistic director.
Here was music old and new, famous and unknown, delivered with conscientious passion.
An unusual cello-heavy instrumentation in three works took advantage of the society's diverse membership, while Dawn Upshaw added an aristocratic vocal gleam.
The new piece was John Harbison's "Between Two Worlds," for soprano, two cellos and two pianos.
Like much of Mr.
Harbison's music, this cyclic setting of poems by Robert Bly and religious meditations by Jacob Boehme gracefully blended a sprawling array of styles, influences and ethnic echoes.
There were traces of African rhythm, monodic lines out of chant, repetitive figures faintly redolent of Minimalism, flashes of Messiaenesque piano writing and fluid atonal progressions in the Bergian manner, which generally serves as Mr.
Harbison's home base.


Indian Tribe Makes Plans For a Nationwide Lottery
The Coeur d'Alene Indian tribe of Idaho said today that it planned to create a national lottery that would be the first in the country in which buyers could charge tickets by using a toll-free telephone number and a credit card.
Planners say the National Indian Lottery, scheduled to begin this fall with an initial jackpot of $50 million, could raise as much as $200 million a year for the 1,300-member tribe through a purchasing system intended to operate much like a home shopping network.
Buyers would call an 800 number and charge a minimum $5 for five $1 tickets in a weekly game.


By Design; Take a Deep Breath
The return of the hourglass figure has brought back corselets.
Some women prefer to wear the underwear variety that hides beneath their clothes.
But why not make a strong statement and flaunt a sexy corselet belt on the outside?
Karl Lagerfeld showed at least a dozen ways to wear a corselet belt in his spring show, and some of those belts are in stores now.
In black patent or clear vinyl, they may have straps that go around the neck like a halter or strings that tie around the waist ($725 and $735, at Saks Fifth Avenue and Bergdorf Goodman).


Protest Against Gingrich and Plans to Cut School Lunch Program


Corrections
An article on Feb. 7 about a call by France for a European Union conference on Algeria misstated the constitutional procedure for naming a government in France.
It is the President, not the Parliament, who names the government.


Secretary of State's Bleeding Ulcer Illustrates Arthritis Drug Problem
THE bleeding stomach ulcer that Secretary of State Warren Christopher suffered as a complication of a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug he took for arthritis vividly illustrates the dangers of such drugs.
Complications of these drugs, referred to by doctors as Nsaid's (pronounced EN-seds), are a significant public health problem.
The complications have been described in a medical journal as the most prevalent serious drug toxicity in the United States.
Each year such complications lead to about 41,000 hospitalizations and 3,300 deaths, studies show.
They are a principal reason for the procedure known as gastroscopy, which Mr.
Christopher underwent, in which doctors pass a tube through the mouth into the stomach to diagnose stomach disorders.


Report on Nicotine Levels Wins Polk Award
Reports on subjects ranging from the nicotine content of cigarettes to fraud and mismanagement at the Immigration and Naturalization Service have won the George Polk Awards for 1994.
The journalism awards were announced by Long Island University, which administers the awards.
The winners are chosen each year by a panel of journalists and professors at the university.


Piano and Saxophone With Jazz Inspirations
All sorts of things mutate at the fringe of jazz.
At the Beacon Theater on Saturday night, David Benoit, a pianist, and Art Porter, a saxophonist, performed what might be called instrumental pop music.
They were both playing music related to jazz, yet their conclusions were radically different.
One thing the two share is an ability to make some money playing music without words: although Mr.
Porter was mostly playing funk with overlaid improvisations and Mr.
Benoit was playing sentimental, piano-based music, they're both frequently on the radio, and usually on the same stations.
And both sell recordings.
Fusion music, much maligned by critics, is still popular, although the fact that the Beacon show was not sold out suggested that the music's commercial grip might just be slipping.


Accounts
*
Pacific Linen Inc., Bothell, Wash., to the Evans Group, Seattle, to handle the retail chain's advertising, media buying and strategic planning account, previously in-house.
The billings were estimated at more than $6 million.


The Last Electrocution
The last person to be executed in New York State was Eddie Lee Mays, a 34-year-old armed robber who was put to death on the night of Aug. 15, 1963, in the electric chair at the state prison in Ossining.
Mr.
Mays, who had been convicted of killing a woman during a holdup in a Harlem bar, was the 695th person to be electrocuted in New York after the state ended hangings in 1890 and introduced the electric chair to the world, said Dr.
James R. Acker, professor of criminal justice at the State University at Albany and an expert on capital punishment.


Pollini Cancels Recital
The pianist Maurizio Pollini has canceled his Carnegie Hall recital on March 16 because of illness.
The concert will not be rescheduled.
Subscribers and single-ticket buyers who purchased their tickets through Carnegie Charge will receive automatic credit on their accounts.
Those who bought tickets at the box office may return them for refund either in person or by mail to Carnegie Hall Box Office, 154 West 57th Street, New York, N.Y. 10019, Attention: Pollini Refund.
All requests must be made by May 19.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Q&amp;A
Surviving a Crash
Q.
I have heard that drunks survive car crashes better.
Does this mean you should relax when a crash is imminent rather than tensing every muscle in the body?


Matt Urban, 75, Much-Decorated War Veteran
Matt L. Urban, whose exploits on World War II battlefields earned him as many citations as the legendary war hero Audie Murphy, thereby tying him as the United States' most-decorated soldier, died on Saturday at Holland Community Hospital in Holland, Mich.
He was 75 and lived in Holland.
The cause was complications from a collapsed lung brought on by one of his seven war wounds, a spokesman for the family said.


Yanks Sign Ex-M.V.P. but He's 40
With every screwball he tossed from the bullpen mound, with every stride he took while jogging along the outfield warning track and with every syllable he uttered, the one-word question still lingered like stale cigar smoke.
Why?
Why was Guillermo Hernandez trying out for the replacement Yankees?
Why would a 40-year-old pitcher who won a World Series ring, a most valuable player award and a Cy Young award in 1984 and had a stellar 13-year career bother involving himself with the Players "R" Us philosophy of replacement baseball?
Why was Hernandez, once the best closer in baseball, auditioning for 10 minutes off the same mound used by a 35-year-old named R. T. Sadd during a tryout last week?
"This is hard to explain," said Hernandez, who signed a minor league contract today pending the results of a physical.
"Maybe I'm taking advantage of this. Maybe not. Who knows? I want to get here before everything is settled because it's the only way I can do it. The Yankees gave me the opportunity to get ready and make the club."


Court Backs Investors on Damage Awards
The Supreme Court ruled today that stockbrokers may not invoke a commonly used arbitration agreement to refuse to pay punitive damages to customers who are found eligible for them in arbitration proceedings.
The 8-to-1 ruling was a victory for investors, who have often complained that courts have given the securities industry an unfair advantage by enforcing arbitration agreements that brokerage clients have little choice but to sign.
In these contracts, both parties agree that any disputes will be taken to arbitration rather than to court.


Observer; Trial by Trial
After many years of watching the most widely celebrated trial in human history, I slipped quietly into a coma.
Johnnie Cochran objected.
I was deeply flattered.
Cochran was the most brilliant defense attorney to put a leaden thumb on the scales of justice since Socrates argued his own case.
Now he was objecting to my very own coma.
Surely there were rich book possibilities here.


Vanderbilt Women Take Charge in S.E.C.
Vanderbilt 67, Tennessee 61
Sheri Sam and Na'Sheema Hillmon each scored 14 points and No. 9 Vanderbilt ended four years of frustration last night by beating No. 2 Tennessee, 67-61, for the Southeastern Conference tournament championship at Chattanooga, Tenn.


Where a School Lunch Is Food, Not a Policy Issue
For Gloria Brown and her daughters, free lunch at Franklin Elementary School is a big deal.
The meals are well-balanced, and Heidi, age 7, and Samantha, age 10, like them.
Like many parents at Franklin, Mrs.
Brown, who works the 3 A.M. shift at Hardee's, does not understand why the Republicans want to scrap the national lunch program and instead give a lump sum of money to states for school meals.


At Best, a Difficult Undertaking
Some boys want to be policemen or firefighters when they grow up.
Stephen Priola wanted to be a funeral director.
In 1993, he rented space at a Whippany funeral home and opened his own business.
But Mr.
Priola, 26, has lived in Parsippany all his life and had hoped to set up his business here.
Now he has applied to convert his home into a mortuary, and his neighbors do not like the idea.
Parsippany's zoning ordinance does not list a funeral home as a permitted use in a residential area.
Mr.
Priola has applied for a variance.
A hearing will be held April 12.


Protestants Ask for Outsiders to Oversee the Disarming of Ulster
The largest Protestant political party in Northern Ireland proposed today that an international commission be established to supervise the disarmament of Roman Catholic and Protestant paramilitaries in the British province of Ulster.
The dispute over disarming guerrilla organizations has in recent impeded the peace effort advanced by Britain and Ireland, particularly the new framework proposed by the two Prime Ministers on Feb. 22.


On My Mind; The Political Laundry
The trouble with skinheads, K.K.K. wizards and all the other preachers and congregations of white supremacy, black subjugation and death to Jews is that they have no sense of business and public relations.
What they need is somebody who can teach them the name of the race-hate game: Get the press to persuade the public that, whatever they say and teach in the way of hate, racists often do social good and should get credit for it.


Jail Deaths Called Preventable
One, diagnosed with diabetes, died of pneumonia; another, a fatal seizure from inadequate medication.
In all, three inmates of the Essex County Jail suffered preventable deaths since 1992 because their conditions were mishandled by the medical staff, a prison health specialist testified last week.
Ronald Shansky's testimony was reported in the current issue of The New Jersey Law Journal.


Pataki Getting Low Marks for Job Performance, Poll Shows
At a time in his term when many politicians are still enjoying a honeymoon with voters, Gov.
George E. Pataki's favorable ratings are barely higher than those of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo at the lowest point of his administration, according to a poll released today.
The pollster, Lee M. Miringoff, director of the Marist Institute for Public Opinion, said that Mr.
Pataki's low rating of 36 percent apparently reflected opposition to the new Governor's austere budget proposal, which has angered groups from Catholic bishops to college students to advocates for the poor.
Asked about the budget, 42 percent of the respondents said they disapproved of the budget and 39 percent said they approved.


Science Times E-Mail
Science Times has an electronic mail address for comments from readers about published articles and suggested areas of coverage:
scitimes@nytimes.com.


75 Years Later, Study Still Tracking Geniuses
IN 1921, Dr.
Lewis M. Terman, a Stanford University psychologist and a pioneer of the I.Q. test, scoured California's schools to identify 1,521 children who scored 135 or over on his new intelligence test, the Stanford-Binet.
Terman's little geniuses -- who as the study went on took to calling themselves "Termites" -- are now in their 80's, and have been contacted by researchers every 5 or 10 years, making the Terman Study of Genius the grandfather of all life-span research.


American To Conduct Paris Opera
The young American conductor James Conlon, who has largely built his career in Europe, was appointed principal conductor of the troubled Paris National Opera today, inheriting a high-risk position -- if not the same title -- from which his two predecessors were summarily removed.
The 44-year-old Mr.
Conlon, who will retain his current posts in Germany as music director of the city of Cologne and chief conductor of the Cologne Opera, will serve as music adviser to the Paris Opera starting on May 1 and then become principal conductor on Aug. 1, 1996, with a contract running through 2001.


Washington Talk; For G.O.P., Moderation Is Becoming Intolerable
That Republicans are even talking about stripping Senator Mark O. Hatfield of his Appropriations Committee chairmanship for deserting his party over the balanced-budget amendment is the latest, and most vivid, example of a heightened partisanship among Republicans -- and one that leaves less and less room for moderate views.
Unlike the House and its restless new class of conservatives clamoring for rapid-fire action on Speaker Newt Gingrich's Contract With America, the Senate has moved at a decidedly slower pace.
And though the Senate has always been viewed as the more patient, more deliberative chamber, the gentlemanly Senator from Oregon may well have crossed the threshold.


Council Leaders Assail Mayor On Need to Sell City Hospitals
Several City Council leaders yesterday assailed Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's philosophy on hospital privatization, attacking the Mayor's contention that a high death rate among newborn babies in New York City public hospitals demonstrated the need for the city to sell some hospitals.
In a news conference yesterday, Mr.
Giuliani reiterated his contention that a series of articles in The New York Times detailing the high death rate among newborns and other problems in the public hospitals underscored the need for the city to remove itself from the business of owning and operating hospitals.


Green Goes With Flow As Mets Fall, 5-0
Today was the kind of day that makes it easy to see why sun-drenched resort towns and baseball exhibition games were made for each other: balmy, glistening and boasting of great expectations and even greater theater.
And true to a time-honored script, a youngster in a New York Mets uniform and another in an Atlanta Braves uniform were doing their best to deliver.


Food Stamps in Peril
The food stamp program is the best part of the nation's welfare system.
It saves millions of poor Americans from hunger and malnutrition every year and, unlike other welfare programs, is sensibly designed to insure equitable treatment from state to state.
Yet if House Republicans get their way, this exemplary program could be wrecked within weeks.
Food stamp benefits are paid by Washington, indexed for inflation and set at identical levels across the country -- worth up to $375 per month for a family of four.
They are a true safety net: if you are poor, you qualify.
During the past 20 years, states have allowed cash assistance to the poor to fall, after accounting for inflation, by over 20 percent; food stamps alone have stood between poverty and malnutrition.


TV Movies and TV Echoing a Movie
How do you drum up attention for a television movie?
One way is to get the star of an old series.
See tonight's "Shamrock Conspiracy," starring Edward Woodward, once the weekly vigilante hero of "The Equalizer."
Another way is to tackle a risky subject.
See tomorrow's "Choices of the Heart: The Margaret Sanger Story," about the extraordinary woman whose contraception crusade eventually led to the founding of Planned Parenthood.


I.B.M. Fails to Meet Demand on Thinkpad
The I.B.M.
Corporation, which stumbled badly in the fourth quarter when it did not meet holiday demand for its wildly popular Aptiva consumer line of portable computers, risks repeating that error with its new Butterfly, or Thinkpad 701C, PC.
The company said yesterday that advance orders for the new line of subnotebook computers, which features an innovative new keyboard design, indicated that initial demand for the product would far exceed the company's ability to manufacture it.
It will be well into the second quarter before it catches up, I.B.M. said.


Bobek Wins Qualifier Group
It was only the qualifying round, but for Nicole Bobek, this round was an insurmountable obstacle last year.
Not today.
In her first appearance at the 1995 world championships, Bobek skated a freestyle program that was just slightly inferior to the one she performed to win the United States women's championship on Feb. 11.
As a result, she stood first in her qualifying group, one place ahead of a shaky Lu Chen of China, who is considered one of the leading contenders for a gold medal.


Peso Reaches Lowest Point In 3 Months
The political and economic storm battering Mexico took a further toll on the badly weakened peso today, driving the currency to its lowest point since the crisis began last December.
The peso traded at an exchange rate of more than 7 pesos to the dollar at midday before Mexico's central bank stepped in to buy pesos and help stabilize the currency.
At the end of the day, the spot rate for the peso was 6.555 to the dollar, or just above 15 cents, compared with nearly 29 cents before the peso's first devaluation on Dec. 20.
Since then, the peso has lost 47 percent of its value.


Securities Trader Committed No Wrong
To the Editor:
Joseph Jett and your readers deserve better than your Feb. 28 editorial after the Barings collapse, in which you uncritically adopt Kidder Peabody's position that Mr.
Jett "fooled" the experienced Kidder executives who supervised him.


Boeing Opposes U.S. Guarantee for Aeroflot
The Boeing Company said yesterday that it was lobbying the Clinton Administration to block Federal loan guarantees that would apply to a Russian airline's purchase of Russian jetliners equipped with American-made engines.
Boeing officials said the deal could set a precedent of assisting a foreign competitor.
The dispute puts Boeing in contention with one of its key suppliers, the United Technologies Corporation, whose Pratt &amp; Whitney division would supply the engines for the 300-seat Ilyushin IL-96 MT jetliner.
Although the IL-96 has been flying for several years, the addition of the Pratt &amp; Whitney engines as well as avionics from the Rockwell International Corporation's Collins unit makes it a much stronger competitor on the world airline market.


Volcano Is Seen Erupting On Jupiter's 'Pizza Moon'
A SPECTACULAR volcano is erupting on Jupiter's moon Io, astronomers at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration Infrared Telescope Facility have reported.
The eruption was spotted last Thursday by the telescope team at Mauna Kea, Hawaii, in the form of a spreading spot on the colorful surface of the moon.
Io, which is about the same size as Earth's moon, is the only body in the solar system other than Earth where active volcanism has been observed.


College Student May Have Been Burned Alive
A woman whose bound and gagged body was found by firefighters on Saturday in the basement of a burning house in Queens was identified today as a 20-year-old college student from Canarsie, Brooklyn, the police said.
Officials said they believe that someone poured a flammable liquid on her and burned her alive.
The woman, Kimberly Antonakos, of 1437 East 87th Street, was last seen about 3:50 A.M. on Wednesday when she dropped off a friend at a home in Canarsie, said Detective Julio Martinez, a police spokesman.


Volume of Lawsuits Is a Target for House
The House today began debating a package of bills intended to reduce the number of lawsuits, taking up as its first item a considerably weakened version of a proposal to require those who lose their challenges to pay their opponents' legal costs.
The debate over the "loser pays" provision began a weeklong effort by the Republican-controlled Congress to overhaul the American legal system.
The proposal, which the House is expected to vote on Tuesday, would write into law a modified version of the rule that requires those who sue and lose in civil cases to pay the costs and fees of their opponents in many cases.


Iran Signs Oil Deal With Conoco; First Since 1980 Break With U.S.
A major American oil company said yesterday that it had been awarded a contract by Iran to develop a huge offshore oilfield in the Persian Gulf, the first energy agreement involving Iran and the United States since Washington severed relations with Teheran in 1980.
American companies are permitted to buy oil from Iran, but they may not resell it in the United States.
The contract by Conoco Inc. goes far beyond buying oil to sell to a third party, and the arrangement to develop oil and gas sources in Iran indicates a long-term relationship.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a national movement to make it easy for ordinary citizens to get permits to carry concealed weapons misstated the population rank of Texas in some copies.
It is the nation's second most populous state, not the third.


Hospitalized Zimmer Is Making Progress
DON ZIMMER, a Colorado Rockies coach, made satisfactory progress yesterday in his recovery from a temporary loss of blood flow to the brain two days earlier.


A Shrewd Move on Schools
The pilot program announced by Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and Schools Chancellor Ramon Cortines to privatize the maintenance and repair of New York City schools is a smart idea.
It could save money.
It could help prevent the city's school buildings from collapsing around the students and teachers who inhabit them.
The system of repairing schools has long been inadequate.
The fault has been shared by the Board of Education's Division of School Facilities and the school custodians.
Together they are responsible for more than 1,000 school buildings.


Sabres' LaFontaine Resumes Workouts
PAT LaFONTAINE resumed full workouts with the Buffalo Sabres yesterday, more than 15 months after undergoing reconstructive surgery on his right knee.
LaFontaine skated with the rest of the team through several offensive drills for about an hour and said he felt no discomfort.
He has been sidelined with the injury since early last season. (AP)


Listless Devils Show Up In Quebec
The Devils are developing a pattern, following wide-open victories with humiliating defeats.
For the second straight time, the Devils capped a one-sided victory with a listless performance.
The Devils suffered a 6-3 trouncing at the hands of the Nordiques at Le Colisee tonight.
In their last game, two days ago, the Devils toyed with Florida and won, 6-1.


Mexico Says Ex-Aide Impeded Inquiry on Brother's Killing
The Government announced today that it had charged a former Deputy Attorney General, Mario Ruiz Massieu, with impeding the investigation he conducted into the assassination last fall of his own brother, a leader of Mexico's governing party.
The action represented a potentially explosive turn in the inquiry.
The prosecutors asserted that while Mr.
Ruiz Massieu was serving as a close aide to Carlos Salinas de Gortari, the former President, he intimidated witnesses and falsified evidence to keep Mr.
Salinas's elder brother from appearing as a crucial suspect in the case.


Plucking Free Software Directly From the Ether
ONE of the things that puts people on line, whether through a commercial service like Compuserve, a not-yet-commercial service like the Internet or a local electronic bulletin board, is the ability to download software.
There is a lot of software in the ether, if you can figure out how to get it.
(It is easy to remember the difference between downloading and uploading if you think of the other computer as the Big Machine in the Sky. Downloading is getting software and other documents from it, like having your prayers answered. Uploading is sending software and other documents to it.)


Medal for a Rutgers Scientist
The director of the Center for Mathematical Sciences Research at Rutgers University, Dr.
Joel Lebowitz, will receive the Dalmar S. Fahrney Medal from the Franklin Institute in Philadelphia in May.
The award recognizes leadership in science.


How Brain Waves Can Fly A Plane
TO be locked inside one's own head -- unable to speak, move a muscle or even an eyeball -- is perhaps the worst imprisonment a person can endure.
But new techniques in electroencephalography may soon make it possible for a totally disabled person to communicate by directly controlling the faint electromagnetic signals emitted by his or her brain.
Similar techniques may one day allow an airplane pilot to operate certain controls merely by thinking, and an Air Force program at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Dayton, Ohio, has demonstrated that brain-actuated control has moved a significant step beyond science fiction.


Politician Has a Listener
The Federal Bureau of Investigation has been asked to investigate after a secret listening device was found in the office of Mr.
Treffinger, the Essex County Executive.
The bug, hidden under a radiator cover, was discovered Friday by the Public Safety Director, Rocco Malanga.
Its battery, strong enough to send a signal about five miles, was still in operation, Mr.
Treffinger said, suggesting it had been placed recently.


Allegations of Huge Fraud Embroil a Co-Op in Queens
Year after year, the retirees and working-class families who live in the Big Six Towers cooperative in Queens dutifully paid their monthly maintenance fees.
They absorbed additional charges for capital improvements with little fuss.
And eventually, with the promise of great earnings, many even invested their life savings in a plan to expand Big Six's shopping center.
But because of what appears to be an elaborate fraud, the new shopping center never opened, and the high-rise apartment buildings fell into debt for more than $20 million and into some disrepair.
And the stunned residents of Big Six learned last night that they may never recover their investments because the former manager of their complex apparently deceived them.


UConn Women Bring Down the House
It was as close as a Super Bowl or an early Mike Tyson fight or a typical Connecticut women's basketball game, except that this one was for the Big East Conference title.
The Huskies, the nation's No. 1-ranked team, routed Seton Hall, 85-49, tonight at Walsh Gymnasium, the Pirates' home court, in the final of the conference tournament.
The 36-point margin was the largest in a Big East final since Connecticut's 26-point victory over Seton Hall last year.
Actually, UConn led by 46 points until it cleared the bench near the end.


Doctors, on Offensive, Form H.M.O.'s
Doctors, on the defensive in recent years as employers and insurers sought to control medical costs, are starting to fight back against the growing sway of insurance and health care companies over the practice of medicine.
And in a challenge to health maintenance organizations and other insurers, a small but growing number of physicians are leapfrogging the middleman by offering to sell their services directly to employers.
The doctors insist that they, rather than insurers, can do the best job of protecting the interest of patients while providing the economical care that the public demands.


Old Dominion Earns an N.C.A.A. Berth
Old Dominion 80, James Madison 75
Old Dominion did not allow James Madison a shot from the field in the final 2 minutes 43 seconds last night as the Monarchs beat the Dukes, 80-75, for the Colonial Athletic Association tournament championship in Richmond and a berth in the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.


Death Chamber in Oklahoma


Corn in the New World: A Relative Latecomer
A NEW technique for dating ancient organic matter has upset thinking about the origins of agriculture in the Americas.
The earliest known cultivation of corn, it now seems, occurred much more recently than had been thought -- 4,700 years ago, not 7,000 -- and scientists are perplexed as they ponder the implications.
The new date means that people in the New World, in the Tehuacan valley of the central Mexican state of Puebla in particular, probably did not begin growing their most important crop until as much as 4,000 or 5,000 years after the beginning of agriculture in the Old World.
Hunter-gatherers who settled along the Jordan River valley managed to domesticate wild progenitors of wheat and barley as early as 9,000 to 10,000 years ago, and thus became, as far as anyone knows, the first farmers anywhere.
Perhaps such a lengthened time gap could suggest clues to the circumstances favoring the transition to agriculture, one of the foremost innovations in human culture.


In Chaotic City Hospitals, A Bureaucracy to Match
When New York City's public hospitals underwent their last major reorganization more than 25 years ago, civic leaders renewed a longstanding promise to bring medical care for the poor up to the standards of the best private hospitals.
Faced with financial mismanagement, squalid conditions and a bureaucracy out of control, they drew up plans for a sleek, modern business unfettered by politics: the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation.
Forged in the more magnanimous era of the Great Society, the public corporation was to insure the most generous medical services of any American city.


Even After 17 Losses, Krzyzewski Still Smiles
October was not a time for repair, the way Mike Krzyzewski once looked at his life.
It was a time for work as another basketball season at Duke approached much too soon.
His school's first national championship was a triumph of will over fatigue, and the business had not changed in the four years since.
The discomfort he had felt in his legs, and the back pain, would be overcome by more shots, and treatment, and concentration on the job that had to be done.
Pain was just another opponent until Oct. 19, during another medical test in a seemingly endless series, when Krzyzewski was asked to walk on his tiptoes.


Interpublic Units Starting a Venture
The Brockway Group, the unit of the Interpublic Group of Companies that produces infomercials and other direct-response advertising programming, has formed a joint venture with the Gotham Group, a boutique agency owned by Interpublic, to develop and market financial service products to consumers.
Brockway has also been hired by five marketers, including the General Motors Corporation and Motorola Inc., for various assignments such as developing infomercials.
"We're trying to experiment with new models of how to do business," said Martin Pazzani, chief marketing officer at Brockway in Huntington, L.I.
The venture with Gotham, based in New York, will create conventional ads as well as infomercials, he added.
The terms of the agreement were not disclosed.


New Agencies For 3 Accounts
Three advertisers have selected new agencies for their accounts.
America West Airlines named Team One Advertising in El Segundo, Calif., to handle its account, which had been at Rosenfeld, Sirowitz, Humphrey &amp; Strauss in New York for the last 11 years.
The billings were estimated at $18 million.


Canadian Food Official Plans a Deal
Wallace McCain, who was ousted last fall as co-chief executive of the big Canadian food company that he co-founded with his brother, Harrison, announced today his intention to head an equally big Canadian food operation in a transaction valued at $1 billion (Canadian), or about $710 million.
Mr.
McCain, who broke with his brother after a 40-year partnership at McCain Foods Ltd. of Florenceville, New Brunswick, is joining with a leading Canadian pension fund in an offer to acquire all the shares of Maple Leaf Foods Inc., a diversifed producer of baked goods and meats based in Toronto.


Bassist Mixes Virtues Of Youth and Maturity
Musicians tend to explain away Christian McBride's talent.
He has perfect pitch, some say.
He has a "sonographic memory," others contend.
He's physically perfect for the instrument he plays, large and strong.
And many of them also say he's the best bassist they have ever worked with.
Jazz is an idiom in which musicians usually require years of conditioning and experience to create a mature statement.
Mr.
McBride, who is 22, plays with a polish and a confidence that belie his age.
Yet his improvisations burst with the freshness associated with youth.
His playing is perfectly edited.
His intonation is beyond reproach.
His logical note choices suggest somebody who has spent years absorbing music.


Missing Baby Is Found at Pennsylvania Station


3 Into 2: History Plays Rearranged
Not so long ago, before the latest curriculum revisions, most schoolchildren would have at least heard of the Wars of the Roses, even if they were not quite sure which side wore which color rose, or what the fuss was all about.
Some may even have known that Shakespeare's first plays were a three-part history of those wars, "King Henry VI, Parts 1, 2 and 3," although few would have read them, much less seen them onstage.
The Theater for a New Audience is offering a rare opportunity to see the seldom-staged trilogy by cutting and pasting the three plays into two and presenting them in repertory.
Thanks to good performances in the main roles, the productions are effective and surprisingly engaging, mostly succeeding despite some odd and distracting directorial idiosyncracies.


A Blood Sport Moves to the Suburbs
THE night was still young, 5 fights down and nearly 20 to go, when the police stepped in.
But as Robert O'Neill aimed his flashlight on a white cock writhing on the ground, its bloody chest ripped open, he looked sorry he couldn't have raided the place sooner.
"This is one of the losers," he said.
Then he spied two dead cocks tossed in a corner of the filthy backyard.
More losers.


At Benefit, Kitchen Dresses Up As a Parlor
For those who remember performances framed by seedy loft spaces and jarred by passing SoHo truck traffic, the Kitchen's opulent setting on Sunday night had to generate a quizzical smile or two.
This was the Hudson Theater on West 44th Street, where orchestra seats were cleared away and replaced by dining tables and white linen.
A fund-raiser was under way.
Brief performances were a preface to cocktails and dinner.
Society photographers were busy.
The biggest givers paid $10,000 for their tables.
The politics of creativity were being re-enacted once again.
Two-party politics, that is, for what are iconoclasts with no temples to pull down, or revolutionaries with no status quo to undermine.
Twenty-four years into its life, ensconced in its well-equipped performing space on West 19th Street and with a firm finger on the pulse of what has been our musical counterculture, the Kitchen has fewer rough edges; defiance seems somewhat beside the point.


Babbitt Seeks to Ease Rules in Bid To Rescue Imperiled Species Law
With the Republican-controlled Congress preparing to rewrite the Endangered Species Act, the Clinton Administration today proposed changes intended to increase the law's flexibility and decrease its economic costs without putting rare plants and animals in greater danger of extinction.
Among other things, the Administration said it wanted to exempt from regulation activities on most small plots, like house lots, allowing owners to disturb the habitats of endangered and threatened species as long as the overall effect on the species was negligible.


INSIDE
Ruling Favors Investors
The Supreme Court ruled brokerage firms could not use a commonly used arbitration agreement to avoid paying punitive damages.
Page D1.
Panel on Gulf War Illnesses
President Clinton said he would create a panel to improve the treatment of veterans for illnesses they attribute to their service.
Page A14.
Flying With Brain Waves
New techniques may one day allow pilots to operate controls by merely thinking.
Science Times, page C1.


A Hard Look at Corporate Welfare
On the same day last week that the Senate dramatically rejected a measure to force the Government to balance the budget, an obscure Federal agency was accepting last-minute requests for annual handouts from some of America's largest businesses.
As a result, the Campbell Soup Company, which receives $500,000 a year from the Government, will most likely be using taxpayer money once again to help advertise V-8 Juice and soup in Argentina.


The Inevitable: Death, Taxes, Bugs
THE 1994 versions of Turbotax, Macintax and Taxcut, the three leading tax-preparation programs for personal computers, all have flaws that can, in certain circumstances, lead to erroneous returns.
The Turbotax and Macintax flaws appear to affect only a relatively small number of tax software users.
Intuit Inc., which makes the programs, said fewer than 1 percent of all users of its Federal and state programs are likely to encounter the flaws.
The Taxcut bug appears to be more significant, but it is unclear how many users are affected.
Block Financial Software Inc., the maker of Taxcut, did not return phone calls asking for comment.


Russia Needs to Make Restitution for Stolen Art
To the Editor:
Re "Russia Reveals More Art Taken From Nazis" (front page, Feb. 28): "Twice Saved," the exhibition at the Pushkin Museum of Fine Art in Moscow, should have been more appropriately titled "Twice Stolen."


A Well-Founded Fear
She makes women's clothes.
In today's Algeria, that is a political act, and potentially a fatal one.
Until last year, when she abandoned her market stall in Algiers, 38-year-old Naima Belahi imported fabric from France and Italy and sewed it into beaded evening gowns or stylish short dresses.
Then, last March 10th, Algeria's Islamic insurgents ordered all women to veil themselves within a week or risk becoming legitimate targets of murder.
The day after the deadline, militants killed a 16-year-old high school student who was walking to class without a head scarf.
Ms.
Belahi, visiting the U.S. at the time, was afraid to return home.
She neither makes nor wears the shroudlike Islamic dress that must cover the female body.
To do so, she feels, would be to signal agreement with the extremists.
She has taken refuge with a Connecticut family and applied for political asylum.


CHRONICLE
It has been 10 years since KATHLEEN LANDIS began playing piano and singing at the Cafe Pierre, so when Pierre Hotel executives asked her how she wanted to celebrate, she said, "By doing something everyone has said I'd be good at."
Instead of her usual gig, accompanying herself on piano, she will do two more formal shows every evening this week, focusing on the songs of Harold Arlen and Johnny Mercer, and will be backed by a piano and bass duo.
"I never thought anything would be for 10 years," Ms.
Landis said.
"I never even go back to the same restaurant twice."


D'Amato to Support Dole in '96
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato plans to announce his support on Tuesday for Senator Bob Dole's 1996 Presidential campaign, a move that is expected to trigger a chain reaction of endorsements for Mr.
Dole by prominent New York Republicans, party officials said yesterday.
Republican officials, speaking on the condition of anonymity, said they expect Gov.
George E. Pataki and the state Republican chairman, William D. Powers, to follow Mr.
D'Amato's lead quickly.
The three party leaders forged a strong alliance in last year's gubernatorial race and want to duplicate it in 1996, the officials said.


She Knows Her Ohms and Iambs
As she squeezes fingers through a tiny opening to
grab wires she teases about the


U.N. Parley Ponders How to Stretch Scarce Aid Funds
Aware that the climate for international aid has changed, rich and poor nations, gathered for a weeklong conference on world poverty, are beginning to debate new ways to help the 1.3 billion people who are absolutely destitute.
How far the two camps have come toward accommodation will not be known until the end of the week, when leaders from 130 nations discuss the conclusions their delegations have reached at the United Nations World Summit for Social Development.


METRO DIGEST
STATE SENATE PASSES DEATH PENALTY
The State Senate voted overwhelmingly to return the death penalty to New York State 18 years after the state's last capital punishment law was declared unconstitutional.
At 1 this morning, the Assembly was still locked in a sometimes fiery debate that had begun late Monday afternoon.
A1.
IN CITY HOSPITALS, CHAOTIC BUREAUCRACY
When New York City's public hospitals underwent their last major reorganization more than 25 years ago, civic leaders renewed a longstanding promise to bring medical care for the poor up to the standards of the best private hospitals.
The system that emerged is now under attack for both its ideology and its cost.
But long before the change in political sentiment, New York's public hospitals were moving toward a crisis of their own making, with problems that had a familiar ring.
A1.
ALLEGATIONS OF CO-OP FRAUD
Year after year, the retirees and working-class families who live in the Big Six Towers cooperative in Queens dutifully paid their monthly maintenance fees.
And with the promise of great earnings, many even invested their life savings in a plan to expand Big Six's shopping center.
But the stunned residents of the Big Six have now learned that they may never recover their investments.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  COUNCIL ASSAILS MAYOR ON HOSPITALS
Several City Council leaders assailed Mayor Giuliani's philosophy on hospital privatization, attacking the Mayor's contention that a high death rate among newborn babies in New York City public hospitals demonstrated the need for the city to sell some hospitals.
B3.
A woman whose bound and gagged body was found in the basement of a burning house in Queens was identified as a 20-year-old college student from Canarsie, Brooklyn.
B3.
REGION  PATAKI GETS A GRADE
At a time in his term when many politicians are still enjoying a honeymoon with voters, Governor Pataki's favorable ratings are barely higher than those of Governor Cuomo at the lowest point of his administration.
B5.
D'AMATO TO SUPPORT DOLE IN '96
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato plans to announce his support for Senator Bob Dole's 1996 Presidential campaign, a move that is expected to trigger a chain reaction of endorsements for Mr.
Dole by New York Republicans.
B5.
ECONOMIC PLAN FOR NEW JERSEY CITIES
On a hill where rioters tore the heart out of New Jersey's capital city in 1968, Governor Whitman announced a new urban agenda that offers the cities of New Jersey help in planning for economic recovery, but not much help in paying for it.
B6.
NICOTINE REPORT WINS JOURNALISM AWARD
Reports on subjects ranging from the nicotine content of cigarettes to fraud at the Immigration and Naturalization Service have won the George Polk Awards for 1994.
B6.
VANDALS PAINT SWASTIKAS IN L.I.
OFFICE
Vandals broke into the office of a Long Island dentist, drew swastikas on the walls and poured black paint on his records and files, the Suffolk County police said.
B6.
Chronicle B20  Our Towns by Evelyn Nieves B6


Slovakia Takes a Wrong Turn
Although Prime Minister Vladimir Meciar of Slovakia would like to lead his country into the European Union and NATO, he is pursuing policies that disqualify membership in either organization.
Mr.
Meciar, a former Communist Party boss who returned to power last winter for the third time since 1989, seems intent on stifling independent voices in the press, television and radio.
Mr.
Meciar's first official act when he assumed power last November was to put party cronies in charge of radio, TV and the state agency responsible for the media.
The new boss of state radio cut back on news coverage and eliminated programs that allowed unfettered discussion of political issues.
Two weeks ago, after the Slovak radio's Washington correspondent, Peter Susko, reported that a Meciar trade delegation to the United States appeared poorly prepared, he was ordered home and the Washington office was closed.


Harbor Police Chief Is Named
James J. Challender is the new chief of the Division of Police of the Waterfront Commission of New York Harbor.
Mr.
Challender, 53, a former captain of the New Jersey State Police, will head the unit that investigates crime in the harbor and patrols docks and terminals.
PETER S. YOUNG


Theodore R. Bowie, Art Historian, 90
Theodore R. Bowie, professor emeritus of art history at Indiana University, died on Sunday at his home in Bloomington, Ind.
He was 90.
The cause was heart failure, said his wife, the former Marilyn Miller, of Bloomington and Manhattan.


Top Disney TV Official May Leave
Richard H. Frank, the head of the Walt Disney Company's television programming business and one of the highest-ranking executives at Disney, intends to leave soon, according to people familiar with his plans.
The departure of Mr.
Frank would continue the turmoil at Disney, once one of Hollywood's most stable studios.
The company has seen a series of departures from its creative ranks since the head of the studio, Jeffrey Katzenberg, resigned last August in a dispute with the chairman of Disney, Michael D. Eisner.


The Beat of Life, With Reminders of the 70's
Louise Klixbull has been choreographing for 10 years, according to program notes for a performance by the Klixbull Dance Company on Sunday afternoon at the Theater of the Riverside Church.
Given that fact, Miss Klixbull's new "Pulse" was astonishingly naive.
The 90-minute theater-and-dance piece suggested that the Danish-born choreographer and her costume and set designer, Annemarie Klixbull, have an eye for scenic design.
The stage looked handsome, a rectangle of red light and gauze bordered by naked light stands and filled with dancers in red leotards and tights.
But what those dancers performed was a rambling, often aimless-seeming ritual in movement that was mostly calisthenics with some ballet and Martha Graham technique worked in.


James B. McMillan, 78, Judge Who Challenged Segregation
James Bryan McMillan, a retired Federal judge who played a pivotal role in ending the segregation of Southern public schools, died on Saturday at his home in Charlotte, N.C.
He was 78.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


The Mouth That Keeps Roaring; An American Free Spirit Overwhelms the Downhill Scene
Even if Picabo Street had not begun dominating the World Cup downhill circuit, she would have turned her share of Tyrolean heads.
In a discipline where the difference between fabulous and fair is usually too small to be counted aloud, camaraderie is not always part of the tight-lipped proceedings.
But Street, the free-spirited daughter of free spirits, has never been one for quietly toeing the party line.


Grace Chief's Exit Troubles Big Investors
Disturbed by the abrupt resignation last week of J. P. Bolduc, the president and chief executive of W. R. Grace &amp; Company, several big institutional shareholders of the company are considering an effort to unseat eight directors whose terms expire this spring, analysts said yesterday.
The directors include the chairman, J. Peter Grace, and Thomas A. Holmes, the man chosen as Mr.
Bolduc's interim successor.
The resignation, announced late Thursday, has aroused such ire because Mr.
Bolduc was widely seen as an architect of a sweeping overhaul of Grace, transforming the wildly diversified conglomerate into a growth company with two main business lines, specialty chemicals and health care.
Shares of Grace fell $ 1.25 yesterday, to $ 42.25, on the New York Stock Exchange.
The stock has fallen 5 percent since Thursday.


Review/Fashion; A Retreat From Retro Glamour
But the nicest thing about the Day of the Locust crowds at Gucci, the jostling, the elbowing and the expectation in the air, was that the excitement was for nothing but the clothes.


Subway Bomb Suspect in Lineup
The suspect in a subway firebombing, Edward J. Leary, was identified in a police lineup yesterday by 12 of 17 people, some of whom were on the train that was firebombed last December, his new lawyer said.
Earlier in the day, Mr.
Leary made an unscheduled appearance in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, where he was ordered by Justice Rena Uviller to shave his beard for the lineup so that he appeared the way he did on the day of the firebombing.
He and 47 other people were injured on Dec. 21, when a car on a No. 4 train erupted into flames in the Fulton Street station in lower Manhattan.


Jerusalem Journal; In a Museum of Hell, Qualms About Decorum
What many cannot forget are her eyes.
She stands slightly hunched on the far left of the grainy photo, huddling in fear with two other women as Nazi soldiers hover with rifles.
On this dark day in 1941 in Liepaja, Latvia, these unidentified Jewish women are about to die.


Vincent Broderick, Federal Judge, Is Dead at 74
Judge Vincent L. Broderick, who was a senior judge of the Federal District Court for the Southern District of New York and who served as New York City Police Commissioner during a tumultuous period of transition, died on Friday at the Stanley R. Tippett Hospice in Needham, Mass.
He was 74.
Judge Broderick, who lived in Pelham Manor, N.Y., died of cancer, said his daughter Kathleen Broderick Baird of Needham.


CHRONICLE
Joking that she was reluctant to part with her inaugural ball gown and coat, HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON presented them yesterday to the First Ladies exhibition at the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of American History.
"It's not something I came to lightly," Mrs.
Clinton said as she stood next to a mannequin displaying her ensemble at the ceremony.
"As you'll notice we're into the third year of my husband's Presidency."


Yeltsin Vows Crackdown On Gangsters
Russia's powerful Security Council, with President Boris N. Yeltsin in the chair, sharply criticized the Interior Ministry, prosecutors and the domestic secret police today for failing to get a grip on organized crime.
Mr.
Yeltsin then followed through on a promise last week to dismiss Moscow's chief of police, Vladimir Pankratov, and chief prosecutor, Gennadi Ponomaryov.


From a Cool Dude In a Hip, Literary Mood
TOOTH IMPRINTS ON A CORN DOG  By Mark Leyner  216 pages. Harmony Books. $19.
Reading Mark Leyner's new collection of short pieces isn't like reading a book exactly.
It's more like spending several hours with the Comedy Channel on cable television, or a long evening with a couple of teen-agers on acid.
Imagine Beavis and Butt-head morphed with William S. Burroughs or Michael O'Donoghue crossed with Eugene Ionesco; then picture the twisted products of their imaginations projected on one of those big-screen television sets, with the volume turned all the way up.
The results are intermittently hilarious, but also silly and highly sophomoric.


Anne Frank's Friend To Read Diary Excerpts
Miep Gies, the Dutchwoman who helped hide the family of Anne Frank from the Nazis during World War II, is among those who are to take part in a free reading on Thursday at 12:30 P.M. at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church, at 55th Street.
The reading is to feature excerpts from a newly published edition of "Anne Frank: The Diary of a Young Girl," which includes material omitted from the original edition published in 1947.


A Presidential Hopeful for '96 With a Low-Key, Serious Air
Richard Green Lugar has been a United States Senator from Indiana for 18 years, but much of the national electorate has yet to notice.
That would not seem to make for a promising start to a campaign for the Republican Presidential nomination like the one Mr.
Lugar disclosed, to the surprise of many here, on Thursday.
Unlike Senator Bob Dole, the majority leader, who can summon network cameras whenever he wants toopine on any issue, Mr.
Lugar is known largely as an authority on dry topics like arms control and foreign affairs.
Unlike Senator Phil Gramm, of the Texas twang and saber-toothed sound bites, Mr.
Lugar speaks in flat tones and shades of gray.


Simpson Lawyer Suggests Police Didn't Pursue All Leads
O.
J.
Simpson's chief trial lawyer labored today to suggest that in their "rush to judgment" the police failed to pursue leads that might have implicated other suspects in the killings of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman.
But the detective who led the investigation said that all signs pointed toward the former football star.
The lawyer, Johnnie L. Cochran Jr., spent much of a day abbreviated by a shortened daily calendar and a bomb scare cross-examining Detective Tom Lange, one of two police officers who headed the investigation.
Mr.
Cochran posited two alternative scenarios for the night of June 12, 1994, when Mrs.
Simpson and her friend were killed: both theories, he suggested, received only minimal police consideration.


Raveling Is Happy To Leave Coaching
George Raveling, the former Southern Cal men's basketball coach, says he's 95 percent recovered from the multiple injuries he received in a car accident last September.
He's also not pining to coach again.
Hasn't felt the urge.
Raveling, who will work for CBS as an analyst during the National Collegiate Athletic Association men's basketball tournament, retired from Southern Cal last Nov. 15.
He's pleased by his serenity about retiring from the sidelines.
He doesn't want to end up frazzled like the University of Nevada-Las Vegas's Tim Grgurich or Golden State's Don Nelson.
Not at 57.


Executive Changes
ARMSTRONG WORLD INDUSTRIES, Lancaster, Pa., named Frank A. Riddick 3d president and chief financial officer.


Bonds Fall On Concern Over Dollar
Government securities fell again yesterday, as some traders focused on the dollar's weakness against other currencies and others said they considered the market vulnerable to corrections because of its recent strong gains.
The 30-year bond fell 19/32 , to a price of 10016/32 , pushing the yield, which moves in the opposite direction from the price, up to 7.58 percent, from 7.54 percent on Friday.
Shorter-maturity bill rates also came under selling pressure as rates rose modestly.


Estonia's Government Replaced In Vote Signaling Slower Reform
Voters ousted Estonia's pro-market Government in elections this weekend in favor of political parties that advocate a greater commitment to social protection and agriculture, according to election results issued today.
The political shift in Estonia, whose radical market reforms led to much more rapid economic growth compared with that in other former republics of the Soviet Union, was fed by dissatisfaction among elderly and rural voters who felt that they had been left out of the economic revival.


Parents Are Given Report Cards on High Schools
This month for the first time, parents are receiving report cards grading New York City high schools, with consistently high marks going to specialized institutions like Stuyvesant High School in Manhattan and Bronx Science.
Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines is issuing the report cards to show parents how individual schools are doing in areas like standardized test scores, graduation rates and the ability to keep teachers.


Iverson Gets Rookie Honors
Allen Iverson of Georgetown was awarded four honors yesterday when he was named the Big East Rookie of the Year and the league's Defensive Player of the Year.
He was also voted second-team all-Big East and to the all-rookie team.
Voting was conducted by the league's coaches and no coach could vote for his own players.
Iverson set the league's rookie scoring record, averaging 19.8 points a game and a Big East record with 64 steals.
He was a unanimous choice for the Rookie of the Year award and is only the third freshman to be voted the top defender award, joining former Hoyas Patrick Ewing (1981-82) and Alonzo Mourning (1988-89).


Bias Units Investigate Vandalism At Dentist's
Vandals broke into the office of a Long Island dentist over the weekend, drew swastikas on the walls and poured black paint on his records and files, the Suffolk County police said today.
The victim, Dr.
Morris Oster, who has practiced dentistry at an office attached to his home here for 36 years without incident, said he was "shocked and horrified" by the vandalism.


Simms-Browns Negotiations Hit a Lull
PHIL SIMMS shouldn't break out his Cleveland Browns jersey just yet.
Negotiations involving the former Giants quarterback have been put on hold until at least Sunday, according to the Browns' owner, ART MODELL.
The problem?
No surprise; it appears to be money.


Dealing Death in Albany
New York State's political leaders, determined to restore the death penalty, have nearly completed a lawmaking process that ought to shame the Senate, Assembly and Governor.
New York is licensing itself to kill those convicted of certain kinds of murder in a legislative rush that ignores principle and bows to the politics of looking tough about crime.
For weeks the legislators have swapped and logrolled on the solemn subject of capital punishment in ways more suitable to parceling out pork-barrel projects to their districts.
No hearings, no reports showing that the politicians understand their bill or the true cost of bringing back the executioner.
Only proud speeches proclaiming that New York will soon be free to conduct executions.


Corrections
A chart of major financial indicators atop the Business Digest yesterday misstated Friday's close of the Dow Jones industrial average.
It was down 22.13 to 3,989.61, not 4,011.74.


Walt Disney
Shares of Walt Disney rose sharply yesterday, hitting a 52-week high of $56.25, before closing at $56.
Traders attributed the rise to the record-setting videocassette sales of the company's animated movie "The Lion King," which sold 20 million copies its first week.


Correction
Because of an editing error, a letter published March 4 from Representative Nancy Pelosi on legislation to create a public benefit trust to manage the Presidio Army base misstated the vote in the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee.
The bill passed 20 to 0.


W. B. Doner Named To Coca-Cola Roster
The Coca-Cola Company said yesterday that it had further broadened its agency roster by naming W. B. Doner &amp; Company in Baltimore and Southfield, Mich., to handle special projects for Coca-Cola U.S.A.
The billings were not disclosed.


NEW YORK SENATE APPROVES REVIVAL OF DEATH PENALTY
The State Senate voted overwhelmingly last night to return the death penalty to New York State 18 years after the state's last capital punishment law was declared unconstitutional.
At 2:30 this morning, the Assembly was still locked in a sometimes fiery debate that had begun late Monday afternoon, as opponents exhaustively critiqued the racial, moral, political and Constitutional ramifications of the 60-page bill.


UMass and Temple Make Date For Another Atlantic 10 Final
It had been just 19 hours between games for St.
Joseph's.
On Sunday night, the Hawks beat St.
Bonaventure in double overtime to advance to tonight's semifinals of the Atlantic 10 tournament against the University of Massachusetts.
It's not the ideal way to prepare to meet the No. 1 seed in a tournament.
But what can you do when one game ends sometime after midnight and the other starts at 7 P.M. later that day?


No Headline
"I like having a hot lunch. It's expensive to pack cold lunch. A lot of things in stores are rip-offs." -- AMANDA AMUNDSEN, a Wisconsin fourth grader who gets free lunch at school.  [ A16:4. ]


Review/Fashion; Chic Prevails Over Grunge
Fashion likes the characters in its costume drama to come in two sizes: big and bigger.
As the craze for basics, represented by the Gap, crescendoed, it was difficult for designers not to sound a bit like Norma Desmond: they were big, but the business was thinking very, very small.
Fortunately for fashion, big is back.
Gianni Versace is talking about his new town house in New York (his fourth mansion); Giorgio Armani is planning a spectacle and soiree for his show on Thursday night, and Valentino is busily preparing ball gowns for the Academy Awards.


Review/Fashion; Hollywood On a Runway
While some of Italy's younger designers are exploring the styles of the 1960's and 70's, when youth reigned in fashion, the venerable House of Krizia is celebrating the golden age of Hollywood.
Krizia is marking its 40th anniversary this year, and cinema its 100th, a happy confluence.
So the Krizia show today opened with the music of the old Movietone News, followed by snippets of scenes from classic American films.
Next came a bravura promenade of the kind of glamorous clothes worn by the likes of Greta Garbo, Katharine Hepburn, Rita Hayworth and Marilyn Monroe, as interpreted by Krizia's designer, Mariuccia Mandelli.


An Emotional, Inevitable Rite Is Repeated One Last Time
Senator Richard A. Dollinger, Democrat of Rochester, reached into his desk drawer on the Senate floor today and pulled out a hypodermic syringe -- the instrument, he said, that would kill not only convicts but a measure of civilization in New York as well.
"What we're going to do today," he said, unwrapping the needle slowly, "is we are going to fill this with what I think is the greatest venom present in our society today: pure and simple revenge. That is what this is all about."


A Family Meeting


Democrats Forge New Welfare Role
One of the more bizarre features of the current debate over welfare legislation is the way Democrats and Republicans seem to have reversed their usual positions on proposals to require welfare recipients to work.
Unable to agree on any other aspect of welfare policy, House Democrats hit upon this theme: the Republicans' welfare bill, as originally proposed and subsequently revised, is "weak on work."


SOCCER REPORT
Italy
Goals from Gianfranco Zola and Dino Baggio gave Parma a crucial 2-0 triumph against Turin on Sunday to narrow the gap on league-leading Juventus, which was held to a scoreless tie against Inter in Milan.


Oppenheimer for Sale As ING Digests Barings
Oppenheimer &amp; Company, the New York-based securities firm, is for sale, executives at the company and at ING Group said yesterday.
ING, the big Dutch insurance and banking company that has agreed to take over Barings P.L.C., had previously discussed buying the privately held Oppenheimer, the executives said.
At least for now, however, these Oppenheimer-ING negotiations have been suspended, and company insiders and analysts predict that ING, or Internationale Nederlanden Groep N.V., will be preoccupied for the next several months with digesting its acquisition of Barings, the British investment bank that collapsed last week.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CAMPO ELECTRONICS APPLIANCES AND COMPUTERS INC., Harahan, La., a retailer, ended its discussions to acquire Gregg Appliances Inc., Indianapolis, for $52 million in cash and stock.
DATA BROADCASTING CORP., New York, agreed to sell Shark Information Services Corp., which provides stock market information, to Automatic Data Processing Inc., Roseland, N.J., for $20 million.


Supreme Court To Pick a Home For Errant Isle
For the second time in four years, the Supreme Court today waded into a boundary dispute between Mississippi and Louisiana over which state owns a seven-mile-long strip of land that may once have been an island in the Mississippi River but is now quite firmly attached to the Louisiana shore.
Louisiana is challenging the determination by a special master, appointed two years ago by the Court, that despite the current geography, the land belongs to Mississippi.


Whitman's Urban Agenda Outlines Self-Help Program
On a hill where rioters tore the heart out of New Jersey's capital city in 1968, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman announced a new urban agenda that offers the cities of New Jersey help in planning for economic recovery, but not much help in paying for it.
Calling for the creation of neighborhood-based development groups that would seek money from private and nonprofit groups, the program announced today was carefully tailored to the Republican self-help philosophy of a tax-cutting Governor with no money to spare and scant political support in the cities.


Really a Jungle Out There, a Jungle of Urban Neuroses
A lawyer with a fully developed talent for obfuscation is suddenly put into the position of defending his most important client (himself).
The charge: burying a hypothetical lawn mower.
An angry hooker, who describes herself as a "para-professional," pours out her heart to the suicide counselor, a man new on the job, answering the telephone at a Manhattan hot-line center.
Meanwhile, over on Central Park West, two civilized, upwardly mobile couples straighten out their Byzantine extramarital relationships, not through cool analysis but with a snub-nosed gun.
Deliciously overwrought basket cases all.


Fifth Arrest in Betting Scandal
A second adult was arrested yesterday in the investigation into a sports betting ring at Nutley High School.
Thomas Stigliano, 25, of Belleville, became the fifth person charged.
Three youths, ages 17 and 19, and a 24-year-old man were arrested last week after the authorities uncovered an operation that involved shakedowns of parents to pay their children's debts, at least one kidnapping and thousands of dollars in weekly receipts.


Developments in Washington
LEGAL REFORM: The House began debating an overhaul of the American legal system as it considered legislation that would for the first time place civil laws governing personal injuries and defective products under Federal rules.
The debate, which is expected to occupy much of the week, began with a proposal to require that people who undertake civil lawsuits, and then lose, pay the costs and fees of their opponents in many cases.
The bill is a sharply curtailed version of the "loser pays" proposal embodied in the House Republicans' Contract With America.
ENDANGERED SPECIES: With Congress preparing to rewrite the Endangered Species Act, the Clinton Administration proposed changes intended to increase the law's flexibility and decrease its economic costs without putting rare plants and animals in greater danger of extinction.
For instance, it wants to exempt from regulation most homeowners and activities on small plots of land, allowing some disturbance of habitat as long as the overall effect on a species is negligible.
Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt also wants to give more power to state governments in carrying out the law, and has said that future decisions to list species for protection would have to be supported by independent scientific peer reviews.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Market Place.  [ D8. ] The use of reality in ads, intended to infuse them with credibility, has clearly grown, but it runs the risk of being overtaken by events like political turmoil.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D19. ]


Peacocks Move On As Jaspers Are Jolted
A basketball team from the New York metropolitan area did indeed earn a spot in the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament tonight.
But it was not Manhattan.
St.
Peter's of Jersey City stunned the top-seeded Jaspers in overtime, 80-78, in the championship game of the Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference tournament at Knickerbocker Arena.
With the victory, the Peacocks clinched an automatic bid to the N.C.A.A.'s post-season tourney for the first time since 1991.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.00
5.93
3.29
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.77
5.70
3.52
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.00
5.91
3.75
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.41
7.33
6.31
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.58
7.54
6.79
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.47
8.41
7.61
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.45
6.40
5.96
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Essex Is Leaner by 482 Jobs
Nearly 500 of Essex County's 5,100 employees will lose their jobs as the county struggles to balance its budget.
The County Executive, James W. Treffinger, said the 482 layoffs announced yesterday will save $15 million in salaries and benefits this year.
Mr.
Treffinger said the reductions were forced by "past abuses by management, particularly the last management," referring to his predecessor, Thomas J. D'Alessio, who was convicted last year of extortion and money laundering.
The county is facing a deficit of $161.5 million, one-third of its operating budget.


United Way Directors Are Faulted as Trial Begins
Lawyers for William Aramony, the former president of United Way of America, portrayed him today as a driven, dedicated man who had built the charity into one of the best known in the United States, but who was the victim of directors and lawyers who tried to protect themselves by blaming him for a variety of misdeeds.
"The reason William Aramony sits there today," William B. Moffitt, one of his lawyers, said in his opening statement in the trial of Mr.
Aramony and two former aides on charges they defrauded the charity of more than $1 million, "is that the corporate titans of America, men driven by single-minded ambition, were trying to preserve their power and their reputations."


Rx for Endangered Species Law: Empty Medicine Bottles
LIKE a songbird twittering gamely in a thunderstorm, a group of environmentalists last week announced the start of a nationwide campaign to help keep the Endangered Species Act from having its wings clipped or its feathers plucked.
Speaking at a news conference here, members of the Endangered Species Coalition, an alliance of 188 environmental, scientific and civic groups, described their Medicine Bottle campaign, an effort to urge Americans to send empty medicine vials to President Clinton or their Congressional representatives.
The gesture is intended to underscore the importance of plant products and other wild sources to the nation's pharmaceutical offerings.


Heated Plane Wing Prevents Icing Safely
To the Editor:
The controversy concerning the safety of the ATR-42 and ATR-72 commuter turboprop airliners is disturbing (front page, Feb. 26).
No aircraft in the air transport category, whether a trunk airline or a commuter, should be flying with wing de-icing boots to prevent ice buildup.


Chess
Anatoly Karpov did not have as easy a time winning his qualification match for the International Chess Federation's world championship as his forthcoming rival, Gata Kamsky.
During 10-game contests in the Sanghi Nagar, India, Kamsky took just seven games to rack up his winning score of 5 1/2-1 1/2 against Valery Salov, whereas Karpov had to go nine games to achieve his winning 6-3 score against Boris Gelfand.
Not only that, but Karpov was also defeated in Game 3 and thus had to come from behind to victory.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  No. 8 Beats No. 4  Eighth-seeded Mary Joe Fernandez used a consistent serve and steady ground strokes to beat No. 4 Natasha Zvereva, 6-4, 6-3, yesterday in the $430,000 Evert Cup final.
The match was rained out on Sunday. (AP)


New York City's 11 Public Hospitals
1. BELLEVUE HOSPITAL CENTER
1,272 beds.
Widely regarded as the best hospital in the system.
Founded in 1736, it is the oldest teaching hospital in the nation and the model for what a public hospital can be.
For generations it has been a pioneer in new treatments; two of its doctors shared a Nobel Prize for medicine in 1956.
But it also treats the poorest of patients, including 60 percent of the city's homeless. 2.
BRONX MUNICIPAL HOSPITAL CENTER
823 beds.
The primary teaching hospital for the acclaimed Albert Einstein College of Medicine, until Einstein built its own hospital in 1966.
Now, many doctors complain, Einstein pays less attention to Bronx Municipal.
Until recently, the hospital was often criticized for permitting unsupervised resident doctors to dominate patient care.


Firefighter in Coma, and Medical Treatment Is Faulted
A firefighter who collapsed at a blaze in Brooklyn on Sunday suffered severe brain damage and was in a coma last night.
Fire officials said yesterday that an oxygen tube had been improperly inserted by paramedics.
Lieut.
Raymond F. Schiebel, a 25-year veteran of the Fire Department, was listed in critical condition at Woodhull Medical and Mental Health Center, unconscious and on life support after sustaining injuries to his brain, heart, lungs and kidneys because of a "persistent lack of oxygen," said Dr.
David Prezant, the Fire Department's chief physician.


Sports of The Times; The Echoes From a Strike Reach Deep
"LOOK," said the sportswriter's spouse, "here's a story in the paper that says more than 5 million children under the age of 12 go hungry each month. And we should be worried about the baseball players?"
Well, then, should we be worried about the owners?


Perot and the Warbler
To the Editor:
Charles C. Mann and Mark L. Plummer claim "just about anybody" would have done what Ross Perot did (Op-Ed, March 2): rush to destroy the golden-cheeked warbler's habitat before it could be declared an endangered species.


Birden Leaves Chiefs for the Falcons
The Atlanta Falcons, in search of a deep threat at wide receiver to replace the departed ANDRE RISON, said yesterday they had agreed to terms with the free agent J. J. BIRDEN.
Terms of the two-year contract were not disclosed.
Birden, 29, spent five seasons with the Kansas City Chiefs, making 183 catches for 2,819 yards and 14 touchdowns.
Birden had 48 receptions for 637 yards and 4 touchdowns last year. (AP)


Vast Bureaucracy Is Nation's Biggest
No other city in the United States has a public hospital system as vast or as expensive as New York's.
In Los Angeles County, the health care network serves the city and suburbs, with a population of 9 million, 1.7 million more than in New York.
But its public hospitals serve fewer patients and spend much less.
The county has five hospitals instead of 11, an annual budget of $2.5 billion instead of $3.8 billion, and 29,000 employees instead of almost 50,000.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about a study of the consumption of folic acid, a B vitamin that can prevent birth defects, by South Carolina women misstated the recommended amount.
It is 400 micrograms, not milligrams, a day.
The article also misstated the average daily amount consumed by young women in the United States.
It is 250 micrograms, not milligrams.


Small Crimes, Big Crackdown?; Petty Offender and Store Owners Differ Over Arrests
In the wee hours of the morning of Sept. 14, just 131 days after he ended a four-year prison term for peddling cocaine to an undercover cop, Anthony Santiago was done in again: this time for taking a sip from a tinted bottle on a Flushing street corner.
"It was malta," Mr.
Santiago said dismissively, cringing at the notion that sipping a malt drink with one-half of 1 percent alcohol could violate any law.
"They was on me like white on rice."


Stocks Recover From a Blow by the Dollar
At first, the battered dollar dragged down the stock market yesterday, sending the Dow Jones industrial average plunging as much as 34 points in the first 15 minutes of trading.
Nervous currency traders turned to stronger foreign currencies, like the German mark, lessening the value of dollar-denominated assets, like stocks.
Bond prices fell, and long-term interest rates rose.


Don't Just Privatize, but Rationalize New York City's Hospitals
To the Editor:
The proposed sale and privatization of Coney Island, Elmhurst and Queens Hospital Centers should perhaps be considered in a much larger framework.
Policy makers should be aware that the very concept of a private hospital in New York City in 1995 is an oxymoron.


New Barings Owner Retains The Firm's Top Executives
The chairman and the other top managers of Barings P.L.C. will stay in their jobs, at least until the completion of various investigations into the British investment bank's collapse, the company's new owner said today.
Despite mounting evidence that senior managers at Barings knew well in advance of problems with oversight of their futures trader in Singapore and of extremely large financial bets he was making, ING Group, the Dutch company whose acquisition of the British investment house won the necessary court and regulatory approval today, said it would not make any immediate judgments about who was to blame.


'Primary Colors' Error Was Case of Punctuation
To the Editor:
Re "A Reader Finds That a Current Book Reads Suspiciously Like an Old One" (Arts pages, March 3): I truthfully explained to your reporter yesterday that the problem was a nonstory and a matter in editing of dropped quotation marks, several in a book of literary nonfiction with almost a thousand quotations and virtually every one scrupulously attributed.
A mistake in our politically correct times is seen as guile.
It is Lent.
I need the mortification.
ALEXANDER THEROUX  Coronado, Calif., March 3, 1995


A Different Gauge for Rating Airlines
What's a statistic worth?
Not much, when it's a Government measure of on-time performance of the nation's airlines, says Julius Maldutis, an airline analyst at Salomon Brothers.
The problem with the monthly statistics, which the airlines that come out on top use widely in their marketing campaigns, is that they measure flights that are delayed more than 15 minutes.
Mr.
Maldutis says that a better measure of reliability is the percentage of flight-miles canceled, because a canceled trip irks travelers far more than minor delays.


Mudslide Destroys Nine Houses


Midwest Eagles Return To Face Unknown Peril


Clinton to Create a Panel to Look Into Gulf War Illnesses
In response to more than two years of complaints, President Clinton today announced the creation of an independent panel to help improve the Government's treatment of veterans who say their illnesses are linked to service in the Persian Gulf war.
The announcement amounted to tacit acknowledgment of criticism that the Government has failed to investigate adequately the cause of the maladies and that it has been slow to provide gulf war veterans with needed treatment.


Arabs Split on Cultural Ties to Israel
The Arab world's most famous poet has been expelled from the Arab Writers' Union for meeting with Israeli intellectuals, and the punishment has generated bitter debate among writers and artists across the Middle East.
At issue is the whole idea of cultural exchange with Israel, but underlying it is a long-simmering rebellion against pressures Arab governments exert on their cultural establishments.


Potash Buys Big Producer Of Phosphate
Elf Aquitaine S.A. of France and the Williams Companies announced yesterday that they had sold Texasgulf Inc., one of the world's largest producers of phosphate rock, to the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan for $810 million in cash.
The sale signals a major pullback from Elf Aquitaine's long and costly entry into chemicals in North America.
The French oil company had owned 85 percent of Texasgulf, with the rest held by Williams, a pipeline company in Tulsa, Okla., that transports natural gas and oil.


The Miracles of the Body
The scenes of champion athletes performing their miracles on track, field and ice are mere preliminaries to the internal miracles you can witness tonight on "The Universe Within." Fiber-optic cameras, electron microscopes and computer animation produce an astounding display of the workings of the human body.
It makes the program's pledge-drive interruptions, which take up more than a quarter of these two hours, almost forgivable if not necessarily bearable. (My advice: Send in your check and record the show for future watching, finger on fast-forward.)
Mike Powell's 1991 record-setting long jump of nearly 10 yards leads into a celebration of the heart, the muscles and the bones that form the human skeleton, "heavy enough to withstand a pounding and light enough to get airborne for a moment or two." The skeleton is recreated every two years, and you can see the old bone being replaced by new bone in a process that, alas, slows around middle age and ends as all things end.


Gap Inc.(GPS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


PATAKI SEES JUSTICE SERVED
Gov.
George E. Pataki fulfilled one of his central campaign vows today by signing a death penalty bill into law, making New York the 38th state with capital punishment.
Mr.
Pataki used two pens that belonged to slain police officers in a bill-signing ceremony with all the choreographed flourish of one of his stump events.
The relatives of seven murder victims joined dozens of lawmakers and police union officials to watch the Republican Governor end an 18-year battle to return the death penalty to New York State.


Judge Rejects Part of Mississippi Plan to Desegregate Colleges
A Federal judge in Mississippi ruled today that a state plan to eliminate the vestiges of a racially segregated system of higher education did not go far enough, and he went on to block proposals to close a historically black and a historically white university.
Instead the judge challenged the state's practice of using different admission standards for the historically black and white campuses in the eight-campus state university system and ordered the policy changed.
The judge also ordered the state to spend about $30 million beginning in July 1996 as part of a program to improve its three historically black universities.


Lindros Finally Makes An Impact for Islanders
For one night, at least, Brett Lindros found a way to take the weight of his name -- if not the weight of the franchise -- off his broad back.
The rookie with the hefty contract and big expectations beat what seemed like the entire Hartford team for his first National Hockey League goal early in the second period to break a tie.
Jamie McLennan (23 saves), starting in goal for only the second time in 10 games, made Lindros's score stand.
And the Islanders (9-10-3), who have shown they aren't going to blow anyone out this season, squeezed past the Whalers, 3-1, before 10,371 at Nassau Coliseum.


Food Notes
Indian Chicken Wings
Buffalo wings?
How about Bombay chicken wings for a change?
Shaan, a luxurious Indian restaurant at 57 West 48th Street, is making tandoori chicken wings to go.
They are skinless, lightly spiced and succulent.
An order of a dozen wings ($12) comes with yogurt sauce and mint chutney for dipping.
Takeout, but no delivery: (212) 977-8400.
Miller Brewing's Wheat Beer
The Miller Brewing Company in Milwaukee has bought a controlling interest in Celis Brewery, in Austin, Tex., known primarily for its wheat beer.
Celis will be one of the brands in a new division of Miller Brewing called American Specialty and Craft Beer Company.
Pierre Celis, the Belgian-born founder of Celis, said the agreement would enable his company to take advantage of Miller's marketing and distribution network without changing the quality of Celis.
Presidential Palates
Much has been written about the eating habits of Bill Clinton.
But what about John Quincy Adams or Warren G. Harding?
Johnson and Wales University, a culinary school in Providence, R.I., has an exhibition of more than 100 Presidential documents relating to food in the White House, from the collection of Louis Szathmary, a retired chef.
The exhibition, "In and Around the First Stomach," can be seen through June 1 at University Hall, 111 Dorrance Street.
Information: (401) 598- 2805.
Lillian Vernon First
Lillian Vernon, whose catalogues have been filling mailboxes since 1951, has introduced Lillian Vernon's Kitchen, the company's first kitchenware catalogue.
It represents something of a departure for this New Rochelle, N.Y., company, which grosses nearly $200 million a year with the likes of crocheted Christmas snowflakes ($5.98 a dozen).
The catalogue offers items that are cute (bunny teapot, $9.98), economical (six champagne flutes for $9.98) and practical (Waring professional blender, $118).
For the catalogue: (800) 285-5555.
Studies on Food
A more erudite catalogue, this one of books, comes from the Food Heritage Press in Ipswich, Mass.
More than three dozen titles, most from university presses, are listed.
Among the books are "Produce and Conserve: The Grocer and the Consumer on the Home Front Battlefield During World War II," by Barbara McLean Ward (University Press of New England, $24.95).
For information, (508) 356-7625.
Soda Bread
The surprise in the traditional Mrs.
Greene's Irish soda bread made by Wonderwomen Enterprises, a catering and gift basket company in Brooklyn, is not that it is deliciously moist and velvety, but that it is fat free.
How do they do it?
Enough baking soda is the answer, but unlike many fat-free baked products, this soda bread is not overwhelmed by the taste of the leavening.
The breads can be ordered by mail ($10 plus shipping for three round loaves averaging six ounces each) by calling (800) 856-5901.
With 24 hours' notice the company will deliver the bread to the homebound and elderly in the five boroughs of New York City for $5 extra.
Rental Kitchens
The city is filled with small caterers and food producers that need commercial kitchen space.
One of them, Connie A. Peters, who was tired of borrowing ovens and refrigerators for her company, Connie Peters Events, has tackled the problem.
Last year, she rented 8,000 square feet at 195 Hudson Street (near Gansevoort Street) and spent $230,000 turning the space into seven commercial kitchens called Gansevoort Kitchens Ltd.
She uses one.
The other six are for rent starting this week.
The rates, by the day, week, month or longer, range from $100 to $300 a day including water and electricity.
For information, (212) 925-6604.
Off the Menu Lunches at $19.95, Dinners at $95
In a few months, dozens of restaurants in New York will begin offering their annual summer lunch bargain, at $19.95 this year.
And this summer there will be new twist: a number of top restaurants will pull out all the stops and offer elaborate dinners including wine, at $95.
Bring the Children
A child-friendly menu has been introduced at Tennessee Mountain, 143 Spring Street (at Wooster Street), in SoHo.
This barbecue restaurant is offering hamburgers, peanut butter and jelly sandwiches and fried chicken sandwiches, priced from $3.95 to $4.95.
Children receive a bag with crayons, games and a chef's hat.


Larger-Than-Life Address


Canadian Utilities reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


At the Nation's Table: Westport, Mass.
What Goes Around
If one wanted to be Freudian about it, one could say that Alex Kogler has a fixation with little round disks.
As a wing with the New York Rangers' ice-hockey farm system in the 1970's, he devoted his life to chasing an elusive rubber puck.
Since his retirement in 1979, his passion has been little rounds of fried dough with holes in the middle: he owns Butler's Colonial Donut House in Westport, Mass., near the Rhode Island line.
"When I got out of hockey, I didn't have a real trade or an education," said Mr.
Kogler, 43, who was born in Canada.
"My dad owned a bakery in Alberta, so I knew the basics."


Endesa
The American depository receipts for shares of Empresa Nacional de Electricidad, the Spanish electric company known as Endesa, fell sharply yesterday after slipping a bit on Monday, when Spain devalued the peseta.
Each A.D.R. represents one share.


Barenboim on a Path Marked by Beethoven
There was a craggy integrity to Daniel Barenboim's interpretations of Beethoven sonatas in Carnegie Hall on Monday night, an unusual sense that the pianist knew exactly what he wanted to accomplish with this music and went about his task with discipline and forthrightness.
There was no self-indulgence, no lingering over piquant resolutions, no italicizing of shocking modulations.
If the heavens were stormed, it was by using strategic gestures; if the transcendent was alluded to, it was only via the common-sense declamation of the notes on the page.
Mr.
Barenboim was not a structuralist or impressionist or sensualist.
He was not divine or demonic or otherworldly.
He was simply himself.
This was often more than enough.
But the results would have been even more compelling had Mr.
Barenboim's purely pianistic accomplishments been at peak level.
It is doubtful that any virtuoso could carry on Mr.
Barenboim's full-time conducting career and still maintain a prodigious technique that would make the fearsome thrusts and brio patter of the Opus 111 Sonata chilling, or allow the textures in the "Waldstein" Sonata to become hauntingly transparent.
Mr.
Barenboim often fudged complex passages, blending fast-moving lines, sometimes overusing the pedal, neglecting Beethoven the contrapuntist in favor of Beethoven the dramatist.


Bank of Nova Scotia reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Genovese Drug Stores Inc.(GDX.A,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 3


June '94 Produced a Record for Antigay Attacks
Remembered by most gay and lesbian New Yorkers for the Gay Games and the 25th anniversary of the Stonewall uprising, June 1994 now turns out to have a darker distinction.
More antigay attacks were reported in New York City that month than in any other in the 14 years such records have been kept.
The violence contributed to an overall 8 percent increase in reports of antigay attacks last year, according to a study released yesterday by the New York City Gay and Lesbian Antiviolence Project.


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
Complicated Lives Built Around a Core of Serenity  'Wrapped Up, Tied Up and Tangled' Performance Space 122
Lovey, the matriarch of the family of women portrayed in Peggy Pettitt's "Wrapped Up, Tied Up and Tangled," has knees that are "as soft as an armchair."


Film Director's Winery Adds Estate Next Door
Francis Ford Coppola is about to start directing the winery, Part 2.
The film director, perhaps best known for the "Godfather" series, and his wife, Eleanor, have just added the Inglenook estate, a historic Napa Valley property in California, to their wine country portfolio.
The couple have owned the adjacent Niebaum estate for nearly 20 years and released their first wine under the Niebaum-Coppola label in 1978.
Neither Mr.
Coppola nor Heublein Inc., which owned the estate, would disclose the price for the 95 acres and 39,000-square-foot chateau.
Industry sources estimate it at $9.5 million to $10 million.


Rock's Story as Told by the Rockers
When it comes to synergistic marketing, Time Warner, the company that sends me my monthly cable bill, is right up there with the Disney behemoth.
The latest evidence is "The History of Rock 'n' Roll." A version consisting of 10 hourlong tapes, being distributed by Time-Life Video and Television, will reach stores in about two weeks.
Meanwhile, there's the television series, which can be seen in two-hour segments on various stations around the country that made syndication deals with Warner Brothers.
(Interestingly and confusingly, the station in metropolitan New York City is WWOR, Channel 9, which has since aligned itself with Warner's arch rival, the United Paramount Network. WWOR will present "History," snipped here and there to make room for commercials, this evening through Sunday, at 8 each night.)


British Official Appears to Ease Terms for I.R.A. Role in Talks
Britain's chief official on Northern Ireland appeared today to ease his Government's conditions for the political arm of the Irish Republican Army to enter into all-party peace talks on Ulster's future.
During a visit to Washington, the official, Sir Patrick Mayhew, suggested that Sinn Fein, the I.R.A.'s political wing, would be allowed to enter the talks if the I.R.A. showed "a willingness in principle to disarm progressively."


Doskocil Cos.(DOSK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Want to break into commercials? Get on a hit TV show like 'Seinfeld' or 'Northern Exposure' first.
IT'S certainly not news when a television star is signed by an advertiser to pitch a product.
But in an unusual twist to celebrity endorsements, three popular series are contributing what seems a disproportionate number of cast members to the ranks of spokes-stars.
The actors appearing in "Murphy Brown" and "Northern Exposure" on CBS, and "Seinfeld" on NBC, are seemingly omnipresent, whether appearing in broadcast commercials and print advertisements or serving as voice-over announcers.
But unlike other series, including "Ellen" or "Beverly Hills 90210," in which one or two cast members engage in ad work, almost all the regular performers on these three series are doubling as product peddlers.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about the indictment of a New York City police officer in the shooting of a transit officer referred incorrectly at one point to the legal meaning of the jury's action.
The indictment does not mean the grand jury concluded that he the officer committed first-degree assault, only that there was reasonable cause to believe he had done so.


Watson Enjoying Life More Than Ever
Bob Watson instinctively reached for the golden lapel pin, but it wasn't there.
Watson, ordinarily a tie-and-jacket man when plying his trade as general manager of the Houston Astros, wasn't wearing a jacket today.
And the little gold figure that is usually a part of Watson's wardrobe was missing from his spring training outfit -- a polo shirt.
But that figure, Watson's guardian angel, was there in spirit, as always.
"I don't know the angel by name, but I just know that there have been too many instances that if there wasn't a guardian angel, too many negative things would have happened to me," the 48-year-old Watson said as he watched the Astros defeat the Mets, 7-4.


Brother Wars in Mexico
There is more than a whiff of soap opera in the melodramatic story of political assassinations, alleged cover-ups and twisted family ties now unfolding in Mexico.
But far more than soap opera is involved.
At stake is the future of the world's longest-entrenched ruling party, Mexico's Institutional Revolutionary Party, or PRI.
Mario Ruiz Massieu, former deputy attorney general of Mexico, now sits in a New York jail accused of undermining the investigation he conducted last year into the murder of his brother, Jose Francisco Ruiz Massieu.
The dead brother was deputy leader of the PRI.


NeoStar Retail Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


U.S. to Help Girls in Poor Lands Stay in School
The Clinton Administration will announce here on Wednesday the creation of a program to help keep girls in school in Africa, Asia and Latin America, despite enormous economic and cultural barriers.
The first year of the 10-year program will cost about $11.7 million, said the United States Agency for International Development, which will administer it.
Saying that poverty will not end until the lives of women are improved, Hillary Rodham Clinton, in an address today at the World Summit for Social Development, said that the program would be announced as part of a celebration of International Women's Day.
It is not clear how many children and young women the program can affect.


On Going Private: Mayor Wants to Sell Canarsie Cemetery
As part of his efforts to turn municipal services over to private hands, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has proposed selling off three of New York City's public hospitals, its parking garages, its radio license and even its sewage treatment plants.
Now, his administration wants to sell a cemetery.
The city's Department of General Services said yesterday that it had asked private, nonprofit corporations to come forward with proposals to buy or lease the Canarsie Cemetery in Brooklyn, the last city-owned cemetery still accepting new burials.


Let the Dollar Drift
The dollar hit new lows against the German mark and Japanese yen yesterday, setting off needless calls for government intervention.
The Clinton Administration wisely held off.
True, a stronger dollar would make imports cheaper and reassure foreign investors.
But the policy that could turn the dollar around -- a stricter monetary policy -- could also suffocate an already slowing economy.
The price of intervention is too steep.
There are many theories why the dollar is falling, none convincing.
Some say the slide reflects large trade deficits, fiscal imbalance or other structural problems.
But these long-term factors did not suddenly worsen last week.
Or the slide may reflect dismay over Mexico or short-lived fads and fears.
No one knows.


House Panel Votes to Cut Food Stamps
The House Agriculture Committee began voting today on legislation to cut $16.5 billion from projected spending in the food stamp program over the next five years, despite protests from Democrats who said the bill was immoral and mean-spirited.
The Democrats complained bitterly that the Republicans were making vast changes in the food stamp program with little analysis of the effect on human lives and no reliable estimate of the savings.


Quanex Corp.(NX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Dollar's Fall Is Still Unabated; U.S. Officials Take No Action
Trying to ride out an enormous selloff of the dollar on markets around the world, the Clinton Administration watched with growing alarm today but without taking action as the currency fell to post-World-War-II lows against the Japanese yen and the German mark.
Already battered by a relentless decline that began almost a month ago, the dollar lost an additional 2.4 percent of its value against the mark and 2.8 percent against the yen.  [ The dollar fell as low as 88.765 yen in late afternoon trading in Tokyo on Wednesday. ]


Valentine Radford Acquiring Agency
Valentine Radford Communications in Kansas City, Mo., has agreed to acquire Chuck Ruhr Advertising in Minneapolis.
Financial terms of the agreement were not disclosed, but as part of the deal, Ruhr, a 31-year-old agency with 45 employees, has filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.


U.S. Nuclear Pledge Needs Treaty Oversight
To the Editor:
Your March 2 news article on President Clinton's pledge to reduce United States nuclear stockpiles describes a U.S. attempt to persuade the 172 signers of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty to renew it next month.
This is a sham, since the plutonium will remain in storage, not under international safeguards, and could be reused at any time.


Meyer (Fred) Inc.(FMY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


U.S. Pair, in 5th, Still Has Romance
Jenni Meno and Todd Sand, the soon-to-be American newlyweds, who won the United States championship last month, placed fifth in tonight's short program in the world championship with a clean but slightly less scintillating performance than they delivered when they took the national title.
In first place were the Czech pair of Radka Kovarikova and Rene Novotny, who are also engaged to be married.
In second were the Germans, Mandy Woetzel and Ingo Steuer, who were romantically involved until recently.
In third were the defending world champions from Russia, Yevgeniya Shishkova and Vadim Naumov, who apparently still are involved.


Opposition in Bronx
New York City prosecutors expressed mixed feelings about the death penalty, with the Bronx District Attorney saying he would not seek it under any circumstances.
Article, page B5.


Key Witness in Bomb-Plot Trial Admits Lying About His Exploits
The prosecution's most important witness in the terrorism trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and 10 others admitted yesterday that he had lied for years about his background, boasting to Federal agents and friends that he was an intelligence officer in the Egyptian Army when in reality he had been a technical officer who never saw combat.
As he testified for the first time in Federal District Court in Manhattan, Emad Salem, the 45-year-old informer who received $1 million for his testimony, recounted how he had lied again and again to impress people.


State Regulators Review New York City's Public Hospitals
Responding to reports of deaths and injuries in delivery rooms, the New York State Health Commissioner yesterday ordered an immediate review of obstetrical care at New York City's public hospitals.
Teams of investigators went unannounced to 4 of the 11 public hospitals to begin reviewing patient records and interviewing hospital staff members, said Dr.
Barbara A. DeBuono, who became State Health Commissioner a month ago.


Jersey City Passes a Budget
With less than four months left in its fiscal year, Jersey City finally has a budget.
Despite the opposition of some angry taxpayers, the City Council voted 6 to 2 last night to adopt a $288 million budget that will raise the local tax rate by a projected 50 percent.


Canadian Imperial Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Michaels Stores Inc.(MIKE,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


What's Wrong With Revaluing the Peso?
To the Editor:
In his March 2 Economic Scene column, Peter Passell dismisses the proposal to restore the Mexican currency to 3.5 pesos per dollar as bad economics, yet provides no economic argument to refute the idea and no evidence that the "mainstream" alternative is in any way superior.


Rangel's Mother, 90, Dies
Blanche Rangel, a retired garment worker and mother of United States Representative Charles B. Rangel, Democrat of Manhattan, died on Monday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
A Harlem resident, she was 90.
She had a long illness, according to Mr. Rangel's office in Washington.


Reviews/Fashion; Luminous Design From Jil Sander
Only a few seasons ago, minimalism meant monastic.
Many designers who gravitated toward it as a trend have abandoned the nunnery, replacing the virginal with the vampish.
But for those who studiously abstain from jewelry, gemstone buttons, beads and bustles, minimalism is a sort of religion.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
As the dollar plunged around the world, the Administration watched in alarm but did not act.
It fell to post-World-War-II lows against the Japanese yen and the German mark.
Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin is reported to be reluctant to fight the markets, preferring to let the sell-off die before acting.  [ Page A1. ]


A Partial Cure for Drug Bills For a $370,000-a-Year Ailment
Many patients with Gaucher disease, a rare inherited disorder, suffer not only physically but financially as well because the only drug effective against the condition can cost hundreds of thousands of dollars a year.
But now a panel of experts says it may be possible for many patients to reduce costs without compromising effectiveness by using smaller doses.
The panel, convened by the National Institutes of Health last week to study managing the disease, said studies showed that many Gaucher patients responded well to lower doses of the drug.
Although there are not enough data to agree upon an optimal dose schedule that could be applied to all patients, it said, doctors can consider using doses lower than those typically prescribed to find an effective treatment level for each individual.


Albertson's Inc.(ABS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 2


Treasuries Continuing Drop in Price
Prices of long-term Treasury securities continued their slide for a fifth day yesterday as the dollar plunged again in the currency markets.
Analysts said an early muted response by Treasuries to the dollar's fall in Europe forced some investors to cover short positions hurriedly and gave an early lift to bond prices.
But the buying quickly ended as the dollar fell even lower.


Mets Want to Sign Franco
The Mets, aware of reports that the Baltimore Orioles had nearly signed the free-agent relief pitcher John Franco, remain interested in the left-hander, but also remain in limbo because the pursuit of all unsigned players came to a halt on Feb. 9, when the 28 clubs instituted a signing freeze.
"All I know is that there was a report in the Baltimore papers that the Orioles had come close, but I don't know if that's old news or what," General Manager Joe McIlvaine said tonight.
"All I know is that before negotiations broke off because of the signing freeze, we were still in the hunt."


Executive Changes
GATEWAY 2000 INC., North Sioux City, S.D., the marketer of personal computers, appointed David J. McKittrick senior vice president and chief financial officer.
GENERAL MOTORS CORP., Detroit, named G. Mustafa Mohatarem chief economist.


Disciplinary Schools Planned For Students Carrying Weapons
Seeking to stop increasing violence in New York City schools, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said yesterday he would remove students carrying guns from their regular schools for a year.
The older ones would be sent to four disciplinary academies, which would open next fall.
Students as young as kindergartners would be segregated in disciplinary programs.
The new policy, which would require Board of Education approval and is expected to receive it, would reverse a two-decade policy of allowing principals and school district superintendents to determine punishment for armed or violent students.
Many students, even those with guns, are now suspended for a week or so and then allowed back into the school.


Roger MacBride, 65, Libertarian And 'Little House' Heir, Is Dead
Roger Lea MacBride, who became guardian of Laura Ingalls Wilder's "Little House" series of young-adult novels, who later drew on them in his own writing and who ran for President in 1976 as the Libertarian Party's nominee, died on Sunday at his home in Miami Beach.
He was 65.
The cause was heart failure, said his daughter, Abigail Adams MacBride.


Jacobson Stores Inc.(JCBS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Book Notes
Louganis Tops the List
Whether the staggering sales of his new book are testament to his courage, charisma, commercial timing or all three, Greg Louganis's new book, "Breaking the Surface" (Random House), is making a significantly bigger splash than the sleek former Olympic diver -- or booksellers -- expected.
"I never anticipated what's been happening," Mr.
Louganis, 35, said in a telephone interview from Atlanta, where he is on tour.
"I don't think anybody did. It is a complex story. I guess it is touching a lot of people and a lot of emotion."


Police Foot Patrols Don't Offer False Security; Giuliani's Good Choice
To the Editor:
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's appointment of Nicholas Scoppetta to head his police watchdog committee should give every New York City resident extra pride in his Honor's good judgment (news article, Feb. 28).


Airport Guard Roughly Treats Ex-Governor
A guard at Raleigh-Durham International Airport was dismissed today after witnesses said he throttled former Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia, an airport spokesman said.
Mr.
Wilder was unhurt but indignant after the incident, which began when the former Governor tripped an airport metal detector.


'Saturday Night' Lives, for Now, but Then What?
"Saturday Night Live," the television institution as well as a potent moneymaker for NBC in its 20 years on the air, needs a creative overhaul that may include everything except the show's live format and its location in New York City, a top network executive said yesterday.
The executive, Warren Littlefield, who is the president of NBC Entertainment, said the network had previously asked for "major changes" in the show this season.
"Some of that has been accomplished," Mr.
Littlefield said yesterday.
"But there are a lot of things that were left undone. We're having discussions internally and with Lorne Michaels about what we want to do."


Deb Shops (DEBS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Gingrich Criticized for Opposing Job Protection for Homosexuals
A day after standing alongside his lesbian sister and urging tolerance for gay men and women, Speaker Newt Gingrich incurred the wrath of advocates for homosexual rights today when he said there should be no Federal protection for job rights based upon a worker's sexual orientation.
"I don't think their boss ought to ask them about their private life," Mr.
Gingrich, a Georgia Republican, said in response to a question at his daily press conference.
But when pressed he added: "I don't think you should have a right of filing a Federal lawsuit or having the Federal Government protect you based upon your sexual behavior."


Host Marriott Corp.(HMT,N) reports earnings for 16wks to Dec 30


Gangway for Rimsky-Korsakov: His Operas Have Found Voices
Of the many amazements produced by the Bach, Handel and Scarlatti tercentenary year of 1985, few surpassed the near-simultaneous presentation of three Handel operas under one roof at the Pepsico Summerfare in Purchase, N.Y.
Such a convergence would be extraordinary even for a composer more central to the operatic repertory and is scarcely conceivable for a truly peripheral figure like Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov.
But the Kirov Opera presented a substantial Rimsky-Korsakov festival a year ago in St.
Petersburg, Russia, where the composer spent most of his life.
And partly as a result, enterprising New Yorkers could piece together a remarkably concentrated, three-pronged Rimsky-Korsakov opera experience over the weekend.


Market Place; The Labyrinth of 2 Insider Cases
If you had some hot inside information, would you tell a friend?
And would that friend tell somebody else?
In the case of two takeovers five years ago, Federal investigators say the answer was yes, over and over again.
The result is two overlapping insider trading investigations that are setting records for generations of tipping.


Intuit Inc.(INTU,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Chiquita Brands Intl.(CQB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Kiss Is Just a Kiss


Attacks on Youth Agency Called Unfair
A year after Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said that the Youth Services Department was plagued by rampant financial mismanagement and political manipulation, the City Investigation Department has determined that many of the allegations were unjustified or exaggerated.
Although a report released yesterday by the Investigation Department said that the youth agency had a $3.9 million deficit in the last fiscal year, that figure was millions below the one presented by the Mayor.
Mr.
Giuliani said last year that the agency had overspent by $11 million.


Wieden and McCann Share Nike Japan
A new alliance between Wieden &amp; Kennedy in Portland, Ore., and McCann-Erickson Worldwide in New York has been awarded the Japanese account of Nike Inc., a Wieden &amp; Kennedy client in the United States since 1982.
The account, for which the billings were not disclosed, was previously handled by Dentsu Inc. in Tokyo.


Athena Shares Plunge On Rejection of Drug
Shares in Athena Neuroscience Inc. fell sharply today after the company said that it had received a letter from the Food and Drug Administration stating that its drug Zanaflex, a potential treatment for spasticity resulting from spinal cord injury, was not approvable.
Zanaflex is one of several drugs that Athena has licensed from other manufacturers to produce sales while it develops its own drugs for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease and other neurological disorders.
Zanaflex is Athena's name for tizanidine hydrochloride, which is marketed in more than 50 countries by Sandoz Pharma Ltd. and its affiliates under the brand names Sirdalud and Ternelin; it had 1994 sales of more than $100 million.


2 Americans Shot to Death In Pakistan
Gunmen shot and killed two United States diplomats and wounded a third this morning as they were driven to work in Karachi, a sprawling port city that has long been ravaged by violence.
The United States Embassy in Islamabad, the capital, released a statement two hours after the 8 A.M. shooting saying that the diplomats had been traveling in an embassy van when gunmen armed with automatic weapons opened fire.


Hunting Meets Future, and It's Too Easy for Some
The bones in the basement are testimony to the skill of Jerry Simmons.
He has a box full, mostly spinal columns and grinning skulls, from deer, elk and other big game.
Embedded in each piece is a single black arrowhead.
His longbow is the same weapon Attila the Hun used to humble the Romans, older than civilization itself.
A gun would be more efficient, but for him the thrill is in getting close to his prey, in seeing the arrow fly.


PATAKI SEES JUSTICE SERVED
Gov.
George E. Pataki fulfilled one of his central campaign vows today by signing a death penalty bill into law, making New York the 38th state with capital punishment.
Mr.
Pataki used two pens that belonged to slain police officers in a bill-signing ceremony with all the choreographed flourish of one of his stump events.
The relatives of seven murder victims joined dozens of lawmakers and police union officials to watch the Republican Governor end an 18-year battle to return the death penalty to New York State.


Roberds Inc.(RBDS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Foreign Affairs; Mexican Malfunction
As my flight into Mexico City was landing, I began to feverishly fill out the customs form they passed out on the plane.
Line three, though, stumped me.
It consisted of nine different boxes, out of which you were supposed to find and circle your occupation.
Columnist wasn't listed.
There was, however, "farmer," "driver of a vehicle," "livestock raiser" and then one that just leapt out at me.
It said: "bond holder."
Those two words tell you a lot about what's wrong with Mexico today.
Mexico is so dependent for its economic growth on foreign investors who will buy its government and commercial bonds that "bond holders" now have their own box on the visa form.
Unfortunately for Mexico, most of the people who check that box are going out, not coming in.


Broadway Stores Cuts Back On a Remodeling Program
Broadway Stores Inc. said yesterday that it was scaling back its ambitious store remodeling program, which was a key component in the struggling company's strategy for regaining financial health.
The company also said the GE Capital Corporation, its primary lender, had agreed to relax the earnings and capital-expenditure requirements of its working capital line.
Broadway, based in Los Angeles, operates 83 department stores in the West.


Bombardier Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Sony Names Division Leader
Peter Gelb, the president of Sony Classical U.S.A. since July 1993, has been put in charge of the classical-record label's international operations, the company said yesterday.
He succeeds Gunther Breest, who resigned abruptly in December after a six-year tenure during which he transformed the former CBS Masterworks label into a company that rivaled its European competitors in terms of its artist roster and the diversity of its repertory offerings.
The appointment puts Mr.
Gelb, 41, in charge of a roster that includes the Berlin Philharmonic, Claudio Abbado, Esa-Pekka Salonen and the Los Angeles Philharmonic, Yo-Yo Ma, Emanuel Ax, Isaac Stern and Placido Domingo.
His purview also includes several subsidiary lines started or acquired by Mr.
Breest, including the Vivarte early-music series, the St.
Petersburg Classics line, which specializes in Russian music, and Arc of Light, a sacred-music label.


Unemployment the Key Issue in French Election
Suddenly, the race to succeed President Francois Mitterrand this spring is wide open -- a tight contest between a Socialist and two rival conservatives that is all about jobs, jobs, jobs.
With unemployment stuck at more than 12 percent despite economic recovery, all three main contenders agree that the way to solve France's long-term unemployment problem is by reducing the social security and health insurance premiums that French companies pay the Government for every worker they employ.


Speech on the Energy Plan
New Jersey's plan for supplying and regulating its energy needs into the next century will be made public today when Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman speaks to a members of the electric power industry at a conference organized by the Board of Public Utilities.
The plan would allow utility companies to charge large industrial users lower rates than other customers.
Officials say the system is needed to meet competition from other states and to keep large companies and their payrolls from moving elsewhere.


Transactions
Baseball  National Ledague
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Signed Ed Vande Berg, pitcher, to a minor-league contract.


Dress Barn Inc.(DBRN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Picture It on the Menu: Arctic Hare Ragout
Canada's vast north, which stretches almost to the North Pole, is unlikely ever to support a three-star restaurant, but the region's foods, particularly those popular among the Eskimos -- caribou, seal, hare and game birds -- may soon be offered in restaurants in Europe and the United States.
Some northern fish like salmon and char (Arctic trout) are already sold abroad, but other staples are not readily available because of export bans and because Eskimos generally don't kill more animals than necessary for their own consumption.


Frederic Billings Littlefield, 92, Founder of Maine Summer Camp
Frederic Billings Littlefield, founder of Camp Robin Hood in Brooksville, Me., where generations of boys made their summer homes, died on March 1 at his home in Medford, Mass.
He was 92.
He died in his sleep, said his son, Frederic S. Littlefield of Concord, Mass., who runs the camp.


Green Wants to Level The Replacement Field
Mets Manager Dallas Green, angered by the lopsided nature of exhibition games between teams using young, talented minor leaguers and others using retreads and never-have-beens -- like his -- called on club owners today to redefine replacement baseball to restore some semblance of fair play until the strike by major leaguers is over.
Green, fuming and frustrated by his club's inept 0-4 start, called for the new policy to come out of the owners' quarterly meetings that started this afternoon and run through Thursday in Palm Beach.


For Sale: A Little Bit of the Yankees
Harvey L. Leighton has lived a dream shared by thousands of New York Yankees fans: as an owner of the club for 19 years, he had great seats, his picture in the program, a parking space for his limo, a championship ring for his finger and all the big-league names he could drop.
Now he's living a nightmare: trying to sell.
Out of desperation, he has even taken out a classified ad.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Farm Credit Bank is selling $50 million of medium-term notes due in 1998 through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
The notes are callable in one year, carry an interest rate of 7.61 percent and are priced at par.


A Writer Has to Live, Even if He Has to Sell Out
DON SNYDER came down from Maine the other day to provoke fate and confront compromise in this city, which he does not like at all.
He left the train carrying a duffel with a change of clothes and manuscripts of two novels that he referred to as lightweights.
Still, anyone could see they were weighing him down.
Mr.
Snyder is 44.
He looks like Steve McQueen in his prime, taut, tough and weathered, with eyes that squint through fog and the defenses of whomever he is talking to.
Yet, he concedes, the city scares him.
It is not the violence of its streets that intimidates him, but the memories of restaurant muggings, where stylish editors bought him fancy lunches and told him that he had written the greatest thing they had ever read, then never called, though they said they would.
"For me, this is a place of deceit and heartache," he confided.


Agency Withdraws From VW Review
Martin/Williams in Minneapolis, one of five finalists in the review for the Volkswagen of America account with billings estimated at $90 million, is withdrawing, the agency said yesterday.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Question of Fit: Scaling Down a Voice  Lyuba Kazarnovskaya, soprano Walter Reade Theater
There is a degree to which a recital is a collaboration between a musician and a concert hall, with the hall's resonance providing the finishing touch.
The Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center, though attractive and comfortable, was built principally for film and does what a good cinema should: it projects the sound clearly, unclouded by ambient reflections.
For concerts, the hall has fold-out panels meant to create reflective surfaces, but although they are sometimes adequate, they seriously failed Lyuba Kazarnovskaya, the Russian soprano who gave a recital on Monday evening.


Expansion Site Recommendation Made
Baseball's expansion committee held another meeting today.
As with its previous meetings, the committee made no public announcement about its deliberations.
But it did recommend to the executive council tonight the two sites for the next round of expansion.
The committee, a person familiar with the meeting said, recommended Phoenix and St.
Petersburg, Fla.
That move came as no surprise because high-ranking baseball officials previously had said that the committee had long ago decided it would recommend awarding franchises to those two cities.
But the committee keeps meeting and keeps saying it hasn't reached a decision on which two of the four competing areas will get new teams.


Of a Father Whose Son Is 'Cheerful'
When Jeff Mitchell (Russell Crowe) has a hot date in "The Sum of Us," he also has a problem: his father.
"Don't let me interrupt," insists Harry Mitchell (Jack Thompson), when his son and the date begin necking.
Moments later, Dad is back with a porn magazine, offering it to the lovebirds "if you need something to get started." Then he's back again with a question: "Sorry, I forgot to ask. How do you take your tea in the morning?" At one point Harry can be seen with his arm around Jeff's date, making raunchy double-entendres and having a whale of a time.
What is meant to render this behavior touching, instead of pathological, is the fact that Jeff's date is a gardener named Greg (John Polson).
And that the heterosexual Harry champions his son's openly gay sexual identity, even if the father says: "He's what you might call cheerful. Can't bear that other word." Garrulous and pesty, Harry still emerges as this story's instant hero, an advocate of love, fun and fairness in an otherwise small-minded world.
"Call me Henrietta!" he merrily declares in one scene.


Adams Resources &amp; Energy Inc.(AE,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ira C. Herbert, 67, Coca-Cola Executive
Ira C. Herbert, a retired executive vice president of the Coca-Cola Company, died at his home in Atlanta on Saturday.
He was 67.
The cause was a heart attack, said a spokeswoman for Coca-Cola.


In New York City, a Mixed Response to Law From Prosecutors
The five district attorneys in New York City, where the vast majority of the state's murders are committed, expressed mixed feelings about capital punishment yesterday, with one -- District Attorney Robert T. Johnson of the Bronx -- saying he would not seek the death penalty under any circumstances.
Mr.
Johnson, already known as something of a maverick, said his opposition to capital punishment was based on his "intense respect for the value and sanctity of human life." In a statement released yesterday afternoon, he also expressed qualms about the death penalty's fairness and cost and concluded: "It is my present intention not to utilize the death penalty provisions of the statute."


Dollar Hurts Stocks; Dow Falls 34.93
In the second consecutive day in which the weak dollar has hurt the stock market, the Dow Jones industrial average plunged as much as 50 points yesterday before recovering somewhat.
Still, the Dow closed at 3,962.63, down 34.93 points.
The broader indexes fell, too, in heavy trading.
The Standard &amp; Poor's 500 closed at 482.12, down 3.51, and the smaller-company Nasdaq composite index closed at 791.33, down 6.44.


Shoe Prints Convinced Simpson Investigator of a Single Killer
The lead police detective in the O. J. Simpson murder case, Tom Lange, testified today that the single set of shoe prints between the bodies of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman and the similar way in which each had been slashed and stabbed had convinced him that a single person had killed them both.
A day ago, Mr.
Simpson's chief trial lawyer, Johnnie L. Cochran Jr., asked Mr.
Lange if he had considered any explanations of the crime that did not implicate Mr.
Simpson.
Today, the chief prosecutor in the case, Marcia Clark, forged through the door Mr.
Cochran had opened, asking Mr.
Lange to describe at greater length than before what his own theory of the case was.


Tejas Gas Corp.(TEJ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Berkley (W.R.) Corp.(BKLY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Technology in the Classroom


Comptroller Predicts Bigger Budget Shortfall
New York City's Comptroller said yesterday that the city's budget gap could be $500 million higher than the $2.7 billion shortfall projected by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, largely because of overly optimistic estimates of tax revenues and rising costs of overtime, pensions and benefits for municipal workers.
In a report on the preliminary budget plan that Mr.
Giuliani unveiled last month, Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi also warned that many of the Mayor's proposals to close the gap remained uncertain at best.
That uncertainty, he said, raised the possibility of still more cuts or other actions to balance the city's $30.5 billion budget for the fiscal year that begins in July.





Gottschalks Inc.(GOT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


AT TEA WITH: Gillian Armstrong; A Lucky Director's Daring Career
ASKED her age, Gillian Armstrong does not immediately answer.
She pushes her smooth blond hair away from her face with blunt, sensible fingers and smiles.
She takes her time.
"Just say early 40's," she finally replies.
She is not being coy.
She is politely serving notice that this interview will be conducted on her terms; the woman who became Australia's first female film director at age 27 is accustomed to being in charge.
Indeed, a few minutes later she quietly suggests moving to another table.
Gesturing around the empty tearoom at the Stanhope Hotel, she stands up and says, "With all the thousands of people that are in here, why should we sit next to the kitchen door?"


Police Foot Patrols Don't Offer False Security; More Officers Help
To the Editor:
Richard Moran, in "More Police, Less Crime, Right? Wrong" (Op-Ed, Feb. 27) correctly argues that increasing police without correcting underlying social and moral problems will not prevent crime.
However, he neglects other reasons to increase the number of police officers.


Bank of Montreal (BMO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Tiffany &amp; Co. (TIF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


K-III Communications Corp.(KCC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reviews/Fashion; Russia, Women at Work and Elegance
Inspiration is where you find it, and Laura Biagiotti found hers in Russia.
After she opened a boutique in Moscow, she was invited to put on a fashion show in the Kremlin.
So, last month an audience of 4,000 saw a two-hour show of opera, ballet and, of course, clothes.
Naturally, the fall collection she showed today in Milan was filled with Russian references, from the multicolored domes of St.
Basil's Cathedral to Cossack braid embroideries to the cheery floral designs on painted wooden dolls.
But the strongest influence came from Mongolian lamb.
Cashmere yarn was worked into curly fringes that decorated coats, capes, shawls, skirts, collars, cuffs and pocket flaps in black, white, gray, orange, pink, lavender and peach.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Nordiques Beat Penguins  Aleksei Gusarov scored his first goal of the season with 58 seconds to play as the Quebec Nordiques held on for a 5-4 victory over the Penguins last night in Pittsburgh.
The Nordiques have a National Hockey League-best 35 points, 3 more than Pittsburgh. (AP)


A Cake Mix Derby
WHILE baking may be the province of the dedicated cook, nearly everyone needs to come up with a cake now and then.
Since store-bought cakes are often quite expensive or unbearably undistinguished, cake mixes are often the logical alternative.
This year, Americans are expected to spend more than $400 million on cake mixes.


Lin's Value Is Set at $3.3 Billion
The Lin Broadcasting Company was valued yesterday at $127.50 a share, or $3.3 billion, a price that analysts said represented a bargain for the AT&amp;T Corporation, which is expected to buy the 48 percent of the Lin it does not already own.
AT&amp;T is expected to go ahead and seek to buy the stake at that price, analysts said, because it is relatively low for an asset that is considered crucial to the company's expansion in the cellular telephone business.
Lin holds licenses in the nation's two largest cellular markets, New York and Los Angeles, as well as Dallas and Houston.


Injustice for Consumers
In the name of legal reform, House Republicans are barreling ahead this week with three bills that would drastically curb the rights of citizens to court redress over defective products and securities fraud.
There is unquestionably room for real reform in the American system of civil justice.
The courts are slow and overburdened.
Juries are inconsistent and occasionally award damages that seem excessive.
Frivolous wrongs are sometimes litigated while more grievous harms never make it to court.
Such problems require a balanced assessment and remedy.
But the Republican proposals include little progress and too much that merely relieves manufacturers and sellers of their proper duty of obligation to the public.


Meggett's Parting Shots Irk Reeves
The David Meggett story is over except for one thing: Dan Reeves.
Even though the Giants' coach released a statement after Meggett left for New England expressing how disappointed he was to lose him, until now Reeves has not had a chance to respond to some of the criticisms leveled against him by the former Giants running back and his representatives.
Reeves was out of town when Meggett left.
But he stayed in close contact with Giants management virtually every day he was away.
When he got back, Reeves was surprised to hear about some of the things Meggett had said of him and responded to them yesterday.


Corrections
An article on Monday about the opening of the National People's Congress in Beijing referred incorrectly in some editions to recent rates of Chinese inflation.
Inflation, a major concern of the congress, last peaked in 1988, not 1989; the rate then was 19 percent, not 17.5.


Carson Pirie Scott &amp; Co.  (CRP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Cluster Care Doesn't Always Make Sense
To the Editor:
In your Feb. 27 news article on the so-called cluster concept of care for the frail elderly in their homes, you quote Lieut.
Gov.
Betsy McCaughey of New York as saying that "cluster care is one of the most important tools enabling us to cut personal care hours and provide quality care in an era of scarce health care dollars."


Elbit Ltd.(ELBTF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
The place: 86th and Park.
A woman in the back seat of my taxicab was arguing with me about the best route to Rockefeller Center.
I tried to explain that, because of construction, we would be better off going down Fifth Avenue.
She vehemently insisted we remain on Park.
We argued back and forth: Park.
Fifth.
Park!
Fifth!
With traffic at a complete standstill I reached for my clipboard and began to write a letter to a lifelong friend, a girl who not long ago meant the world to me.


Reviews/Fashion; Versace: Clean and Mean for Fall
The routine of Gianni Versace's shows is so embedded in Milanese consciousness that Via Gesu, the street that connects Mr.
Versace's palazzo to the Four Seasons Hotel where the top models stay, is lined with spectators by show time, as if for a papal visit.
But there is no sense of routine inside the palazzo.
No designer as established as Mr.
Versace in his style and clientele has gone so far so fast in remaking what is his signature.


Elscint Ltd.(ELT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reward Offer in Bomb Threats
A $500 reward is being offered for information on a bomb threat that prompted officials to evacuate Edison's high schools seven times on Monday.
The school superintendent, Melindo Persi, said someone called the police at 7 A.M. and gave a list of times bombs could go off at Edison High School and John P. Stevens High School.
The schools were evacuated before each of those times.
Bomb-sniffing dogs found no explosives in the buildings.
But as a precaution, officials said yesterday, all after-school activities were canceled indefinitely.


Differing Accounts of a Firefighter's Care
Questions have deepened about the emergency treatment given to Lieut.
Raymond F. Schiebel, the firefighter who collapsed at a blaze in Brooklyn on Sunday and died last night, with sharply differing accounts offered by officials of the volunteer ambulance corps that treated him and an Emergency Medical Service paramedic.
The paramedic, Kevin Montgomery, said yesterday that Lieutenant Schiebel's early treatment was undermined by volunteer ambulance workers who, he said, operated in a panic, refused to yield medical control and argued over which hospital to go to.
Mr.
Montgomery said he had to force his way into the volunteer ambulance with the firefighter, and he described the scene inside the vehicle as "difficult and chaotic," with as many as a half-dozen Hatzoloh Ambulance Corps workers packed into it.


Morningstar Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lincoln Electric Co.(LIEL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Benjamin's Lower-Back Trouble Presents a Problem for the Nets
The Nets touted their depth at the center position earlier this season.
Now, more than ever, they need that depth because BENOIT BENJAMIN underwent a magnetic resonance imaging test on his lower back yesterday and is scheduled to miss at least tonight's game against the 76ers in Philadelphia.
Results were not available from the team last night.
But in response to a question about how long he would be out, Benjamin said, "Couple weeks. I can't perform and play."


Money for Vietnam War Project
The state authority that distributes casino revenue wrote a check yesterday for $2.75 million to be spent on an education center next to the Vietnam Veterans War Memorial.
The center will try to tell the stories of the 1,525 New Jersey residents killed or lost in Vietnam.
The memorial is to be unveiled May 7 -- the 20th anniversary of the departure of the last American troops from Vietnam.
PETER S. YOUNG


Matinee Idols in a Rare Twilight Pairing
Butch and Sundance didn't exactly ride again in Greenwich Village on Monday night -- they're getting on, after all -- but they did spend the evening together.
Just a couple of urban cowboys, local yokels, out on the town.
In an occasion unusual for its subdued momentousness, Robert Redford and Paul Newman, two old buddies who are perhaps Hollywood's male icons of longest standing, appeared together at the New School for Social Research on West 12th Street.
As his silver-haired friend sat slouched and silent in the front row in the auditorium, Mr.
Redford went on stage, his legendary smile glinting, his jaw muscles bunching in familiar fashion, as he made the case that contrary to popular opinion, he's a city guy.


Mexico Says Accused Man Had $6 Million in the U.S.
Mexican officials said today that nearly $7 million had been found in American bank accounts in the name of a former government prosecutor who has been charged with a cover-up in his investigation into the murder of his brother, who was a governing-party leader.
The discovery of the accounts raised new questions about the possible motives of the former prosecutor, Mario Ruiz Massieu, who was arrested on Friday in Newark and is expected to be extradited soon to Mexico.


Seaman Furniture Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Integrated Health Services Inc.(IHS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sundstrand Corp.(SNS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Interface Inc.(IFSIA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


UConn's Rizzotti Injures Elbow
JENNIFER RIZZOTTI, the Connecticut junior point guard, hyperextended her right elbow Monday night during the Big East Conference tournament title game against Seton Hall.
The injury was diagnosed yesterday and her status is day-to-day.
Connecticut earned the Big East's automatic berth in the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, which begins next week, with its 85-49 victory over Seton Hall. (AP)


A Harvard Dean to Quit
The dean of the Harvard Business School, John H. McArthur, said on Monday that he would step down by September.
Mr.
McArthur, who turns 61 this month, became dean in 1980.
A search for a successor will begin this week, the university said.


Ernest Nukanen, 75, Documentary Maker
Ernest Nukanen, a cameraman, documentary film maker and teacher, died on Feb. 26 at his home in Belfast, Me.
He was 75.
He had been in failing health for some time, the University of Southern California News Service reported.


Life Re Corp.(LRE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Season Taking Toll on Coaches
Marshall Coach BILLY DONOVAN was being treated for flu-like symptoms yesterday at St.
Mary's Hospital in Huntington, W. Va.
He was admitted Monday, a hospital spokeswoman said.
His secretary, CHRISTAL PERRY, said that Donovan, the youngest head coach in Division I basketball at age 29, hoped to be released later this week.


Report Cards for the Schools
For years, New York City schoolchildren have been given report cards evaluating their performance.
Now report cards for each of the city's schools are being issued as well.
The latest -- assessing 121 of the city's 167 high schools -- were distributed this week.
The cards offer parents, the public and school administrators a useful tool to help hold schools accountable.
Until now it has been difficult for outsiders, and even insiders, to check how schools were doing in comparison with other schools in the same neighborhood or throughout the city.
Many principals even resisted the reporting of reading scores or violent incidents for fear such statistics would give a distorted picture of their schools.


Dollar General Corp.(DOLR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Why War? Sifting Through the Past for Answers
ON THE ORIGINS OF WAR AND THE PRESERVATION OF PEACE
By Donald Kagan
Illustrated. 606 pages. Doubleday. $30.
War usually arrives over distances and long stretches of time.
In 226 B.C., for example, Rome, already the most powerful state in the Western world, concluded a treaty with Carthage, which was aggressively expanding its power and influence in what is now Spain.
The treaty aimed at peace, writes Donald Kagan, in his lucid, erudite study of the reasons war often breaks out despite the most ardent desire to avoid it, and yet, eight years and several Roman vacillations later, it led to war.


No Headline
"Justice will now be served." GOV.
GEORGE E. PATAKI.  [ A1:6. ] "This is a step back in what should be a march constantly toward a higher level of civility and intelligence. The argument that the death penalty will deter and reduce crimes has been abandoned almost everywhere." MARIO M. CUOMO.  [ B5:1. ]


Columbia's Rohan Announces Resignation
Chapter 2 of the Jack Rohan era at Columbia is now officially over.
The school yesterday announced the resignation of the winningest basketball coach in its history, three days after Rohan's young, injury-depleted squad finished its season with a 4-22 record.


PetsMart Inc.(PETM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Orchard Supply Hardware Stores Corp.(OSHC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


As 2 Directors Leave, Gloom At State Arts Agency Deepens
The executive director of the New York State Council on the Arts has resigned and her top deputy is retiring early, deepening a sense of uncertainty at the agency, which supports some 1,200 arts groups statewide.
The two officials both voiced dismay over the budget and staff cuts, although neither said they were the sole reason for their leaving.


Truth of dare: Versace strikes a compromise. C10


Parental Smoking and Infant Deaths
NURSING mothers who smoke and caregivers who expose babies to cigarette smoke may double or triple the infants' risk of dying of sudden infant death syndrome, a new study has shown.
While earlier research had established that smoking during pregnancy puts babies at risk of sudden infant death, the new study is the first to explore in detail the relationship between sudden infant death and exposure to tobacco smoking after birth apart from prenatal exposure.


HOUSE APPROVES MEASURE TO LIMIT FEDERAL LAWSUITS
Voting largely along party lines, the House of Representatives today passed legislation intended to curtail sharply the increasing number of lawsuits brought in Federal courts.
The measure, the Attorneys Accountability Act, was swept along by a tide of anecdotes purporting to show that the American legal system is out of control, swamped with frivolous product-liability and personal-damage suits.
The main effect of the bill, which was approved 232 to 193, would be to encourage parties to settle lawsuits before trial by exposing them to the risk of paying some of the opponent's legal costs.


Now Manhattan Must Wait To Learn Post-Season Fate
Despite 25 victories and a nationally ranked defense, Manhattan remains uncertain as to whether it will be selected for the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.
"In my mind, our only bad loss this season was to Iona," Coach Fran Fraschilla said yesterday of his team's 25-4 season.
"Other than that, we've taken care of business. After a great three-month run, I don't think we should be penalized just because of the final four seconds of our last game."


Kohl's Corp.(KSS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


In a Tiny Company's Fight, Big Communications Stakes
The contest might look quixotic.
A small manufacturer that has lost money in every one of its 23 years is tilting at rich and mighty Motorola Inc. and, by extension, almost every other maker of wireless communications equipment.
If it wins, the tiny Interdigital Communications Corporation could conceivably earn hundreds of millions of dollars in royalties over the next decade.
If it loses, it might well remain what it has long been: a marginal player, unable to capitalize on the exploding growth in wireless communications.


Pipe Explosion Commemoration
Patricia Brown still has nightmares about the orange fireball that set building after building ablaze in her apartment complex on March 23, 1994.
To work through her feelings, she is helping to organize a celebration, "Miracle in March," on the first anniversary of the natural gas pipeline explosion.
"The fact that nobody was killed does not mean it's not as important as an earthquake," said Ms.
Brown, who is annoyed that President Clinton and Governor Whitman have declined to attend.


Moscow's Mayor, Denouncing Yeltsin Dismissals, Vows to Quit
The pugnacious yet immensely popular Mayor of Moscow abruptly threatened to resign today unless President Boris N. Yeltsin reinstates two senior law enforcement officials he dismissed after the mob-style execution of the television personality Vladislav Listyev.
The Mayor, Yuri M. Luzhkov, who was once one of Mr.
Yeltsin's most trusted supporters, said the dismissal of the city's chief prosecutor, Gennadi Ponomaryov, and police chief, Vladimir Pankratov, on Monday was a thinly veiled attack on him.
Many in Moscow agree, including some of Mr.
Luzhkov's most powerful friends, who say he was completely serious about leaving his job.


Mayor, and Luck, Help Control Oil Depot Fire
A gasoline fire erupted with a thunderous roar at an Amoco fuel-storage depot here today before firefighters smothered it with foam, possibly averting a catastrophe -- with a little help from Carteret's Mayor.
Officials said that a quick response by fire companies and a fortuitous wind kept the flames from spreading to two tanks loaded with gasoline and diesel fuel and prevented any injuries to hundreds of nearby residents and shoppers in the Carteret Shopping Center, across Roosevelt Avenue from the tank farm.


Veterans Return to the Bridge at Remagen


CHRONICLE
Police Commissioner WILLIAM J. BRATTON dismissed Police Officer CAROL SHAYA-CASTRO yesterday for posing nude in the August 1994 issue of Playboy magazine.
The Commissioner said she had violated the City Charter and the department's rules and was thus unfit to be a police officer.
"The reputation of the New York City Police Department is not for sale, and there is no room in our organization for anyone who would attempt to do so," he wrote in his ruling on the case.
"In my opinion, the proven misconduct in this case is directly contrary to the values that this department stands for."


The Lure and Addiction Of Life On Line
MARK P. had been sober for two years when he went on line.
He began talking to other people through his office computer.
He even found an on-line Alcoholics Anonymous meeting.
At first it was exhilarating.
Then it became a problem.
He wrote in an electronic message:
I was coming home later and later.
My wife thought I'd started drinking again.
I lose all sense of time once I get on-line.
I'm an addict.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  DOLLAR'S PLUNGE DEEPENS  As the dollar plunged around the world, the Administration watched in alarm but did not act.
Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin is reported to be reluctant to fight the markets, preferring to let the sell-off die before acting.
A1  KEEPING GIRLS IN SCHOOL  The Clinton Administration plans to announce the creation of a decade-long program today aimed at keeping girls in school in Africa, Asia and Latin America despite economic and cultural barriers.
A12


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMERICAN HOMEPATIENT INC., Franklin, Tenn., a health care service company, agreed to acquire Conpharma Home Healthcare Inc., Buffalo, from its Canadian parent company, Continental Pharma Cryosan Inc., for about $30 million in cash.


Developments in Washington
LEGAL REFORM -- Voting largely along party lines, the House passed legislation intended to curtail the number of lawsuits in Federal Courts.
The Attorneys Accountability Act, approved 232 to 193, seeks to encourage parties to settle lawsuits before trial by exposing both parties to a risk of paying their opponent's legal costs.
The measure, the first of three the House will vote on this week, was swept along by a tide of anecdotes purporting to show that the legal system is swamped with frivolous product liability and personal damage suits.
FOOD STAMPS -- The House Agriculture Committee began voting on legislation to cut $16.5 billion from projected spending in the food stamp program over the next five years, despite protests from Democrats who said the bill was immoral and mean-spirited.
Under the bill, states would have the option to get Federal food stamp money in a lump sum and then set their own eligibility standards and benefit levels.


Sing a Song Of Asparagus And Pasta
NOW that its season is beginning, asparagus can take a leading role in this variation on a pasta primavera.
The dish gains its creamy texture from blue cheese and yogurt, creating a sharpness that is softened by the sweetness of the vegetables.
1. Chop onion.
2.
Heat large nonstick pot until it is very hot.
Reduce heat to medium-high, and add oil.
3. Add onion, and cook until it begins to soften.
4. Mince garlic, and add.
5. Bring water to boil in covered pot for pasta.
6.
Using thin slicing blade of a food processor, slice carrots.
Stir into onion and garlic along with thyme.
7.
Wash asparagus.
Break off and discard tough, woody part of stalks.
Add to onion and carrot pot.
8.
Wash, trim and slice mushrooms; wash and trim tomato, and cut into small chunks.
Add mushrooms and tomatoes to vegetable pot; stir well, cover and continue cooking over medium-low heat.
9. Cook pasta.
10.
Stir a little of the yogurt into the cornstarch to make a smooth paste.
Stir the paste into the remaining yogurt, and mash in the blue cheese.
When vegetables are tender, add in the yogurt mixture, and stir until the sauce is smooth and the blue cheese has melted.
Season with salt and pepper.
11. Drain the pasta, and top with sauce.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 708 calories, 13 grams fat, 14 milligrams cholesterol, 725 milligrams sodium, 35 grams protein, 125 grams carbohydrate.


Charles S. Chetham; Former Museum Head, 65
Charles Scott Chetham, a former director of the Smith College Museum of Art in Northampton, Mass., died on Saturday at his home in Provincetown, Mass.
He was 65.
He died after a brief illness, his family said.


Changes in Food Stamps
In a 15-hour session, the House Agriculture Committee endorsed sweeping changes in the food stamp program, including strict work requirements.
Page A16.


Theory on Nuclear Dump Peril Is Disputed
Senator J. Bennett Johnston yesterday belittled a debate over whether a proposed dump for high-level atomic wastes in the Nevada desert might erupt in a nuclear explosion, and publicly released an internal document from the Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico that strongly attacked the explosion thesis.
Mr.
Johnston, a Louisiana Democrat, was the legislative force behind the plan for a centralized national dump for highly radioactive nuclear wastes and has long argued that Yucca Mountain in Nevada is the best site.


Boston Scientific Corp.(BSX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


For an Honest Death Penalty
It is a staple of American politics that there is very strong support for the death penalty; in opinion polls, roughly 70 percent consistently favor it.
Yet the popular will on this issue has been thwarted.
To be sure, we have many capital trials, convictions and death sentences; we have endless and massively costly appeals; and a few people do get put to death every year.
But compared to the number of death sentences, the number of executions is minuscule, and the gap is widening fast.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday, about the concerns of some large institutional shareholders of W. R. Grace &amp; Company over the departure of the company's chief executive, referred incorrectly to an executive who spoke with them.
He was Peter B. Martin, head of investor relations, not Thomas A. Holmes, Grace's interim president and chief executive.


Knicks Put Smith On Injured List
Charles Smith, still bothered by pain in his sprained left knee, was placed on the injured list last night before the Knicks-Boston Celtics game at Madison Square Garden.
New York's starting small forward will miss at least five games, meaning he cannot return before March 17 against the Washington Bullets.
Anthony Bonner, who has been on the injured list with a sprained right ankle, will be activated for tonight's game in Boston.


Few Endorse Punishing Senator For Balanced-Budget Defection
Still reeling from last week's defeat on the balanced-budget amendment, Senate Republicans agreed to meet on Wednesday to discuss what disciplinary action, if any, to take against Senator Mark O. Hatfield, the only Republican who opposed it.
But Republicans across the party's ideological spectrum, from the conservative Phil Gramm of Texas to the moderate John H. Chafee of Rhode Island, voiced opposition today to the idea of punishing Mr.
Hatfield, a 28-year Senate veteran from Oregon.


Wine Talk
HAVE a date for lunch today?
No?
Then amble over to the Post House, at 28 East 63d Street, off Madison Avenue, and sample some of the free wine.
Yes, free wine.
The Post House is one of Alan Stillman's restaurants, and Mr.
Stillman is a man who likes to give away wine.
He runs five restaurants in New York, and he's pouring free wine at each of them all this week.


Co-op Residents Ask What Went Wrong
After a seven-year wait, Blanche Pollack, a retired cashier, finally got a city-subsidized apartment in the Big Six Towers cooperative in 1980, and it was, she thought, such a deal: $6,775, with a monthly maintenance fee of $431.
Mrs.
Pollack, a widow, believed that she was going to spend her final years secure and comfortable in Woodside, Queens.
But by yesterday afternoon, her calm had been shattered, and her future suddenly seemed uncertain.
Sitting in curlers in Frank's Hair Salon at the Big Six complex, she struggled to retain her composure as she grappled with Monday night's stunning news.


METRO DIGEST
PATAKI SIGNS DEATH PENALTY BILL
Governor Pataki fulfilled one of his central campaign vows by signing a death penalty bill into law, making New York the 38th state with capital punishment.
A1.
CRACKING DOWN ON SCHOOL VIOLENCE
Seeking to stop increasing violence in New York City schools, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said he would remove students carrying guns from their regular schools for a year.
The older ones would be sent to disciplinary academies, which would open next fall.
Students as young as kindergartners would be segregated in disciplinary programs.
A1.


Haley Will Play Next Season
The All-Pro defensive end CHARLES HALEY, who said after the Dallas Cowboys' loss in the National Conference championship game that he was retiring, will play another season.
Haley, 31, who is due to make $1.95 million this season, said yesterday that he changed his mind -- for now.
"I'd rather not play if we're going to lose, and if they sit on their hands as far as getting other players, I still might retire again," he said. (AP)


Australians Won't Move To Raise the Sunken Hull
Australian yachtsmen today abandoned all plans to raise the sunken hull of their $3 million America's Cup yacht, One Australia.
Their decision is based on more than the cost of raising the 75-foot yacht, a price that is likely to be high.
They also believe there is nothing left worth saving.
Peter Morris, head of the One Australia syndicate, said today that "the possibility of getting something of any value is low." Of particular concern were the 11 high-tech sails that were on board when the yacht sank Sunday in 500 feet of water during a Pacific Ocean race against Black Magic 2.


A Visionary Cuba, When Believers Still Believed
The island of Cuba has never looked as fantastically exotic as it does in "I Am Cuba," a nearly 2 1/2-hour swatch of cinematic agitprop that aspires to be the "Potemkin" of the Cuban Communist Revolution.
Completed in 1964, during the headiest days of the romance between the Soviet Union and Cuba, this Russian-Cuban co-production is a feverish pas de deux of Eastern European soulfulness and Latin sensuality fused into an unwieldy but visually stunning burst of propaganda.
Supervised by the great Russian director Mikhail Kalatozov, who is best known for "The Cranes Are Flying," it suggests Eisenstein filtered through "La Dolce Vita" with an Afro-Cuban pulse.
"I Am Cuba," which opens today at Film Forum, is structured like a social realist mural with five panels, each of which illustrates a different aspect of the revolution.
After surveying the fleshpots of tourist Havana with a leering disapproval, it moves into the sugar cane fields, then returns to the city to follow the leftist student movement.
From there it journeys to the country to show the bombing of the innocent peasants' hillside dwellings.
It ends in the mountains marching with Fidel Castro's ragtag army.


For Chefs in Turkey, an Effort to Revitalize a Forgotten Cuisine
FROM dumplings the size of a thumbnail to multilayered delicacies made with dough as thin as a leaf, from eggplant 40 ways to poached fish en papillote with cream sauce, Turkey is full of culinary surprises.
Cookbooks paint a tantalizing cuisine that proves Kipling was wrong when he insisted that East and West would never meet.
But the cuisine that some believe is as varied and sophisticated as French and Chinese appears to have been left largely in the hands of home cooks: it is difficult to find authentic Turkish cuisine in restaurants, where a lot has been Frenchified.


Extendicare reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Police Foot Patrols Don't Offer False Security
To the Editor:
"More Police, Less Crime, Right? Wrong" (Op-Ed, Feb. 27) seriously misrepresents or misunderstands two studies it uses to make its point: the Kansas City preventive patrol experiment and the Newark foot patrol experiment.


With Rise in Health Unit Mergers, Catholic Standards Face Challenge
For more than a century, Leonard Hospital, a small community hospital in Troy, N.Y., was nonsectarian.
But this year, in a merger with St.
Mary's Hospital, a slightly larger Roman Catholic hospital five miles away, Leonard became a Catholic institution.
Now the crucifixes have been ordered, and soon, the nuns from St.
Mary's will go to Leonard for a ceremony in which they will hang a portrait of Mother Elizabeth Seton, founder of the Catholic order that now operates both hospitals.


Irving P. Abel; Longines Executive, 85
Irving P. Abel, a former president of the Longines-Wittnauer Watch Company, died in his sleep on Sunday at his home in Boca Raton, Fla.
He was 85.
The cause was undetermined, said his son, Martin, also of Boca Raton.


Checkers Drive-In Restaurants Inc.(CHKR,NNM) reports earnings for Year to Jan 2


Agendas Clash in Bid to Alter Law on Product Liability
Lobbying over the high-stakes legal overhaul measure now in the House has become so contentious that George McGovern, a liberal icon of the 1960's, says the debate is even more heated than that over the Vietnam War.
Perhaps not.
But the former anti-war Democrat has started a mini-war himself, first by appearing in a commercial for the bill and then by saying he does not really understand the legislation and does not fully support the "extreme" measures favored by the House Republicans.


Abbey Healthcare Group Inc.(ABBY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sports of The Times; Better Late Than Never For Ashburn
RICHIE ASHBURN invented Marvelous Marv Throneberry, but that is not the reason he was selected to the Baseball Hall of Fame yesterday.
Richie Ashburn also threw Cal Abrams out at home to help the Phillies win the 1950 pennant, which is duly remembered by aging Brooklyn Dodgers fans, but that isn't why Ashburn was selected by the Veterans Committee, either.
Ashburn was selected because he was just about as good as a center fielder can be, without bashing the ball over the fence 40 times a year.
Not every great center fielder is Willie, Mickey or the Duke, but there should be room in the shrine near the shore of Lake Otesaga for a player who batted .308 over 15 years and ran down most line drives in the power alleys.


George Cadbury, 88, Canadian Economist
George Woodall Cadbury, an economist in Canada who was an international leader in the Planned Parenthood movement, died on Feb. 25 in the Oakville Trafalgar Memorial Hospital in Oakville, Ontario, where he lived.
He was 88.
The cause was heart failure, said a daughter, Lyndall Elizabeth Boal of Mt. Kisco, N.Y.


Financier's Mother Dies
Jean Davis, a philanthropist and the mother of Marvin Davis, the billionaire financier and former owner of 20th Century Fox, died on Feb. 21 at her home in Palm Beach, Fla.
She was 94 and had lived most of her life in Manhattan.
The cause was respiratory failure, said a spokesman for the family.


Awards in Dueling Casino Suits
John Tombarello is a high roller.
In eight years, he reportedly lost more than $500,000 at the Sands Hotel Casino, before ending his relationship with the casino in a huff after it switched his hotel suite.
To lure him back, the Sands offered a $93,000 Mercedes, said Mr.
Tombarello's lawyer, Lloyd D. Levenson. (He had turned down a Cadillac worth $44,000 and a pair of Rolex watches worth $50,000.)


Woman Is Sentenced in Husband's Death
A woman who killed her husband during her losing campaign for the New Paltz Town Board in 1993 was sentenced today to 15 years to life in prison, the minimum sentence for intentional murder.
The woman, Iris Pyne, 54, has said she was a battered wife who killed her husband, Richard, in self-defense.
In a courtroom with more than 40 supporters, Mrs.
Pyne said before being sentenced: "My life with my husband was a story of a man and a woman in a very dysfunctional relationship, a symbiotic one. Dick was not a bad man. He was ill. He was filled with a lot of anger."


Paul Harris Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Personal Health; What women can do to escape heart disease.
BY now most women surely are aware that heart disease is an equal opportunity killer, especially in those past the age of 50.
Slightly more than half the deaths from heart disease in the United States now occur among women, and this share is likely to increase as the population ages.
But what are women doing to stem this rise, particularly those in their 50's and 60's, the decades when their coronary death rate begins its steep climb?
Not nearly enough, according to recently published reports.
Women with two or more major controllable coronary risk factors -- cigarette smoking, lack of physical activity, high blood cholesterol, high blood pressure, diabetes and overweight -- are more the norm than the exception.
Three factors -- smoking, sedentary habits and overweight -- were featured in recent reports.
Addiction to Nicotine
The United States Public Health Service estimated that in 1990, 61,000 American women over 35 died from cardiovascular diseases caused by smoking.
The chances of suffering a heart attack can be cut in half within just one year of quitting smoking, but only 2.5 percent of women who smoke successfully quit each year.
As of 1993, the most recent year for which national data are available, 22 million women -- more than one in five -- were regular smokers.


Fire in New Jersey
A fire erupted with a roar in Carteret, N.J., but was smothered with help from the Mayor.
Page B3.


A Firefighter Dies, and With Him a Firehouse's Source of Strength
For the firefighters of Engine Company No. 221 in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, it was the sort of wrenching problem that begged to be talked over with a good listener.
A beloved member of the company died yesterday in the hospital.
Yet, it was a workday.
So you had to bottle your grief and be ready and willing to fight fires.
This was precisely the type of matter the firefighters would take to Lieut.
Raymond F. Schiebel, the resident father confessor, Mr.
Advice and chief sounding board of the firehouse.
In fact, if you needed to talk over anything at all, he was the willing ear.


First Mission for Donated Copter
The executive helicopter that Governor Whitman turned over to the state police for use as an air ambulance flew its first mission on Monday, transferring a critically ill patient, Thomas Boyle, 77, from Bayonne Hospital to the Deborah Heart and Lung Center in Browns Mills.
The trip took 20 minutes.
"The drive would have taken two hours," said the chief flight nurse, John Bisciglia.
Mr.
Boyle remained in critical condition yesterday in the intensive care unit.


Port Jervis Nurses Win Pact With Hospital
A six-month nurses' strike at the only hospital in Port Jervis, N.Y., ended late Monday after negotiators reached a settlement that gave nurses their first contract since they organized more than a year ago.
More than 100 nurses at Mercy Community Hospital went on strike on Sept. 1 for higher pay and job security.


CML Group Inc.(CML,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


AM Intl.(AM,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Duplex Products Inc.(DPX,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Call Off Campaign: Kittles Has Arrived
It was only a few months ago that the Villanova athletic department mounted an aggressive marketing campaign, complete with posters and brochures, touting its star forward Kerry Kittles as a potential all-American.
Although respected in the Big East Conference, where he earned first-team honors last season as a sophomore, Kittles was relatively unknown throughout the rest of the nation.


Nobody Is in Favor Of Illegal Searches
To the Editor:
Re "Poll Finds Public Doubts Key Parts of G.O.P.'s Agenda" (front page, Feb. 28): You do no one a favor with your simplistic and skewed poll-taking.
"Are police searches without a warrant a good idea?" No, they are not a good idea.
They violate the Fourth Amendment of the Constitution, which bears quoting:


Arthur Schulte, 88, Investment Banker
Arthur David Schulte, a retired New York investment banker and philanthropist, died last Wednesday at the Hospice Center in Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 88 and had homes in Manalapan, Fla., Greenwich, Conn., and Manhattan.
The cause was congestive heart failure, his family said.


Pioneer Financial Services Inc.(PFS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Amre Inc.(AMM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


C-Tec Corp.(CTEX,NNM) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.94
5.95
3.24
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.76
5.77
3.54
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.98
6.00
3.77
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.42
7.41
6.39
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.62
7.58
6.86
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.50
8.47
7.69
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.47
6.45
5.95
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


McClellan's Condition Improves
GERALD McCLELLAN was taken off a life-support machine yesterday as he began to regain consciousness, 11 days after suffering brain injuries in a world title fight at London Arena.
"He's doing quite well," the neurosurgeon JOHN SUTCLIFFE said of the American fighter.
"He's starting to wake up. He's breathing for himself. He's opening his eyes and starting to move."


Valea Calugareasca Journal; From Communist Vineyards, a Bouquet of Iodine
With a slight air of apology, Viorel Stoian eased the cork and a piece of faded plastic out of a bottle of cabernet sauvignon that had rested in the cellar of the National Wine Institute of Romania for almost two decades.
"Like almost everything in Romania, the corks we had were so bad that we had to put plastic in with them to keep the wine from running out," he explained.


Margery Solomon; Bridge Player, 86, Represented U.S.
Margery Mastbaum Solomon, one of America's leading bridge players, died on Saturday at her home in Elkins Park, Pa.
She was 86.
The cause was pulmonary fibrosis, said her daughter Norma Brunswick of Rydal, Pa.


Rejoining the Welfare Debate, Clinton Attacks G.O.P. Plans
Wedging his way back into a debate he helped start but that has lately overtaken him, President Clinton today denounced Republican proposals for overhauling welfare as too harsh on children and too soft on work requirements, and pledged support for broad experimentation by states.
In a speech to the National Association of Counties here, Mr.
Clinton urged the Republicans to pass national legislation denying driver's and professional licenses to parents who refuse to pay child support.


INSIDE
A Firefighter Dies From Injuries at Blaze
Lieut.
Raymond F. Schiebel, the resident father confessor of his Brooklyn firehouse, died of his injuries.
After he collapsed at a fire on Sunday, volunteer ambulance workers operated in panic and confusion, said a paramedic.
Pages B1 and B6.
Review of Hospitals Ordered
After reports in The New York Times of deaths and injuries in delivery rooms, the state Health Commissioner ordered a review at New York City public hospitals.
Page B1.
Americans Slain in Pakistan
Two United States diplomats were killed and one was wounded when their car was ambushed by a gunman in Karachi.
Page A12.
College Segregation Ruling
A judge ruled that Mississippi cannot close two historically segregated universities to claim progress on integrating higher education.
Page B8.


Charming Shoppes Inc.(CHRS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Accounts
*
Keycorp, Cleveland, to Wyse Advertising, Cleveland, to handle advertising, promotion and collateral programs for the bank holding company, previously handled by J. Walter Thompson Detroit.
Wyse joins Bronner Slosberg Humphrey, Boston, on Keycorp's agency roster.
The billings were not disclosed.


Microsoft and U.S. Seek to Upset Judge's Decision
Teaming up with the Justice Department, its former adversary, the Microsoft Corporation filed an unusually personal brief today asking a Federal appeals court to overturn a judge's decision that dismissed the company's attempt to settle antitrust charges out of court.
Lawyers for Microsoft also urged that the judge, Stanley Sporkin, be disqualified from the case, contending he had relied on a popular book about Microsoft for much of his information.


International Specialty Products Inc.(ISP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Spot Work for Prime-Time Stars
Successful television shows often land cast members work in advertising, endorsing products or serving as voiceover announcers in broadcast commercials.
Here is a look at the casts of three popular television shows and advertising work they are doing.
Advertising, page D18.


Six Communities Compete For a New Military Center
Wanted: 140,000 square feet of secure office space.
Good airline connections to Latin America.
Affordable family housing.
Strategic site for nabbing drug lords and running top-secret military missions.
With American forces scheduled to withdraw from Panama by 1999 under terms of the Panama Canal Treaty, the Pentagon is looking for a new home for its Southern Command, the headquarters responsible for United States military activities in Latin America.


Fabri-Centers of America (FCA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Colts Sign Rams' Anderson
Wide receiver FLIPPER ANDERSON got quite a 30th birthday present from the Indianapolis Colts yesterday -- a five-year contract reportedly worth $8.5 million, including a $2 million signing bonus.
Anderson caught 259 passes for 5,246 yards and 26 touchdowns in seven years with the Los Angeles Rams. (AP)


New Croat-Bosnian Link Worries U.N.
Three weeks before its threatened expulsion of United Nations peacekeepers is to begin, Croatia has forged a new military alliance with Bosnia, establishing what on paper is a common front between former adversaries to counter Serbian rebels in both their countries.
The move, announced on Monday night, added to the concerns of United Nations officials and Western nations over the possibility of renewed war in Croatia and Bosnia if the Croatian President, Franjo Tudjman, goes through with his threat to expel the 12,000 United Nations peacekeepers in Croatia when their Security Council mandate expires on March 31.


Analogic Corp.(ALOG,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


ICN Pharmaceuticals Inc.(ICN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Fay's Inc.(FAY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Barclays PLC Group (BCS,N) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Bell &amp; Howell Holdings Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Novo Nordisk A/S(NVO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Esterline Technologies Corp.(ESL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


AEP Industries(AEPI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Rouse Co.(ROUS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sheik Didn't Suggest War Against the U.S.
To the Editor:
Your March 1 news article on the sedition trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman errs when it states that a sermon given by Mr.
Abdel Rahman encouraged "guerrilla war against all enemies of Islam, including the United States." At no place in this sermon does Mr.
Abdel Rahman mention the United States.
Indeed, when asked afterward what an ordinary man should do regarding jihad -- the Arab word for struggle -- especially in America, he said:


Enterra Corp.(EN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Fritz Cos.(FRTZ,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Choreographer to Speak
Gloria Contreras, a Mexican choreographer who worked with the New York City Ballet and led her own troupe in New York City in the 1960's, is to discuss dance in Mexico at 2 P.M. on Friday at the Library for Performing Arts at Lincoln Center.
Ms.
Contreras directs the Taller Coreografico of the National Autonomous University of Mexico.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Friday about a planned merger between the Abbey Healthcare Group and the Homedco Group misstated the potential ranking of the combined company.
The article cited an analyst who said he expected the merged company would have revenues of more than $ 1.3 billion in its first year, which would make it the largest company in the home medical care industry.
But based on last year's revenues, it would be the second-largest, not the largest, with combined revenues of $ 962.7 million.


U.S. Is Urged To Investigate Cereal Prices
Two members of Congress have asked Attorney General Janet Reno to investigate the four largest cereal companies in the country -- Kellogg, General Mills, Post and Quaker Oats -- for antitrust violations.
The two, Sam Gejdenson of Connecticut and Charles E. Schumer of New York, both Democrats, said at a news conference today that the cost of cold cereal had increased by 90 percent since 1983, twice the rate for other foods, and that about 55 percent of the price of a box of cereal was for marketing and profits, twice the average of other foods.


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
Kooks on the Loose, Flirting With Improvisation  'Spontaneous Broadway' John Houseman Studio Theater
Daredeviltry is being practiced in a room beneath West 42d Street.


Courier Quickly Gets Off to a Cozy Start
Jim Courier, twice the titleholder of the Newsweek Champions Cup as well as a part-time desert resident, took advantage of the balmy conditions today to improve his 1995 match record to 20-2 with a 6-3, 7-5 dismissal of Markus Zoecke.
Now ranked 11th in the world and seeded 9th here, Courier, the champion in 1991 and 1993, did not have sufficient status to gain a first-round bye at this event, which allows only its top eight men to bypass the opening round.


Army Suspends 5, Including 2 Officers, in Training Deaths
Two Army officers and three sergeants were suspended today pending the completion of investigations into the deaths of four soldiers training to become part of the Army's Ranger corps, military officials said.
Those suspended included the commander of the Sixth Ranger Training Brigade, Lieut.
Col.
Richard Rachmeler, as well as a company commander, said Rich McDowell, an Army public affairs officer.


Ewing Casts Long Shadow Over Wilkins and Celts
By the fourth quarter, the Knicks' offensive game plan was unstoppable: give the ball to Patrick Ewing.
Scoring a season-high 46 points, including 38 in the second half, Ewing carried the Knicks to their third consecutive victory, 115-110, over the Boston Celtics last night at Madison Square Garden.


CHRONICLE
REBA and DAVE WILLIAMS are not writers: he is chairman of Alliance Capital, an investment management company in Manhattan, and she is director of special projects for the company.
But their names are on a new writing center at Marymount Manhattan College because they donated the $250,000 needed for construction and initial operating expenses.
The center officially opens with a reception this evening.
When it was only in the planning stages, "I thought, what an exciting idea," Ms.
Williams said yesterday.
"After all, we are right in the middle of New York where all the writers are. How wonderful that students can be with them, learn from them, talk to them."


Public Relations Enters Barings Case
With new details having emerged about the charges that Nicholas W. Leeson is likely to face if he is extradited to Singapore, a public relations man for the former Barings P.L.C. trader said today that "powerful people" could be the losers when Mr.
Leeson told all he knew about the downfall of the venerable British investment firm.
The public relations man, Max Clifford, who specializes in selling the stories of the notorious and the briefly famous to Britain's tabloid newspapers, told reporters here that Mr.
Leeson was determined to clear his name and fears being sent back to Singapore from Germany, where he is in jail pending extradition proceedings.


Stop &amp; Shop Cos.(SHP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Wellcome Is Accepting Glaxo Offer
Wellcome P.L.C. said today that it had given up its six-week hunt for another bidder and would accept the $15 billion takeover offer made in January by Glaxo P.L.C., creating the world's largest pharmaceutical company.
Glaxo won its battle for Wellcome after Wellcome's effort to find another buyer ended in failure over the last two days.
After moving to the brink of offering to top Glaxo's bid, two potential suitors, Zeneca Group of Britain and Roche Holdings of Switzerland, backed off at the last moment, industry executives said.


PATAKI SEES JUSTICE SERVED
Gov.
George E. Pataki fulfilled one of his central campaign vows today by signing a death penalty bill into law, making New York the 38th state with capital punishment.
Mr.
Pataki used two pens that belonged to slain police officers in a bill-signing ceremony with all the choreographed flourish of one of his stump events.
The relatives of seven murder victims joined dozens of lawmakers and police union officials to watch the Republican Governor end an 18-year battle to return the death penalty to New York State.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Mar. 3
Feb. 24
Mar. 4
1995
1995
1994
Gasoline production, daily
7.4
7.3
6.8
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.0
3.0
Gasoline stocks
221.6
219.8
225.8
Distillate stocks
121.9
123.4
102.7
Crude imports, daily
6.2
5.7
6.4
Product imports, daily
1.4
1.7
1.9
Crude stocks
324.7
323.0
334.2
Crude production, daily
6.6
6.6
6.7
Refinery utilization (%)
91.0
88.9
85.9
Source: American Petroleum Institute


St. Joe Paper Co.(SJP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bradlees Inc.(BLE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Berlitz Intl.(BTZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A listing on Sunday in the calendar of events of the Long Island Weekly, about a benefit auction at Dowling College in Oakdale, L.I., was incomplete.
The event will be held on Saturday at 7:30 P.M. in the college's Fortunoff Hall.


A Young Bassist, Skipping His Way Around the Scales
Christian McBride started his late set on Tuesday night at the Village Vanguard with a classic bass player's gambit: a brisk walking line, which introduced "Cherokee." The walk, however, was more like hopscotch, lightly skipping around typical walking-bass scales.
The arrangement of "Cherokee" was equally novel, shifting unpredictably between fast be-bop and a waltz.
At 22, Mr.
McBride has become the most celebrated young bassist in jazz for his precise intonation, robust tone and springy timing.
He has just released his first album as a leader, "Gettin' to It" (Verve), and at the Vanguard (178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street, Greenwich Village) through Sunday, he is introducing a quartet.


No. 2 House Democrat Files a New Charge Against Gingrich
A House Democratic leader lodged yet another ethics complaint against Speaker Newt Gingrich today, this one over Mr.
Gingrich's promoting a toll-free telephone number on the House floor to sell tape recordings of the college course he teaches.
Mr.
Gingrich was explicitly warned against commercial promotion five years ago by the House ethics committee.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; Probation for Ex-Judge in Theft
A former state judge in Somerset County who admitted stealing $173,000 from his partners in a real estate venture was sentenced yesterday to five years' probation.
Michael Imbriani, 66, who retired from the bench in May while under investigation, must also perform 300 hours of community service and make restitution of $88,002, since he has already repaid some of the stolen money.


Dollar's Fall: Crisis With No Bite
What's so terrible about a falling dollar?
It has been declining in value for nearly a decade against the two strongest currencies, the German mark and the Japanese yen -- doing so gradually most of the time, but with occasional plunges like the current one.
And the damage to the economy has been negligible.


Clinton Issues Order to Build Union Muscle
President Clinton sided with organized labor today and issued an order barring the Federal Government from doing business with companies that hire permanent replacement workers during strikes.
Last month Vice President Al Gore made clear that Mr.
Clinton intended to take the step even if it would ignite a bitter political fight.
Republican leaders in Congress had warned the President not to go forward with the plan, and today they immediately began seeking passage of legislation to block the action.


More Progeny of 'Cheers'
The departed "Cheers" is still a major player in the sitcom game.
"Frasier" is a direct spinoff.
Now, taking indirect routes, there's NBC's "Hope and Gloria," created by Bill and Cheri Steinkellner, former Emmy Award winners for "Cheers," and CBS has "The George Wendt Show," whose star is probably better known as Norm Peterson, former accountant and champion devourer of beer nuts for 11 years at the Cheers bar in Boston.
"Hope and Gloria," making a spirited debut at 8:30 tonight, goes for the old sitcom standby of pairing opposites.
Hope Richardson (Cynthia Stevenson) and Gloria Utz (Jessica Lundy) live in a Pittsburgh brownstone.
Hope, a kind of dizzy "My Friend Irma" replay, is a former cheerleader who won't fail to tell her co-workers at WPNN-TV things like "love your belt!" Flashy Gloria, a hairdresser, copes with raising a 5-year-old son and fending off a persistent former husband, Louis Utz (Enrico Colantoni), a carpet salesman she has divorced twice.
"Maybe I'm stupid," concedes Gloria.


Simpson's Lawyer Hints Slayings Were Mistake by Drug Dealers
The chief defense lawyer and the chief police investigator in the O. J. Simpson case continued their seemingly endless fencing match today, delving into topics lik ethe rate at which ice cream melts and the murder methods used by Colombian drug lords.
The lawyer, Johnnie L. Cochran Jr., elaborated on his assertion that Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman were not the victims of a jealous former husband but of irate drug dealers who had set out last June to kill one of Mrs.
Simpson's friends -- one of their customers -- instead.


Paul Horgan, 91, Historian And Novelist of the Southwest
Paul Horgan, a wide-ranging writer of novels, history and biography whose work earned him two Pulitzer Prizes, died yesterday at Middlesex County Hospital in Middletown, Conn., where he lived.
He was 91.
The cause was cardiac arrest, said Donald Berke, his godson.


I.B.M. Cleared by Jury In a Stress Injury Case
A Minnesota jury decided today that I.B.M. was not liable for injuries a former high school secretary said had been caused by the design of its computer keyboards.
The case has been closely watched by makers of office equipment and lawyers around the country for thousands of clerical workers who believe that poorly designed data processing equipment has led to an epidemic of neck, shoulder, arm and hand ailments collectively known as repetitive stress injuries, or R.S.I.
While the ruling does not set a direct precedent for what juries can decide in other cases, it will encourage equipment companies not to settle such claims.


Correction
The Pulse chart in The Metro Section on Monday, about New York City museums, misstated the availability of budget figures from the Whitney Museum of American Art.
Though the numbers were not immediately available for the chart, the museum does disclose them: for the fiscal year 1991 (which began July 1, 1990) the budget was $ 13.5 million; for 1992, $ 13.1 million; for 1993, $ 12.9 million; for 1994, $ 13 million.


Rebuttal on Ex-Barings Trader's Role
Lawyers for Nicholas W. Leeson said today that Mr.
Leeson, the former trader for Barings P.L.C., had not been trying to flee from justice when he abruptly left Singapore last month, and that he was not solely responsible for the collapse of the British investment firm.
In their most detailed remarks yet about the case, the lawyers sought to counter the common perception that Mr.
Leeson, a 28-year-old Briton, had brought down Barings through ill-advised and unauthorized bets on the direction of Japanese stock and bond prices.
They said he would consider cooperating with British prosecutors about the events inside Barings before its failure a week and a half ago if it would increase his chances of facing any criminal charges in Britain rather than in Singapore.


House Panels Back Changes For Welfare
Two House committees approved legislation today to make vast changes in welfare and food stamp programs as the House Democrat leader charged that Republicans were undermining the legitimacy of House actions by ramming legislation through the chamber.
"There are days on which I feel like the House is the staff for the Senate," said Representative Richard A. Gephardt, the House minority leader.
"We send over rough drafts, and they try to figure it out."


AT HOME WITH: Dan Hirschman; A Young Master of Bridge
PUT a question to one Hirschman child, and you can expect amplification and clarification from the other two.
Ask 10-year-old Dan Hirschman, the youngest, whether he saw much of the dozens of Midwestern towns he visited while amassing his trove of victories at bridge, and he says: "No, I didn't really. We didn't get out of the hotel much."


Christopher Plunges Into Israel-Egypt Nuclear Dispute
Secretary of State Warren Christopher tried today to make peace between the peacemakers.
In a meeting with Egypt's Foreign Minister, Amr Moussa, Mr.
Christopher sought to help resolve a dispute between Egypt and Israel that has centered on the treaty to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons, but which has much broader repercussions for the two countries, which made peace 16 years ago.


Russian Gang Chief Indicted in Slayings
The reputed head of a Russian emigre crime gang in Brooklyn was arrested in Italy yesterday and indicted in Manhattan on charges of masterminding a five-year reign of violence that included at least three gangland murders tied to drug trafficking, racketeering and extortion.
The suspect, Monya Elson, 44, was arrested by Italian police officers in the Adriatic town of Fano.
Federal prosecutors said he headed a racketeering enterprise known to the police as Monya's Brigada, a gang whose harsh use of violence has struck fear among the 50,000 or so Russian emigres who have settled in Brighton Beach and Sheepshead Bay.


Defense for Malcolm X's Daughter Seeks to Question Informer
Expressing outrage at what they portrayed as Federal investigators' sloppy supervision of a longtime Government informer who says Quibilah Bahiyah Shabazz tried to hire him to kill Louis Farrakhan, lawyers for Ms.
Shabazz demanded today that the informer appear in court to testify at her pretrial hearing.
As that hearing got under way, to determine whether there is enough evidence to have the Government's case against Ms.
Shabazz proceed to trial, the testimony centered on telephone conversations -- secretly recorded by the informer, Michael K. Fitzpatrick -- between himself and the defendant.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Signed Mike Schooler, pitcher, to a minor-league contract.
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Signed Jerald Clark, outfielder, to a minor-league contract.


Bread Winner
THE carved disk at left may look like an old wooden German butter mold, but it's actually a bread warmer by Gail Ellis Israel, a potter in North Wales, Pa.
Heat it in a 325-degree oven, then place it in a breadbasket.


C.I.A. Report on Bosnia Blames Serbs for 90% of the War Crimes
In what is believed to be the most comprehensive United States assessment of atrocities in Bosnia, the Central Intelligence Agency has concluded that 90 percent of the acts of "ethnic cleansing" were carried out by Serbs and that leading Serbian politicians almost certainly played a role in the crimes.
The C.I.A. report, based on aerial photography and what one senior official called "an enormous amount of precise technical analysis," also concludes that while war crimes were by no means committed exclusively by Serbs, they were the only party involved in a systematic attempt to eliminate all traces of other ethnic groups from their territory.


Giants Eye Broncos' Center
Giants Coach Dan Reeves apparently is trying to nab another player from his old team.
The Giants have had discussions with Denver Broncos center Dave Widell, according to people close to the lineman.
Widell, a starter in all 16 games for the Broncos last season, is an unrestricted free agent who has been a backup for most of his career but is ready to make the move to being a consistent starter.
The problem for the Giants is that they already have a center in Brian Williams.
They would like Widell, who turns 30 in May, to be more of a utility player since he can play all three positions on the line and can even perform as the long snapper.
Adam Schreiber, a free agent, holds the role Widell would fill.


Metabolism Found to Adjust For a Body's Natural Weight
In a new study that helps explain one of the givens of obesity -- that the body has a weight that it naturally gravitates to -- researchers have found that all people, fat or thin, adjust their metabolism to maintain that weight.
The body burns calories more slowly than normal after weight is lost, and faster than normal when weight is gained, the study found.
This means it is harder both to lose and, perhaps surprising to some, to gain weight than to maintain the same level.
In the study, researchers found that in volunteers who gained weight, metabolism was speeded up by 10 percent to 15 percent, and in those who lost weight, metabolism was 10 percent to 15 percent slower than normal.
The volunteers, both female and male, ranged in age from their 20's to their 40's, but the effect on metabolism was independent of age and sex.


School Day Disrupted by Asbestos


CHRONICLE
As if that wasn't enough excitement from London in one week, The Daily Telegraph reported yesterday that QUEEN ELIZABETH II had had microchips implanted in two of her dogs, cocker spaniels named Oxo and Bisto, to enable her to find them should they wander away.
The newspaper said the chips were inserted by a veterinarian in Sandringham who placed them in loose skin of the dogs' necks.
Each chip is the size of a grain of rice and carries an identification number that can be read by scanners.
The numbers correspond to information about the dogs that will be in a Kennel Club of Britain data base.
The club is trying to promote the identification system for all kinds of pets.
In the last five years, 160,000 dogs and 18,000 cats have been implanted with microchips, the paper said.


Republicans Bite Elections Watchdog
House Republicans promised in their Contract With America to "restore accountability to Congress." They have chosen an odd way to go about it.
They are moving to cripple the Federal Election Commission, the agency charged with enforcing the campaign finance laws that provide at least some check on obsessive political fund-raising.
A measure approved last week by the House Appropriations Committee would slash the F.E.C.'s budget for the current fiscal year by 10 percent.
The actual damage would be even greater because the cut would occur well into the fiscal year.
This assault on the F.E.C., one in a long list of ill-considered rescissions pressed by G.O.P. lawmakers, is yet another reason for President Clinton to have his veto pen ready.


Market Place; Schwab has given investors a good ride, but can it last?
SINCE mid-December, shares of Charles Schwab &amp; Company, the nation's largest discount broker, have risen by nearly 50 percent.
That's a terrific run-up for shareholders lucky enough to have bought Schwab before the rise.
But it's been a bloodbath for the many investors who held short positions -- betting that the company's shares would drop.
Win or lose, Schwab remains a controversial call: it's a lightning rod for strong opinions.


Marinovich Changes Tune
The former Southern Cal and Los Angeles Raiders quarterback TODD MARINOVICH has traded his cleats and shoulder pads for a rhythm guitar.


The City's Ailing Hospitals
New York City's public hospitals are embattled as never before.
Costs are rising, state and city aid is falling, and politics has made it difficult to cut waste.
The quality of care in many hospitals is suffering.
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani is right to call for a fundamental reappraisal of the whole system.
The Mayor is already trying to sell off three hospitals and is wondering whether the city should junk them all.
Given the city's enormous budget deficits, his drastic approach is worth exploring -- but only as part of a rational plan to improve health services for the poor or at least insure that they do not deteriorate further.


Fine Tuning
MICHAEL TEDRICK of Ted rick &amp; Bennett, an interior design firm in San Francisco, sees one-room living as an exercise in discipline.
"With one large room, everything must be edited," he said.
A lanky 6 foot 3, Mr.
Tedrick sleeps in an alcove no larger than a Pullman room, something he remembers fondly from childhood travels.
The alcove, top, was originally a storage space behind bookshelves.
He posted French art populaire chairs of pruned apple branches as sentries and overfurnished the nook: "More was best in this small space." A Georgian wall cabinet gives the alcove architectural interest.


Fresh Water On the Go
FOR trips to places with questionable water supplies, there is now a handy purifier that eliminates harmful bacteria.
The PUR Portable (below) weighs only 12 ounces, cup included, and has an iodine cartridge good for up to 100 gallons.
It's $48 at Tent and Trails, 21 Park Place (near Church Street); (212) 227-1760.
For longer trips, Jamie Abish, the store's general manager, recommends the Katadyn water filter, good for 1,000 gallons.
It's $142.


A Design Shop Worthy of Its Contents
CASSINA, the Italian company that is the licensed manufacturer for furniture designed by modern masters (including Frank Lloyd Wright, Le Corbusier, Gerrit Rietveld and Charles Rennie Mackintosh), has finally gone retail in America.
Two Italian architects, Dario Caimi and Franco Asnaghi, have designed the company's first shop, at 155 East 56th Street (above).
It is a stunning, stark white, two-story space with a curved wall cutting across it.
The glass wall facing the street is stopping traffic -- literally.
Last month, for example, a man left his car idling while he went in to examine Wright's Taliesen dining-room table and Coonley chairs.


PNC to Buy Chemical's Branches in South Jersey
The PNC Bank Corporation of Pittsburgh said yesterday that it had won an auction to buy Chemical Bank's 84 branches in southern New Jersey for $504 million in cash and stock.
Chemical said last year that it wanted to sell these branches, keeping 40 branches in the New York suburbs of northern New Jersey.
It calculated that it was too small to be an effective competitor in the southern part of the state, most of which is part of the Philadelphia trade area, and decided that it would rather sell what it had than expand by paying the high going prices for banks in the region.
PNC, by contrast, already has a significant presence in eastern Pennsylvania and Delaware.


U.S. to Send F.B.I. Agents to Pakistan
Using its jurisdiction over terrorist attacks on Americans overseas, the Federal Bureau of Investigation prepared today to send a team of agents to Pakistan to investigate the shooting attack in Karachi on Tuesday that killed two United States consulate employees and wounded a third.
Law enforcement officials said they were treating the attack as a possible retaliation by Islamic militants for the arrest last month of Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, the accused mastermind of the 1993 World Trade Center bombing.
He was apprehended in an Islamabad rooming house in an operation by American authorities working in Pakistan.


PAKISTAN HUNTING GUNMEN IN KILLING
Pakistan's top officials vowed today to do everything possible to track down gunmen who opened fire earlier in the day on a van carrying three Americans to work at the United States Consulate in this port city, killing two of the Americans and wounding the third.
The gunmen, riding in a taxi, vanished into rush-hour traffic after the fusillade, leaving no obvious clues to their motives or identities.


METRO DIGEST
UNION TIED TO JAVITS CENTER IS SEIZED Asserting that the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center is riddled with corruption, the International Brotherhood of Teamsters seized control of the union local that dispenses many jobs at the center, saying it was a patronage mill for mobsters and convicted felons.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  WASHINGTON, BROKE, GETS GIULIANI'S ADVICE In his hometown, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani is wrestling with a budget gap that's still growing despite deep cuts.
But in flat-broke Washington, lawmakers have turned to Mr.
Giuliani for budgetary advice.
B3.


Esterline Technologies Corp.(ESL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Norman Rosten, 81, Playwright And Brooklyn's Poet Laureate
Norman Rosten, a poet, playwright and novelist, died on Tuesday at Long Island College Hospital in Brooklyn.
He was 81.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said his daughter, Patricia.


Sun Goes Down on Courier
Jim Courier's campaign for credibility in 1995, a rejuvenative effort that brought him into this match against Carlos Costa with an enviable 20-2 record, came to a sudden halt tonight in the second round of the Newsweek Champions Cup.
As the desert darkened around him, the ninth-seeded Courier, twice a champion here, found himself dispatched by an underling in the second round for the second consecutive year.
Steady serving, persistent returns and a topspin forehand that proved more damaging than Courier's signature shot, simply because it had better aim, combined to insure Costa, ranked 34th in the world, a 7-6 (8-6), 6-3 victory.


New Question on Medics in Firefighter Death
The chairman of the medical council that regulates ambulance care in New York City said that the volunteer ambulance worker who treated a stricken firefighter last Sunday had apparently violated local regulations concerning advanced life-support care.
The firefighter, Lieut.
Raymond F. Schiebel, died as a result of oxygen deprivation on Tuesday after collapsing at a blaze in Brooklyn.
Fire Department officials have said that the ambulance workers who treated him improperly inserted an oxygen tube into his stomach rather than his lungs, and that the mistake may have contributed to his injuries.


Unraveling Copyright Rules for Cyberspace
Government officials from 11 industrial nations have concluded their first official meeting on copyright issues in cyberspace, with plans to keep looking for agreements on protecting intellectual property in an electronic world that knows no physical borders.
The senior United States representative at the meeting, Bruce A.  Lehman, Assistant Secretary of Commerce and the Commissioner of Patents and Trademarks, called the closed-door three-day meeting that ended here today an exploratory effort.
He said the group would work toward a consensus that the United States hoped could be presented to a broader international copyright organization.


Nets Falter But Finally Win One In Overtime
When their leading scorer and floor leader have the ball stripped from their hands in the final seconds of regulation, two things usually happen: the Nets lose and they grow extremely unhappy.
Fortunately for the Nets, the game went into overtime, and Derrick Coleman and Kenny Anderson had five extra minutes to right everything they had done wrong.


Novo Nordisk A/S(NVO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Yanks Re-think Player Plans
Less than a week after a humbling setback to the Los Angeles Dodgers had the owner George Steinbrenner huddling with his subordinates and ordering them to get some superior players, the Yankees have cooled it.
Rather than shuttle players here from the minor league complex in Tampa, Fla., the Yankees have elected to intensify the workouts for some potential replacement players under the supervision of General Manager Gene Michael, get them ready to play and then wait.
They will not ask their minor leaguers to play in replacement games yet.


Adams Resources &amp; Energy Inc.(AE,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Morocco Should Control Western Sahara
To the Editor:
Re your March 5 news article on complaints of Moroccan interference in United Nations efforts to determine Western Saharan sovereignty:


New Jersey Daily Briefing; New President for St. Peter's
The Rev.
James J. Loughran was named the 21st president of Saint Peter's College yesterday, succeeding the Rev.
Daniel A. Degnan, who is retiring.
Father Loughran, a 55-year-old Jesuit, received bachelor's and master's degrees and a doctorate in philosophy from Fordham University, where he is now interim vice president for academic affairs and interim dean of the faculty of arts and sciences.
His appointment is effective July 1.


A Maverick Pianist Answers Back
After having performed some 600 solo piano improvisations since 1970, Keith Jarrett should be able to do them in his sleep.
But the truth is, he said in a rare interview, speaking by telephone from his home in rural New Jersey, that these concerts have become more taxing than ever.
That is one reason Mr.
Jarrett, who turns 50 this year, is performing only two solo piano concerts in the United States this year, one of which is to take place on Sunday in Avery Fisher Hall at Lincoln Center.
During these extended solo improvisations, Mr.
Jarrett has been known to scold his fans for coughing too much, to launch into long critiques of contemporary music or simply to walk out on a noisy audience.


A New Face For Estee Lauder
The Estee Lauder Companies has hired the actress Elizabeth Hurley to represent its products in worldwide advertising, replacing the model Paulina Porizkova, who has appeared in Lauder campaigns since April 1988.
The terms of the multiyear agreement with Ms.
Hurley, which begins with ads in August for a new Lauder fragrance, were not disclosed.
"Paulina was wonderful and represented us well in the 80's," Robin Burns, president and chief executive of Estee Lauder USA, said yesterday.
"But consumers today are looking for something warmer, more touchable, and Elizabeth represents all that."


Bucs Beat Out the Jets In Bidding for Harper
Around lunch time, Coach Rich Kotite said the Jets were still in the hunt to sign Alvin Harper.
Whatever deal the Jets had cooking was done before dinner.
Harper, the Cowboys' star free-agent wide receiver, reached agreement yesterday with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers on a four-year, $10.6 million contract that included a $3 million signing bonus.


Russian Opposition Leader Opens Old Wounds on Visit to India
On his first visit to the Indian subcontinent, the Russian nationalist leader, Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky, was strongly criticized by Pakistan and Bangladesh today for remarks in which he said that he opposed the "artifical division of any country" and that India should be restored to its pre-independence unity, which would include Pakistan and Bangladesh.
Mr.
Zhirinovsky also denounced the Russian Government and President Boris N. Yeltsin for Moscow's arms reduction agreements with the United States, and said the weapons Russia is destroying should be sent to India instead.


HBO Buys Rights to New Studio's Films
Home Box Office Inc., the pay cable-television service, said yesterday that it had reached a 10-year agreement to buy future films from Dreamworks SKG, the entertainment company owned by David Geffen, Jeffrey Katzenberg and Steven Spielberg.
Home Box Office, a division of Time Warner Inc., valued the contract at between $600 million and $1 billion, depending on how many films Dreamworks delivers and how much income they generate.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Chicago is selling $132.1 million of tax-exempt general obligation bonds through First Chicago Capital Markets Inc.
The bonds are priced to yield a maximum of 6.35 percent for an issue due in 2016.
For short-maturity serial bonds, yields range from 5.00 percent in 1998 to 6.25 percent in 2013.
The bonds are rated triple-A by Moody's Investors Services and the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation. *
Cone Mills Corp., Greensboro, N.C., is selling $100 million of notes due in 2005 priced at 99.831 percent to yield 8.125 percent through J. P. Morgan Securities.
The notes are noncallable and are rated Baa2 by Moody's and BBB by S.&amp; P.


HOUSE PASSES BILL THAT WOULD LIMIT SUITS OF INVESTORS
The House today easily passed a measure that would limit the ability of stockholders and their lawyers to file suits accusing companies or stock brokers of fraud.
The bill, part of a package of Republican-sponsored legislation to overhaul the nation's system of handling civil lawsuits, was approved by a vote of 325 to 99.
The bill was supported by 99 Democrats, one more than the 98 Democrats who opposed it along with the House's one independent.


School Lunch Bill Leaves Out Military Children
When a House committee voted last month to scrap the national school lunch program and let states decide how to use Federal money to feed pupils, it forgot about a large group of needy young diners.
The Republican plan to revamp the 49-year-old program has no provision for the 57,000 children of military families who receive breakfast or lunch at Pentagon-run schools on bases in the United States and abroad.
About 40 percent of the children receive free or reduced price meals, since some service members' income is low enough to allow them to qualify for the program.


Essay; Where's the Fingerspitzengefuhl?
In our last episode, we discussed Bill Clinton's passive Weltanschauung, a "world view" that confines what was once America's diplomatic freedom of action to the slow convoy of multilateral consensus.
Today we seize another long German word: Clinton foreign policy lacks Fingerspitzengefuhl, that combination of sure-footedness on slippery slopes and sensitivity to nuance familiar to mountain goats, safecrackers and statesmen.


An Upbeat Account of Down Times
IN LOVE WITH DAYLIGHT A Memory of Recovery  By Wilfrid Sheed  252 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.
One particular advantage of Wilfrid Sheed's writing, at least for his readers, is that his prose remains incapable of turning gloomy.
Not that Mr.
Sheed didn't have plenty to be gloomy about when writing "In Love With Daylight: A Memory of Recovery."


Dutoit and the Philadelphia Bring Another 'Jeanne d'Arc'
It is probably still safe to describe Honegger's 1935 dramatic oratorio "Jeanne d'Arc au Bucher" ("Joan of Arc at the Stake") as a rarity, even though the Philadelphia Orchestra's performance on Tuesday evening at Carnegie Hall follows a New York Philharmonic account by only 11 months.
Before that the work's last major performance in New York was at a 1984 Boston Symphony concert, and finding a good recording still takes some effort.
There are undoubtedly practical reasons "Jeanne d'Arc" is attempted so rarely.
It requires huge forces: an augmented orchestra that includes an ondes martenot (an early electronic instrument), a choir, a children's choir, singers and actors.
And Paul Claudel's alternately prosaic and mystical French text may also create some resistance.
Unlike George Bernard Shaw, whose "Saint Joan" looks rationally at Joan of Arc's trial, Claudel depicts her adversaries as animals, with the Bishop of Beauvais as a pig.


Legislature Acts to Stop Tax Loss on Bonds
Using a power normally reserved for seizing land, the state tonight enacted a law that would take back a clause in its bond agreements, preventing the potential loss of as much as $1 billion in tax revenue over the next 15 years.
The law, if it survives likely court challenges, would also eliminate the state's liability for claims for $61 million in tax refunds dating to 1992.


A Surging Red Storm Gets Ready To Confront Its Moment of Truth
The consensus of the Big East coaches is that any one of the top eight teams could emerge as the conference tournament champion Sunday and earn the automatic bid to the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.
And it's not just coach-speak either.
Here's proof.
The top four teams in the conference -- Connecticut, Villanova, Syracuse and Georgetown -- all suffered losses in the final week of the regular season.
Providence, seeded sixth, beat Connecticut and Villanova in consecutive games, while St.
John's, No. 8, upset Syracuse and Georgetown.
Even ninth-seeded Pittsburgh has won four of its last six games, adding to the sense of vulnerability the top teams are feeling heading into the tournament, which begins tonight at Madison Square Garden with St.
John's playing Pitt at 7 o'clock and Seton Hall meeting Boston College at 9:30.


Documentary Magazine To Make Debut in April
Robert Coles, a child psychiatrist, Harvard professor, social historian and author of more than 50 books, is a man who, at 65, is still searching for new ways to express the wonders of life.
Next month, Dr.
Coles and his long-time collaborator, the photographer Alex Harris, plan to introduce what they describe as a new kind of documentary magazine that will try to create an enduring record of people from all walks of life.


Illness Renews a Father's Early Lessons
I AM high in an apple tree in the orchard of my childhood.
My father is beneath the tree, sorting stakes for his tomato plants.
I'm about 4 years old.
"I don't think you should climb so high," he suggests.
"You're going to fall."
I don't fear falling. And then I do.


World News Briefs; Clinton to Visit Haiti For Shift of G.I.'s to U.N.
The White House said today that President Clinton would visit Haiti on March 31.
Mr.
Clinton will meet with President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, whom the United States helped to restore to power, and is expected to preside over ceremonies handing over the United States peacekeeping mission to the United Nations.


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Tournaments
Quarterfinal competition in the Hockey East playoffs begins tonight when New Hampshire plays Providence at Boston College's Conte Forum.
The Wildcats, who beat No. 1 Maine last week by 3-2, finished third in the league standing and the Friars were sixth.
In other matches, No. 5 UMass-Lowell is at No. 4 Northeastern tomorrow; No. 9 UMass-Amherst at Maine on Saturday, and No. 7 Merrimack at No. 2 Boston University on Sunday.


Political Budget Gap Is Widening
The nettlesome negotiations over the death penalty, which dragged on for nine weeks even though the combatants never differed on the ultimate goal, have raised serious doubts in the Capitol that a state budget can be enacted by the start of the fiscal year, now only 23 days away.
"If the negotiating process on the death penalty is any indication of what's going to happen with the budget, I would suggest that people start canceling their summer vacation plans," said Senator Thomas W. Libous of Binghamton, a Republican.


Experiment With Success -- A special report.; Guiding Hand to College for Ghetto Youth
Reuben Mills, a brash, 22-year-old youth worker fresh out of college, sat behind his battered desk at Benjamin Franklin High School and nervously considered the typewritten list of 25 students.
They were just names to him then, in the fall of 1989, randomly picked from the incoming class of ninth graders.
All were from the same ghetto where he had been reared by a single mother.
Beyond that, he knew nothing about them except that their lives were in his inexperienced hands for the rest of their high school years.


The Long . . . And Short of It; The Height Of Luxury
TO duck, or not to duck: that is the question.
Whether 'tis nobler to suffer low doorways and short beds -- or perhaps, by design, to replace them with 8-foot doors, 20-foot ceilings and beds 8 feet long.
Is this the stuff basketball players (and other vertical achievers) dream of?
The answer is yes, a towering, sky-bending yes.


Jet's Engine Shuts Down
An American Airlines jet was forced to make an emergency landing in Buffalo yesterday after one of its two engines shut down just after takeoff from La Guardia Airport, airline officials said.
The jet, a McDonnell Douglas Super 80 carrying 86 passengers and five crew members to Chicago, touched down at Buffalo International Airport at about 7:30 P.M. without incident, said Edward Martelle, a spokesman for American Airlines.


The Long . . . And Short of It; All the World In One Room
WHAT pleasure could there possibly be in small living spaces in a town as crowded as New York?
It's not a Zen riddle: meditation for most New Yorkers is thinking about their next apartment, the bigger one.
The only acceptable small space in the city is the legendary small-fortune-a-night midtown hotel room.


4 Central Banks Raise Rates to Restrain the Mark
Rushing to bolster currencies dragged down by the weak United States dollar as well as domestic political problems, the central banks of France, Belgium, Denmark and Portugal raised their interest rates today in the latest round of attempts to stave off a European currency crisis threatened by the growing strength of the German mark.
At the same time, the German central bank and Chancellor Helmut Kohl, aware that an overly strong mark could hurt exports and dampen economic growth, as well as irritate Germany's trading partners, tried to talk down the mark and talk up the dollar and the French franc.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; 600 Apply for Restaurant Jobs
Planet Hollywood restaurants are owned by stars.
Not coincidentally, they attract stars and those who want to bask in their reflected light.
So it was no surprise yesterday when more than 600 people showed up at the Trump Regency Hotel to apply for about 275 jobs that will be available when a Planet Hollywood opens here next month.


Corrections
A brief report in the Real Estate column in Business Day yesterday about the leasing of space by the law firm of Orrick, Herrington &amp; Sutcliffe -- in offices formerly occupied by Bertelsmann A.G. -- misidentified the headquarters city of another firm, which subleased Orrick, Herrington's previous space.
The firm, Baker &amp; Botts, is based in Houston, not Boston.


Account Changes At Pillsbury
A month after the Pillsbury Company acquired Pet Inc., the company has reassigned an account and added an agency to its roster.
Pillsbury, based in Minneapolis, said yesterday that it had reassigned Pet's Old El Paso line of Mexican foods to the Leo Burnett Company in Chicago, a longtime Pillsbury agency that handles accounts including Green Giant vegetables and Pillsbury cake mixes.
Before Pillsbury bought Pet, the Old El Paso account, with billings estimated at $7 million to $10 million, was handled in North America by the St.
Louis office of D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles and elsewhere by DDB Needham Worldwide in New York.


Abbey Healthcare Group Inc.(ABBY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


For MSG, No Rebates From Yankees
Despite the MSG Network's plea for financial relief if replacement Yankees play into the regular season, the team insists that it will not rebate a cent of the cable network's estimated $42 million payment for the TV rights.
By taking the same position with WABC-AM radio, which pays the team $5 million annually, the Yankees will have a $47 million cache for a season when gate, concession, parking and national TV revenues would decline precipitously while replacement players are used.
At the same time, player costs will be down.


Berkley (W.R.) Corp.(BKLY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wrecking Ellis Island
To the Editor:
Re "Ellis Island Footbridge Gives Access to History" (letter, March 2): It is disingenuous for Senator Frank R. Lautenberg to call his proposed $15 million bridge to Ellis Island a "footbridge." The span will be wide enough for trucks and will be 15 city blocks long.
Few visitors will want to walk that far.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; Bill Would Ease Death Votes
A State Assemblyman is drawing up legislation to allow executions in murder cases in which most, but not all, jurors vote for the death penalty.
Stephen A. Mikulak, a Republican from Woodbridge, also wants to make other changes to the state's death penalty statute -- changes that defense lawyers and some capital punishment experts say would make it easier for prosecutors to win a death sentence but would violate constitutional protections.


Baryshnikov And Feld Rejoin Forces
Eliot Feld choreographed a solo for Mikhail Baryshnikov in 1977, the same year that Mr.
Feld established the New Ballet School, which continues to provide thousands of children with tuition-free ballet training.
This link may seen tenuous but it came to mind on Tuesday night when 100 of the school's pupils shared a gala program with a dream pair of role models, Gregory Hines and Mr.
Baryshnikov himself.
The evening at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea) opened a five-week season by Feld Ballets/NY and was a benefit for the school, which is affiliated with Mr.
Feld's troupe.


A Day at the Beach Isn't Always a Day at the Beach


So Many Candidates, So Few Spots
Nine men will enter a hotel conference room in Kansas City this afternoon, surrounded by computer figures and empty brackets for the national collegiate basketball tournament, and Manhattan College's disappointment will officially begin to take shape.
This is the only conclusion to be drawn from a system that rewards mediocrity at the richest and most powerful level of the game over outstanding achievement by schools with lesser voices.
Those nine men will work all the way through to Sunday afternoon to identify the 35 most deserving teams for at-large bids in the 64-team Division I field.
They possess a collective background in the game that provides knowledge and credibility, with a set of procedures that guarantees fairness.


Knicks Show the Celtics They Have What It Takes. Twice.
Playing the Boston Celtics on consecutive nights never used to be this much fun.
In winning their fourth consecutive game, and overwhelming the Celtics in the second half, the Knicks breezed to a 108-100 victory tonight at Boston Garden, an arena that used to give New York nightmares.
Tonight, it merely provided the stage for Act II of a two-night performance that opened with a 115-100 victory over Boston at Madison Square Garden on Tuesday.


Orchard Supply Hardware Stores Corp.(OSHC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Fearing Setback, G.O.P Delays Term-Limit Vote
Trying to avert an embarrassing defeat on one of their major campaign pledges, House Republicans tonight postponed a vote scheduled for next week on a constitutional amendment to limit the terms of members of Congress.
The vote was to have been held on Tuesday, but the Republican leadership put it off until the end of the month.


Vying to Be Grammy Host
In New York and Los Angeles, it has become a sure sign that spring is around the corner: the annual campaign by each city to be named host of the next year's Grammy Awards show.
But this year, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Mayor Richard Riordan of Los Angeles turned up the volume in the debate in a good-natured jousting match broadcast live yesterday on WNBC-TV, Channel 5.


Sports of The Times; Leon's Day In the Sun, At Last
SOON after Leon Day awoke Tuesday morning in St.
Agnes Hospital in Baltimore, where he is being treated for a heart ailment, he was talking to his wife, Geraldine.
"I made it," he said.


Bomb Trial Told of Idea to Kidnap a Judge
A few months after being imprisoned on gun charges, the man accused of killing Rabbi Meir Kahane in 1990 asked his associates to kidnap the judge who tried him and to murder an outspoken Jewish legislator, a Government informer testified yesterday.
The accused man, El Sayyid A. Nosair, also strongly suggested to the informer, Emad Salem, that he had in fact killed Rabbi Kahane, even though he was convicted only of possessing a firearm in the case, Mr.
Salem said on the witness stand.


Bridge
The biggest change in tournament scheduling in the last decade has been the introduction of stratified events, now standard in sectional and regional tournaments.
Instead of dividing into three groups according to master-point standing, the players play in one group but are scored by comparing players with their master-point peers.
A Flight C player with little experience can theoretically rank high among the experts in Flight A, but it hardly ever happens.
It did, however, in the Sectional-in-Clubs tournament a month ago in New York City.
At the Beverly Club at 130 East 57th Street in Manhattan, Jill Lafer and Irene Frary were the Flight C winners.
They were also second in Flight B and fourth in Flight A, a remarkable performance.


TV's Better Half
To The Home Section:
How ironic that in the same week in which The New York Times published a piece on the growing stature of television, and the burgeoning quality of the medium's drama and comedy programs in its culture pages ("In the Eyes of Many, TV, Not the Movies, Is the Higher Calling," Feb. 14), it also carried an article about a newly formed organization sponsoring National TV-Turnoff Week, April 24-30 ("A Week Without TV," Home Section, Feb. 16).
In light of the first article's description of how TV writers and producers are creating important, cutting-edge shows brimming with creativity, character exploration and timely issues, those quoted in the second piece who roundly denounce the medium and blame it for everything from our nation's ills to a host of childhood maladies seem increasingly off base.
Perhaps these critics are unaware of this new body of programming which has had stirring results; or they have not learned how to select worthwhile programs, nor how to teach and instill critical viewing skills which can make TV viewing an active, productive, and positive learning activity.


Teamsters Seize Local on Costs At Javits Center
Asserting that the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in Manhattan is riddled with corruption, the International Brotherhood of Teamsters seized control yesterday of the union local that dispenses many jobs at the center, saying it was a patronage mill for mobsters and convicted felons.
The international union's president, Ron Carey, acted on the recommendations of a government oversight body that found extensive corruption at the center, which has long been the focus of charges that mob influence made conventions there prohibitively expensive.


Democrats Plan to Have 2 State Chairmen
Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver will endorse Judith H. Hope of East Hampton and John T. Sullivan of Oswego to be co-leaders of the state Democratic Committee, Democratic officials said today.
Mr.
Silver, the state's most powerful Democrat, will propose the joint leadership on Thursday as a way to build the party north of New York City, where it has been weakest.


The Arms Bazaar Expands Eastward
The Clinton Administration wants new markets for American-made arms, and is looking for them in all the wrong places.
Instead of trying to limit arms trafficking around the globe, it is now ready to make sales to former Soviet bloc countries.
That is the message of the Administration's disappointing new policy on arms sales.
The policy would permit the sale of sophisticated weapons like F-16 fighter jets and Abrams tanks in 10 markets formerly monopolized by Moscow: the Czech Republic, Poland, Hungary, Slovakia, the Baltic Republics, Albania, and even Bulgaria and Romania.
With their economies in bad shape and no threat from neighboring Russia imminent, the last thing these struggling nations need is expensive new weapons.


A home builder drops its nuts-and-bolts image for a 'trust us' campaign.
THE Kaufman &amp; Broad Home Corporation, the nation's fourth-largest house builder, is trying to build something other than dwellings with an unusual soft-sell campaign.
Rather than simply selling houses, Kaufman &amp; Broad, which is based here, is seeking to enhance its brand image and change consumers' perceptions about the tract homes it builds.
The campaign, which features $3.5 million worth of television commercials, is a novel concept for tract-house builders, who usually eschew expensive schedules of television spots, relying instead on the real estate sections of Sunday newspapers to promote openings of new developments.


What's Eloise Doing on Park Avenue?
IT will be good to see saucy Eloise back in town, even though it won't be at the Plaza Hotel.
Hilary Knight's beloved character from Kay Thompson's popular children's classic will be tripping through the Seventh Regiment Armory, on Park Avenue at 67th Street, tomorrow through Sunday at the annual Works on Paper exposition.
Mr.
Knight's original illustrations for the Eloise books, first published by Simon &amp; Schuster in 1955 and now in its 33d printing, were lost.
Outtakes of his early illustrations are rare and valuable.
Several from Mr.
Knight's own collection will be for sale at the Giraffics Gallery booth, from $700 to $6,000, along with original illustrations for many of his 70other books.


Correcting Cocaine Injustice
Federal drug law treats crack cocaine as if it were 100 times more dangerous than the powdered variety.
Crack is cheaper and more widely available in the big cities than powder, but chemically they are nearly identical.
Congress created the disparity in punishment in a panic a decade ago and only Congress still has any faith in it.
The United States Sentencing Commission now reports that the disparity cannot be justified.
Like many who have studied the question, the commission believes that in some broad sense crack is more dangerous than powder because of the way it is consumed and marketed and because of its association with violence and youth gangs.
How much more dangerous the commission is not yet sure, but certainly not 100 times.


Man Dies After Struggle With Police in Subway
A Brooklyn man died in police custody yesterday after an altercation with at least seven officers in which pepper spray was used, the police said.
The man, Michael Wayne Clarke, 31, was subdued on the platform of a Flatbush subway station, handcuffed and taken to a nearby ambulance, an automatic response to a call involving someone who appears violent and emotionally disturbed, the police said.
They said Mr.
Clarke had a heart attack in the ambulance while on his way to Kings County Hospital Center in Brooklyn, where he later died.


Kitt's Victory Overturned And New Race Is Scheduled
The International Ski Federation yesterday overturned the decision of a jury in Aspen, Colo., and wiped out the results of last weekend's storm-plagued Aspen downhill, won by A J KITT.
It ordered the race to be rerun Saturday, but in Norway.


CHRONICLE
MARY MAPLES DUNN, who is stepping down as the president of Smith College, has been named the director of Radcliffe College's Arthur and Elizabeth Schlesinger Library on the History of Women in America.
She will replace Patricia Miller King, who served in the position from 1973 until her death in May.
Mrs.
Dunn, 63, a historian, has long been associated with women's colleges.
She was dean of Bryn Mawr when she was chosen for the presidency of Smith 10 years ago.


Berlitz Intl.(BTZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Senate Democrats Show Their Plan to Balance Budget
Senate Democrats today introduced their own balanced-budget proposal, a statute they said would achieve the goals of the defeated balanced-budget amendment but more quickly and without counting Social Security trust funds against the deficit.
The Democrats presented their plan only a week after the balanced-budget amendment went down to defeat in the Senate for the lack of one vote.
Since then, Republicans have tried to turn Democratic opposition to it into a campaign issue.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  DOLLAR'S SLIDE HALTED  The dollar's slide was halted after Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, called the dollar's tumble, "unwelcome and troublesome" and hinted he might raise American interest rates.
A1


Records as Long As 7-Year-Old Arm; Thieves Are Too Young for Jail
The burglars who stole milk money from the Sisters of Charity defy standard police description.
"Angelic-looking cutie-pies," is the favored label from veteran police officers, who were unaccustomed to handcuffing identical twin brothers on burglary charges.


Economic Scene; Managing the airwaves for productivity and profits.
THE policy honchos who fought long and hard to auction the airwaves rather than give them away are preening these days, and for good reason.
Bids for licenses to transmit voice, data and video over the air are now more than $5 billion -- money most welcome in an era when ketchup again seems destined to be reclassified as a vegetable.
But the vast sums being bet on this modest chunk of real estate in the sky suggest a darker side to this story as well.
For one thing, it is evidence of the awesome value of the spectrum that could have been sold or rented in the past to everyone from broadcasters to cellular phone companies to ham radio operators.


Fay's Inc.(FAY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


No Headline
"I remember one time I had a D, and he was like, 'You got to bring that up, man.' Then it was a C, and he said, 'You got to bring that up.' He was always pushing me to be my best." -- JOE HODGES, on Reuben Mills, his counselor in a youth program.  [ B12:5. ]


Man Dies in Custody
A Brooklyn man died in police custody after an altercation with at least seven officers in which he was sprayed with pepper spray while they tried to subdue him at a subway station, the police said.
Hancuffed and taken to a nearby ambulance, the man suffered a heart attack.
Article, page B3.


Wave of Killing in Sicily Raises Fear of Mafia Terror Campaign
Alarmed by nine gangland-style slayings in Sicily in the last 10 days, Italian prosecutors have warned of a new "terrorist campaign" by the Mafia aimed in part at silencing informers who have been vital to the Government's offensive against organized crime.
On Monday night in the Sicilian capital, Palermo, gunmen killed a nephew of Tommaso Buscetta, a former mafioso who has cooperated with state prosecutors since 1984.
His testimony was instrumental in convicting Salvatore (Toto) Riina, the reputed boss of all bosses, and the indictment of former Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti on charges of acting as the Mafia's protector in Rome.


Thunder Gulch Is Favored
Ten colts, including a three-horse entry trained by Nick Zito, were entered today in the $500,000 Florida Derby with a chance to go on to the Kentucky Derby.
But the early line still favored Thunder Gulch, the traveler from the West Coast barn of D. Wayne Lukas, who won the Fountain of Youth Stakes three weeks ago.
"I don't believe in running entries," Zito said.
"We're not trying to imitate Team Lukas from the 1980's.  But I think all three of these horses have shots."


Opulence redux: Fendi does fur.


A Milestone for Larmer in Rangers' Night of Stars
After Rangers beat the Devils in a 6-4 extravaganza last night, Mark Messier looked across the locker room and smiled when he saw a knot of reporters around Steve Larmer, asking Larmer about his milestone.
With the winning goal in the 59th minute and three assists, Larmer passed the 1,000-point plateau for his career.
But he was only one of several notable performers on this rousing night at Madison Square Garden.


Life Re Corp.(LRE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Met Life Had $160 Million Profit in '94
The Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, the country's second-largest life insurance concern, said yesterday that it earned $160 million in 1994, down from $265 million in 1993, because of a decline in sales to individuals and the extra expenses caused by lawsuits and fines resulting from the improper sales practices of some agents.
Under different accounting rules that conform more closely to those used by shareholder-owned companies, and which Met Life managers use internally, the company earned $998 million before taxes, up 6.5 percent from $937 million in 1993.


Months After the Tar, A Feather in His Cap
RICHARD L. MURPHY -- the former Youth Services Commissioner who was tarred by the Giuliani administration a year ago, but then cleared this week of the worst charges -- sounds remarkably philosophical about the whole thing.
"I realize the power of government when it wants to abuse it," Mr.
Murphy said over the phone.
"I think this has been an abuse of power. And even though I'm sort of a minor player in the whole sea of things, one felt a lot of pain. A reputation was on the line."
That it was.
It was almost a year ago that Mr.
Murphy found himself linked to harsh accusations of wrongdoing: financial impropriety, breaking and entering, political manipulation.
To people who knew Mr.
Murphy, director of the Rheedlen Centers for Children and Families until the Dinkins administration, the charges were laughable.
He was known for his dedication to children and creativity in making government work for them.
Mr.
Murphy himself -- Commissioner from 1990 until early 1994 -- was more stunned than upset.


Man Hurt by Police Settles for $16.6 Million
A Brooklyn man who was left a virtual quadriplegic after a violent encounter with police officers will get $16.6 million in a settlement reached with New York City, lawyers from both sides said yesterday.
It is the largest pretrial settlement by the city in a personal injury lawsuit, said lawyers for the man, Carlton Brown, and for the city.


Classic Architecture to Buy or Ponder
THE desire for classical architecture is finding its way into print, plaster and even plates.
Pat Farrell, a New York artist, offers "Architettura" majolica dinner plates carved with a fluted-column motif (far left), and plates with the acanthus leaf of a Corinthian capital.
The dishwasher-safe plates are $12 to $17 each and can be ordered from the Grazia factory in Deruta, Italy.
Information: (39) 759710201; fax: (39) 75972018.
The Irish Georgian Society, which saves historic houses, is selling bookends ($630 each) and a plaster model of Sir William Chambers's 1758 Marino Casino (left, $1,980), Ireland's first neoclassical building, to raise money.
Available at Scully &amp; Scully, 504 Park Avenue, at 59th Street; (212) 755-2590.


Lofty Ideas
DON FREEMAN took his 1,000-square-foot loft, right, in SoHo five years ago because it had a skylight and "looked Parisian, like an artist's atelier."
Mr.
Freeman, a photographer who hand-colors his pictures, needed a living space that could also function as a place to exhibit his work for clients.
To maximize the loft's versatility, he painted the double-height room white from ceiling to floor.


Journal; The Jew World Order
In a fiery speech delivered in Chicago on Feb. 26, Louis Farrakhan attacked "international bankers" for promoting this century's wars so that their "central banks" could collect interest off loans to the combatants.
The bankers he singled out for ignominy were Jewish -- the Rothschilds in Europe, and, in America, their alleged agent Paul Warburg.
Does any of this sound familiar?
It will to students of the anti-Semitic ravings of Depression-era demagogues.
But, far more disturbing, some of Mr.
Farrakhan's points might also hit home with the members of the Christian Coalition, who have scooped up more than a half-million copies of their leader Pat Robertson's tome "The New World Order" since its publication in 1991.


Hachette Buys Family Life From Wenner
Family Life, the magazine started by Jann Wenner in 1993 for what he described as "baby boomers who once raised hell and are now raising kids," has been acquired by Hachette Filipacchi Magazines from Wenner Media.
Mr.
Wenner, who has invested about $10 million in Family Life, said it would take at least three more years for the magazine to become profitable.
Last summer he said he had decided to seek a partner to share costs, but after Hachette expressed interest in buying the magazine outright, he agreed.


Miller to Test Ads for 2 Brands
The Miller Brewing Company is changing advertising and marketing for its two top beer brands.
Miller said yesterday that it would begin a test of new ads and packaging for its No. 2 brand, Miller Genuine Draft, in Albany and in Alabama, Arkansas, Louisiana and Mississippi.
The test includes a campaign by Bates U.S.A. in New York carrying the theme "Miller Genuine Draft. It just comes easy."


Calendar: Jewelry Show And Times Square Talk
Jewelry on View  Cooper-Hewitt National Design Museum, 2 East 91st Street; (212) 860-6862.
An exhibition of precious and costume jewelry dating from ancient Egypt and of decorative objects like snuff boxes and cameos starts Tuesday and continues through Sept. 3.
The show will examine jewelry design as it relates to style, function, ornament and symbolism.


Two More for Panthers
SAM MILLS, a four-time Pro Bowl linebacker with the New Orleans Saints, decided yesterday to accept a contract offer from the Carolina Panthers, The Charlotte Observer reported.
Mills's agent, BRETT SENIOR, told the newspaper that Mills had received identical two-year, $2.8 million offers from the Panthers and Saints.
PETE METZELAARS, a 6-foot-7-inch tight end who had 302 career receptions with the Buffalo Bills, signed yesterday with the Panthers.
The Observer said he got a three-year deal worth $2.4 million. (AP)


Mayor Booed on West Side
Discontent with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's budget policies and the prospect of diminished city services dominated a "town hall" meeting in Manhattan last night at which the Mayor struggled to explain his fiscal strategy, but was incessantly booed.
The meeting, at the Park West High School on West 50th Street, was the most raucous of the sessions, in which the Mayor visits different neighborhoods to answer questions from residents.


Merce Cunningham, Magician, With His Tricks
The Merce Cunningham Dance Company opened its two-week season at City Center (131 West 55th Street, Manhattan) on Tuesday night with a program that offered a satisfying overview of the choreography of its modern-dance master.
But it was Mr.
Cunningham himself who stole the show, with as little apparent effort as a well-practiced magician at work with hats and rabbits.
The evening opened on a quiet note with "Beach Birds," a pretty, limpid 1991 dance for 11 birdlike creatures moving to a lulling score by John Cage.
Then it was on to more familiar -- and invigorating -- Cunningham territory as the curtain rose on the bright hurly-burly of a panel painted by Robert Rauschenberg and as strange sounds began to percolate in the orchestra pit.


F.D.A. Head Calls Smoking a Pediatric Disease
Dr.
David A. Kessler, the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, said today that smoking was fundamentally a pediatric disease because most addiction to tobacco begins among teen-agers, and outlined steps to combat the problem.
In a speech at the Columbia University School of Law in New York, Dr.
Kessler outlined a program that is likely to be a model for announcements this year from the Food and Drug Administration on whether and how it should regulate tobacco.


Postcards From the Lap
PEOPLE who take business trips with laptop computers can stop thinking of the machines as office equipment and start using them as a way to keep in touch with friends and family while on the road.
Almost any laptop with a modem can link up with an on-line service, like Compuserve, Prodigy or America Online, and all three have E-mail message service.


Now, the Tough Issue: Palestinian Refugees
For the first time, Arab and Israeli officials have met to discuss one of the region's most emotion-laden issues: the fate of hundreds of thousands of Palestinian refugees living outside Israel and its occupied territories.
That the sides were far apart became instantly clear this week when the foreign ministers of Israel, Jordan and Egypt and a leader of the Palestine Liberation Organization sat around a large square table in Amman, Jordan.


Frame by Small Frame, Perseverance Pays for Bowler
The royal blue bowling ball spun straight for the gutter, reached the edge of the yellow wood, hung for a moment half on the lip, half off, and then, as if having checked a map, changed course on a dime, wheeled left and crashed headlong into the 10 white pins, scattering them like a flock of geese.
The hand that threw the ball that struck the pins with such magic and force belonged to the world's greatest bowler, Norm Duke, one of the smallest members of the Professional Bowlers Association tour at 5 feet 5 inches and 123 pounds.
"I never understood why people wonder about my size," he said.
"To me, I'm normal."


Big Publicity Effort Seen In Tobacco Class Action
Lawyers for the plaintiffs in a class-action suit against seven American tobacco companies asked a Federal judge in New Orleans yesterday to approve the largest notification effort ever initiated in an American court.
Through paid newspaper and magazine advertising and use of the Internet and "900" numbers, the lawyers said they hoped to spend from $800,000 to $1 million to reach 103 million Americans.
Minutes after the announcement late yesterday afternoon, the tobacco companies filed a request in Federal District Court in New Orleans that would permit them to appeal a ruling by the judge, Okla B. Jones 2d.
Last month, Judge Jones cleared the way for the first nationwide class action against the tobacco industry on behalf of four plaintiffs who, their lawyers hope, will represent all Americans who are or once were addicted to cigarettes.


E.D.S. Plans Data Accord With Lucas
The Electronic Data Systems Corporation said today that it had reached a preliminary agreement to manage the information processing operations of Lucas Industries P.L.C., a large British automotive and aerospace systems company, under a proposed contract valued at $800 million over 10 years.
In addition, Electronic Data Systems, known as E.D.S., would acquire two units of Lucas that provide consulting services and software to manufacturers.
The financial terms of the acquisition are being negotiated.
The units would add about $800 million in revenues to E.D.S. over 10 years, E.D.S. said.


4 Minutes A Week: A Liberal On NBC
Think of it as a sort of exchange program.
Even as conservatives are infiltrating public broadcasting, Bill Moyers, the pre-eminent PBS liberal, has become the editorial voice or star preacher of the "NBC Nightly News." Mr.
Moyers, who in the past has shuttled between network news and PBS, began his new job last month, and it is already evident that he is bringing a more distinctive presence to it than his predecessor, John Chancellor, whose point of view was similar but whose persona was less personal, more institutional.
Mr.
Moyers' two minutes twice a week are billed as "Perspectives," a fancy word for opinions.
In the latter half of the Tuesday and Thursday programs, Tom Brokaw segues into Mr.
Moyers, who leans on a big desk or table in what pretends to be nothing more intimate than a studio set.
The messages so far have been more populist than partisan.
For example, Mr.
Moyers criticized the line-item veto proposal as permitting the President to cut out small pork but not big pork; fat-cat political contributors, he noted, are spared.
And he criticized the bailout of Mexico as benefiting mainly investors, again those rich contributors.


Flat-Broke Washington Hears Giuliani's Advice
In his hometown, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani is wrestling with a budget gap that is still growing despite deep cuts.
But in flat-broke Washington, lawmakers have turned to Mr.
Giuliani for budgetary advice, which he doled out yesterday at a meeting of the House subcommittee on the District of Columbia.


Paying Children to Read Isn't Cheap, or Right
To the Editor:
I am appalled at a recent idea by House Speaker Newt Gingrich.
His "Learning by Earning" program provides $2 to students for reading a book and answering questions on it.


Court Affirms Public School For Hasidim
Three times since 1991, state courts ruled that a public school district populated entirely by Hasidic children in Orange County, N.Y., violated the United States Constitution's separation of church and state.
And three times, the Cuomo administration supported the appeals.
Then last June, when the United States Supreme Court also ruled that the law creating the district in the village of Kiryas Joel was unconstitutional, the Cuomo administration drafted new legislation within days of the ruling to address the Supreme Court's concerns.


Artful One-Room Living
CLAUDE MONET could not only paint, garden and cook, but also decorate.
The banana-yellow dining room at Giverny, based on his favorite ice cream, with its blue and purple wall accents -- they're Hokusai prints -- is real show-house material.
But we're not talking just pretty.
Monet understood the issues of livability, too.
Nowhere is this understanding clearer than in his studios -- Monet had three at Giverny -- one-room interiors, designed well for both work and relaxation.
Monet had a checklist, right down to the furniture: big armchairs that were slightly beat up so that one wouldn't hesitate to slouch in them, a long upholstered chaise or sofa to stretch out on, piles of pillows that could be quickly landscaped into a gentle hill for napping -- and what the decorating magazines would call lots of personal touches.
As conducive to body as to mind, Monet's studios are the quintessence of one-room living.


Tokyo Journal; Stoically, Japan Looks Back on the Flames of War
Surrounded by an inferno, overwhelmed by the smoke and the roar of collapsing buildings, Tatsuo Hamano, 17, decided that his only hope lay in running not away from the fire but into it.
So he dashed into the flames, dumping his backpack when it began to blaze, and half a century later he is alive to tell the tale.
"I was young and it was so chaotic, I didn't understand what was happening," Mr.
Hamano said.


Dance Magazine Award
Susan Marshall, Carla Maxwell and the Nicholas Brothers have been named the recipients of the Dance Magazine Award for 1995.
Presented for significant contributions to dance since 1954, the awards will honor Ms.
Marshall for her modern-dance choreography, Ms.
Maxwell for her dancing, teaching and directorship of the Jose Limon Dance Company and Fayard and Harold Nicholas for their tap-dancing in a number of film classics.
The awards are to be presented on April 17 in a private ceremony at the Asia Society in Manhattan.


Toddler Found Wandering Alone in Central Park
Two teen-agers found a frightened toddler wandering alone through Central Park early Wednesday and notified the police.
Shortly before dawn, the toddler's parents, who had been sleeping in the park, awoke to find their 18-month-old boy missing.
Panicked, they went to the Central Park Precinct station house, where they were arrested and charged with endangering the health and welfare of a child, a misdemeanor.


New York Subway: Romans Did It Better
To the Editor:
"Cutting Mass Transit, Carefully" (editorial, March 2) praises the New York subway and bus system as "a 24-hour public transit service unmatched anywhere else" and "one of the glories of the city." One struggles to imagine who the other contestants were.


13 Stadium Renovation Plans Later, Yankees Are Still Dissatisfied
Several weeks after city officials presented their latest plan to renovate Yankee Stadium, a top team official has suggested that it may be impossible to rebuild the historic stadium in a way that would satisfy the team's principal owner, George M. Steinbrenner 3d.
The city's current plan, a $600 million proposal, would provide new highway ramps and garages to make it easier for drivers to reach and park at the stadium and would include entertainment attractions, retail shops and restaurants.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; Mail Goes Through, Finally
With the usual batch of mail at Willard Nicholson's motorcycle-accessories business yesterday there was a special delivery.
A very special delivery.
The mailman left a clear plastic envelope, which held five open and empty smaller envelopes.
Four envelopes had been postmarked in 1976 and one in 1978.
There were also parts of two other envelopes, postmarked in 1976.
The envelopes, all clearly addressed, were from the business's buyers and suppliers, Mr.
Nicholson said.
Had they once contained checks, bills, opportunities?
The answers have gone the way of the 2-cent postcard.


Scientist Wins Religion Prize Of $1 Million
Paul Davies, a mathematical physicist who has written and lectured on connections between science and theology, has won a $1 million prize for his contributions to religious thought and inquiry.
Dr.
Davies, a professor of natural philosophy at the University of Adelaide in Australia, was named yesterday as winner of the 1995 Templeton Prize for Progress in Religion.
He is the author of more than 20 books, among them "The Mind of God" (Simon &amp; Schuster, 1992), which discusses ideas about the origin of the universe, order in nature and the nature of human consciousness.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; Officer Sees License, and More
It may turn out to be more expensive than the typical speeding ticket.
Errol Lee of Levittown, Pa., was pulled over on the New Jersey Turnpike on Tuesday night near Exit 7 in Burlington County for doing 75 miles an hour in a 55-m.p.h zone.
When the trooper asked to see his driver's license, Mr.
Lee reached into his jacket pocket and pulled out his wallet.
He also pulled out the edge of a suspicious-looking plastic bag, the state police said.
And when he tried to stuff the bag quickly back into his pocket, he really aroused the trooper's suspicions.


Redskins Sign Stephens
The Washington Redskins moved to shore up their struggling defense by signing Seattle Seahawks middle linebacker ROD STEPHENS to a three-year free-agent contract.


CHRONICLE
Move over waifs, here comes zaftig.
Mannequins sculptured to look like KATE MOSS, the model who epitomizes waifishness, have been replaced by mannequins of DIANNE BRILL, the voluptuous New York partygoer (measurements 40-24-39), in the windows of Miss Selfridge, the trendy London boutique that is attached to Selfridge's department store.
According to a report yesterday in The London Evening Standard, Ms.
Brill's likeness was duplicated in mannequins five years ago but was banished into storage when Ms.
Moss's skin-and-bones look became fashionable.


Song Concert Postponed
The New York Festival of Song has postponed its concert tonight at Weill Recital Hall because Bernarda Fink, a mezzo-soprano, is ill.
The performance is to be rescheduled later in the season.
Subscribers and single-ticket buyers who purchased their tickets through Carnegie Charge will automatically receive credit on their accounts.
Those who bought tickets at the box office may return them for refund, either in person or by mail to Carnegie Hall Box Office, 154 West 57th Street, New York, N.Y. 10019, Attention: NYFOS Refund.
All requests must be made by May 19.
Subscribers who bought tickets from the New York Festival of Song office may call for refunds: (212) 662-9909.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
A Time to Prune
Q.
Is this the time to prune my rose-of-Sharon, which has become rather messy-looking? -- Elliot Draper, Fort Lee, N.J.


Amoco Cites Faulty Valve In Explosion
The apparent failure of a valve and a gush of gasoline into the open air touched off the thunderous explosion and fire on Tuesday at an Amoco fuel storage depot in Carteret, N.J., a company spokesman said yesterday.
The rushing gasoline created a volatile cloud of spray and vapor that burst into roaring flames, threatening other tanks loaded with millions of gallons of fuel and forcing officials to evacuate a nearby shopping center and parochial school and to shut Exit 12 on the New Jersey Turnpike about a mile west of the terminal.


U.N. Parley Puts Focus On Africa
There was little disagreement today among rich and poor countries over the special and urgent needs of Africa south of the Sahara, as delegates at the World Summit on Social Development debated, sometimes bitterly, a plan for fighting worldwide poverty.
There is also a sense that Africa, more than other continents, may be the first to come out of this conference with hopes of concrete action.


R. E. Marker, Expert on Hormones, Dies at 92
Russell Earl Marker, an organic chemist, co-founder of the billion-dollar Syntex Corporation and explorer of the basic chemistry underlying the commercial production of steroidal hormones and birth-control pills, died on Friday at the Phoebe Barker Health Center in Wernersville, Pa.
A resident of State College, Pa., he was 92.
The cause was complications from a broken hip, his family said.


U.N. Cuts Off Aid to Punish Croatian Serbs Who Are Harassing a Bosnian Enclave
United Nations relief officials today took the unusual step of cutting off all emergency food supplies to rebel Serbs in Croatia to press them to open up new access routes to the beleaguered Bihac pocket in neighboring Bosnia.
The development came as the United Nations circulated details of negotiations aimed at preventing a withdrawal of United Nations forces from Croatia.
President Franjo Tudjman has ordered that they begin leaving when their mandate expires on March 31, raising fears of renewed widespread conflict in the Balkans.


Iran Is 'Encouraging' Afghan Refugees to Go
To Nazar Arab, his native Afghanistan is a remote country of incessant war, tribal hostility, starvation and endless land mines.
Talking about his parents, from whom he has not heard in seven years, makes his shoulders sag.
"It was fate that I should escape to Iran and marry and have a new family," said Mr.
Arab, a 30-year-old laborer who came here 12 years ago from the war-ravaged town of Maimana in Afghanistan and subsequently married an Iranian woman.


Word-Painting in Songs By Phrasing and Breath
There were moments during the recital featuring Julianne Baird at Merkin Concert Hall on Tuesday night when it was difficult to separate the artistry of the singer from the artistry of the song.
At the opening of Purcell's "Sweeter than roses," Ms.
Baird's voice swelled on the word "sweeter," seeming to open with ripeness.
The word "cooler" became just as suggestive: the deep vowel seemed borne on her breath like an exotic breeze, almost sounding like an aspirant.
Ms.
Baird is a veteran at such interpretation; she is one of the most recorded and distinguished sopranos of the early-music movement, and was assisted here with supple accompaniments by musicians from Concert Royal led by James Richman at the harpsichord (including the gambist Lisa Terry and the violinists Judson Griffin and Lisa Rautenberg).
Throughout the recital, Ms.
Baird painted words by subtly controlling phrasing and breath, bringing the score to life just as Purcell illuminated the text with his tones.
The texts, surprisingly, were not provided to the audience, but just as surprisingly, they were not often needed, so limpid were Purcell's settings and Ms.
Baird's elaborations.


An Adviser Says Rifkin Is Weighing Guilty Pleas in 2 Deaths
Joel Rifkin is considering pleading guilty to two counts of murder in Suffolk County and abandoning an insanity defense based on his suffering as an adopted child, a consultant for the defense said today.
The shift was discussed during a meeting in the Suffolk County jail on Monday involving Mr.
Rifkin and his newly retained lawyer, Kathleen K. Trum, said the defense consultant, Dr.
David Kirschner.


Psychiatry Doesn't Help Mental Health Cause
To the Editor:
Robert Klitzman's "That Way Madness Lies" (Op-Ed, March 4) represents much of what's wrong with the modern psychiatric approach.
To illustrate why psychiatric financing should not be cut back, Dr.
Klitzman recounts what can be called a "violent mania" story: a patient who hears voices ordering him to kill.
Dr.
Klitzman in effect inflames the public's fear of the "mentally ill" in order to gain more public support for psychiatry.
This is a cheap dramatic technique with a devastating long-term impact.
It increases the public's fear of people labeled mentally ill, reinforces the humiliating stigma and discourages any genuine empathy toward them.


Elbit Ltd.(ELBTF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


RESULTS PLUS
FIGURE SKATING  Americans Gain  With Todd Eldredge first and Scott Davis third, Americans moved into position to win two medals after yesterday's short program in the men's competition at the world figure skating championships in Birmingham, England.
And with Canada's defending champion, Elvis Stojko, in second place, there is a good chance the Europeans will be shut out for the first time since 1959 at Colorado Springs, when David Jenkins of the United States won his third title in a row and led a North American sweep.


NeoStar Retail Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets  The dollar's slide was halted after Alan Greenspan, Federal Reserve chairman, called the tumble, "unwelcome and troublesome" and hinted he might raise interest rates.  [ Page A1. ] What's so bad about a falling dollar?
Economic Analysis.  [ D1. ]


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.94
5.93
3.22
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.75
5.76
3.51
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.94
5.98
3.75
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.33
7.42
6.35
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.54
7.62
6.83
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.42
8.50
7.66
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.45
6.47
5.97
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Translating a Solution
The damage of a falling dollar to the economy may seem negligible.
The danger is that the standard remedy -- higher interest rates -- could do real damage to an economy that is showing signs of a slowdown.
Economic analysis, page D1.


USAir Plan Will Cut 5% Of Capacity
USAir said yesterday that it would cut 5 percent of its capacity, joining other airlines that in recent years have overturned a long-held industry belief that bigger is better.
The airline, based in Arlington, Va., said that by July it would drop 240 unprofitable flights, including many on the direct routes that bypass its big hub airports.
However, USAir said it would also add 70 flights, including new flights to Frankfurt from Philadelphia and Boston, and to the West Coast from Charlotte, N.C.


COMPANY NEWS
AMERITECH CORP., Chicago, awarded a four-year contract to Northern Telecom Toronto, with an estimated value of up to $200 million for a system-wide upgrade of Ameritech's DMS-100 digital switching systems.
GREAT AMERICAN BACKRUB STORE INC., New York, completed a public offering of 1.25 million common shares, to establish a national chain of company owned and franchised stores.


INSIDE
Land Revolt in the West
The Justice Department sued a Nevada county where 93 percent of the land is Federally owned for enacting land use policies designed to flout Federal authority.
Page A12.
Albany's Next Big Battle
The death-penalty fight, which dragged on even though all sides agreed on the basics, raises the question of how a budget accord will be reached.
News analysis, page B6.
Too Young for Jail
Officers call them "angelic-looking," but 7-year-old Jersey City twins are accused of burglary, theft and attempted arson.
Page B1.


Canadian Utilities reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


County's Move on Land Use Draws Suit by Washington
In an escalation of a political war over control of public land in the West, the Justice Department filed a lawsuit yesterday seeking to halt a county in Nevada from seizing control of Federal lands and intimidating Federal officials there.
The lawsuit, which was filed against Nye County in Federal District Court in Las Vegas, is the first direct effort by the Clinton Administration to block the spread in the West of ordinances and other local land-use policies that rural counties say give them the authority to gain control of Federal land.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; College Gets Foreclosure Notice
Upsala College received notice yesterday that the Essex County Improvement Authority, seeking to recover a $4.2 million loan, had begun foreclosure proceedings on the five college buildings that secure it.
So far, Upsala has missed two payments on the loan, which it took out in March 1993.
The next payment of $247,581 is due March 30.
Last week, Upsala announced that it would close May 31, when its accreditation runs out, unless a benefactor rescues it from $12.5 million in debts.


Corrections
Pictures in The Living Section yesterday with a review of Gianni Versace's fall fashion show in Milan, and in a cross reference on the front of the section, carried incorrect credits.
The photographs were by Corina Lecca for The New York Times, not by The Associated Press.


Merger Talks Lift Shares of Health Systems
The stock of Health Systems International Inc. surged 12 percent yesterday as analysts and people close to the company confirmed that the health maintenance organization was holding merger talks with the rival Wellpoint Health Networks Inc.
A merger between the two companies, both based in Woodland Hills, Calif., would create the nation's second-largest health maintenance organization, with nearly $5 billion in revenue and four million customers concentrated in California.
Only Kaiser Permanente, a privately held H.M.O. based in Oakland, Calif., would be larger, with 6.6 million members.


Stars and Gay Men's Chorus
Frederica von Stade, Jerry Hadley and Roberta Peters are among the singers who will join the New York City Gay Men's Chorus for its annual spring concert at 8 P.M. on March 26 at Carnegie Hall.
The concert, "Operantics: Divas, Dueling Tenors and Other Grand Musical Diversions," is to feature scenes and arias from "The Tales of Hoffmann," "Candide," "Porgy and Bess" and other operas, and will include men's choruses from "The Flying Dutchman," "Tannhauser" and "Faust." The host for the evening is the playwright Terrence McNally; Gary Miller conducts.
Tickets are $10 to $40, and a portion of the proceeds will be donated to the chorus's AIDS Outreach Fund.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Learning the Hard Way How to Monitor Traders
A trader at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company barks an order for government securities into the phone.
A nearby clerk instantly taps a keyboard, recording the order in the firm's huge computer system.
And with that, Merrill's first line of defense against rogue traders springs into action.
The recent collapse of Barings P.L.C. following a $1 billion loss by one trader has focused new attention on the industry's workaday controls intended to oversee traders.
While Barings executives have pointed fingers at Nicholas W. Leeson, the 28-year-old trader whose losses brought the bank down, the experience of other firms makes clear that so-called rogues need accomplices -- senior managers with eyes so fixed on the bottom line that foolish risk-taking is tacitly encouraged.


RU-486 Side Effects Are Still Unknown
To the Editor:
RU-486, the French abortion drug, may become the Dalkon shield of the 90's.
But "Representative Bliley's Double Talk" (editorial, March 3) ignores the medical research of the citizens' petition that raises serious questions about the effect this drug may have on women's bodies.


Wheelchair Offers No Respite for Gang Member
It was only when Lamar Lewis emerged from the hospital, paralyzed from a gang shooting in Watts, that he realized just how harsh life on the streets can be.
Even in his wheelchair he had to prove his toughness every day; he was still a target for rival gangs and for the police, still under pressure from his gang brothers to join in drive-by shootings to earn his place among them.


Business Has a Long-Term Commitment to Improving Schools
To the Editor:
As chairman of the Committee for Economic Development panel that produced the recent report "Putting Learning First," I was dismayed by the misrepresentation of the panel's positions on education by Alfie Kohn in "Corporations Have Little to Teach Schools" (letter, Feb. 27).


Corrections
An obituary on Tuesday about James B. McMillan, a Federal judge who initiated crosstown school busing in Charlotte, N.C., in the 1970's, misstated the last name of his surviving daughter, Marjorie.
It is Rodell, not Rodale.


Handmade Serenity
SANDRA SAKATA'S San Francisco studio, left, affords panoramic views of Chinatown and the blue ribbon of San Francisco Bay.
But it is the curated tableaux of vintage African fabrics, Yoruba sculptures and Noguchi lanterns that draw the eye.
Ms.
Sakata is the owner of the Obiko boutiques in San Francisco and at Bergdorf Goodman in New York.
Her studio is a mere 14 by 16 feet with a dining alcove, but she fills it with beautiful objects that show "the hand and spirit of their makers," she said, adding: "In a small room, each piece is nearby. You can touch the textiles, admire the weaving up close."


North Korea Threatens to Jettison Pact in Dispute Over Reactors
North Korea threatened today to jettison its four-month-old agreement with the United States and resume its nuclear program if Washington continues to insist that South Korea build the two new nuclear reactors that have been promised to the North.
North Korea made its most explicit threat thus far to walk away from the agreement on the very day that diplomats from 23 nations gathered in New York to discuss what contributions their countries would make toward financing the $4 billion in light-water reactors promised to the North.


Hartford Schools Enter New World
Kindergarten pupils at the Clark School stood before a door with a red ribbon across it, surrounded by photographers and television crews recording the scene.
"Say the magic words," their principal, Dwight Fleming, told them.
"Computer lab!" the children shouted.
The ribbon was cut, and the door opened to the first computer laboratory installed in a Hartford school by Education Alternatives Inc., the company hired last November to help the city manage its school system.


Steinbrenner Gets a Seat On Owners' Ruling Unit
Always thwarted in his efforts to get intimately close to the seat of baseball power, George Steinbrenner was elevated to baseball's ruling executive council today.
Joining him as new members were Fred Wilpon of the Mets and Claude Brochu of the Montreal Expos.
Steinbrenner, the Yankees' principal owner, and the only owner who has served suspensions under two different commissioners, was elected by American League owners to fill the spot of Jackie Autry of the California Angels, whose term has expired.
Wilpon and Brochu replace Fred Kuhlmann of the St.
Louis Cardinals, whose term expired, and Tom Werner, who recently sold the San Diego Padres.


Review/Fashion; Opulence Is Back: Fendi Lets the Fur Flow
Luxury lives.
At least for some.
Both the Fendi and Genny collections shown today are intended for women who aren't afraid to wear their wealth on their backs.
Maybe it isn't the 1960's or 70's but the 80's that are coming back.
It was snowing -- a rare sight in Milan during fashion week -- as cars pulled up to the house where Fendi held its show this afternoon.
How fitting for a collection that brought furs out of the closet with no apologies.
Last winter, Fendi's furs were hidden as linings or mixed with fake fur to fool onlookers.


Dollar's Four-Day Plunge Halts; Greenspan Hints at Higher Rates
The four-day plunge of the dollar in international currency markets halted today after the chairman of the Federal Reserve, Alan Greenspan, hinted that he might raise American interest rates, which would tend to encourage people to buy dollars.
Mr.
Greenspan did not say the Fed would raise interest rates simply to defend the dollar.
But he suggested that if the decline of the dollar added to inflation here through higher prices for imports, the Fed might respond by raising borrowing costs, slowing the economy and braking inflation.


Dusted and Muscled Up: A New William Morris
Talent agencies in Hollywood develop their own personalities.
The most powerful -- Creative Artists Agency -- seems chilly, remote, almost scary in its intensity.
Its main competitor, International Creative Management, resembles a none-too-happy family, with everyone in it locked in separate rooms and barely speaking to one another.
A third agency, United Talent, is in such a state of crisis that it recently hired a therapist to work out the hostile, aggressive and passive-aggressive tendencies of its agents.
Then there's the William Morris Agency, which is struggling to remake its personality.
From a group of rigid and aloof elderly men (women were not promoted to senior positions) the agency is seeking to turn itself into the brashest kid on the block.
It hasn't succeeded yet, but its rivals are both impressed and intrigued.


Developments in Washington
TERM LIMITS: Trying to avert an embarrassing defeat on a major campaign pledge, House Republicans postponed a vote on a Constitutional amendment to limit the terms of members of Congress.
The vote was scheduled for Tuesday, but the Republican leadership put it off until the end of the month.
THE LEGAL SYSTEM: The House approved a measure intended to limit the ability of stockholders to file suits accusing companies or stock brokers of fraud.
Republican sponsors contend the bill would reduce abusive and frivolous suits; most Democrats say its main effect will be to inhibit citizens from seeking redress from corporations.


Accounts
*
Daasault Falcon Jet Corp., Paramus, N.J., to Emmerling Post Inc., New York, to handle advertising for its Falcon line of business aircraft, previously at Burkhardt &amp; Christy, New York.
The billings were estimated at more than $2 million. *
Editor &amp; Publisher, New York, to New York Creatives, New York, as the first agency to handle advertising for Ampersand, the trade publication's new on-line service.
The billings were estimated at $1.2 million to $1.5 million.


A Glimpse of Master Strategy
DURING their summer odyssey, the most successful tournament for the Hirschman family was the regional championships in Lincoln, Neb., in August, where Dan Hirschman won 28 of the 300 master points needed to achieve life master rank.
On the diagramed deal he sat West, and his father, Martin Hirschman, sat East.
The opening bid of one spade was a surprise to North, who correctly passed, the normal action when the opponents have bid your long, strong suit.
East's response of one no-trump was forcing in the modern style and usually indicates a moderate hand lacking a spade fit.


Marching to Montgomery Again


No Penalty for Senator Who Broke Ranks
Senate Republicans today chose not to sanction Senator Mark O. Hatfield of Oregon because of his vote against the balanced-budget amendment.
But in a caucus clearly split on generational lines, several members expressed their frustration with the inability of top leaders to enforce party discipline in the Senate and with the pace of progress on the Republican agenda, particularly in contrast to the House, participants said.


Madcap Tale of a Family With Greed in Its Blood
THE WINSHAW LEGACY OR WHAT A CARVE UP!
By Jonathan Coe
501 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $24.
Halfway through this savagely funny first novel, Jonathan Coe's hapless narrator sits down and writes a book review in which he calls for more novels that "show an understanding of the ideological hijack which has taken place so recently in this country, which can see its consequences in human terms and show that the appropriate response lies not merely in sorrow and anger but in mad, incredulous laughter."


Bills Sign Paup
The Buffalo Bills continued to bolster their defense yesterday, signing the free-agent linebacker Bryce Paup to a three-year contract worth $7.6 million.
Paup, who played five years for the Green Bay Packers, made the Pro Bowl last season.(AP)


Trade Center To Modernize Viewing Deck
The observation deck of the World Trade Center, one of the city's most popular tourist spots, is about to receive a $5.8 million makeover chockablock with interactive gadgetry, suggesting that in these days of virtual reality, reality itself -- even from atop 107 floors -- may not be enough.
Visitors who once merely gawked at the skyline will soon be able to watch a wide-screen movie that simulates a helicopter ride through the city, use multilingual computers to learn about local lore, view a nightly outdoor laser show and partake of other high-tech exhibits, all intended to improve upon what had been the deck's sole asset: its height.


Chinese Ceramics: The Good Stuff
For most people, Chinese ceramics means Ming and Ching: dainty white vases with blue hermits meditating in soggy blue forests, hulking green pots with flowers crawling over them, or little teacups with red and blue dragons chasing in circles.
Even the museum-quality examples of this stuff are uncomfortably reminiscent of hotel rooms and Chinese restaurants.
The ceramics in "New Finds, Old Treasures: Early Chinese Ceramics From the Meiyintang Collection," at the Asia Society, do not look like hotel-room furniture.
For one thing, the most recent objects in the show date from the 13th century and were made for the imperial court.
In contrast, the Ming and Ching styles date from the 14th century to early this century and were made largely for export.
The Chinese kept the good stuff for themselves. (Didn't you always suspect as much?) For another, the exhibition begins in the fifth millennium B.C., long before the emergence of anything recognizable as "Chinese" culture.
The pottery of the Yangshao era (5000 to 1500 B.C.) is decorated with geometric motifs similar to those on African and archaic Greek pottery: another reminder that abstraction is a fundamental tendency of the human mind, not an aberration of 20th-century art.


U.N. Aid Workers Haven't Left Somalia
To the Editor:
A Reuters dispatch you published March 6 (some editions) notes that Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid "urged donors and relief workers to return to help rebuild Somalia." The United Nations, as General Aidid knows, is still in Somalia.
Reports appearing in The Times and elsewhere have missed this essential part of the Somalia story.


For W. R. Grace, a Question of Disclosure
Last week's abrupt resignation of W. R. Grace &amp; Company's president and chief executive may have resulted from a dispute over whether the company had made full disclosure to shareholders of questionable financial transactions involving J. Peter Grace Jr., the company's chairman, and his son.
The chemical and health care company had said J. P. Bolduc was resigning on March 2 over "stylistic and philosophic" differences with Grace's leadership.
And the company has hewn to that line, despite demands for information from irate shareholders and analysts.


2 Food Companies Set Agency Changes
Two marketers of pantry staples, Heinz U.S.A. and the Domino Sugar Corporation, said yesterday that they would make changes in their agency rosters.
Heinz U.S.A., a division of the H. J. Heinz Company in Pittsburgh, selected Ketchum Advertising to handle advertising for Heinz ketchup, Heinz 57 sauce and Heinz Home Style gravies, three of many Heinz brands that by mutual agreement were resigned in November by the Leo Burnett Company in Chicago.
Though billings were not disclosed, trade publications have estimated them at $8 million.


Ewing Relishes Jordan's Return
If Michael Jordan is coming back to the National Basketball Association, Patrick Ewing welcomes him.
"When Michael left, I told him that I wanted him to stay," Ewing said in an interview on TBS at halftime of last night's San Antonio-Cleveland game.
"I wanted him to be there when we won a championship. Years from now I didn't want people saying, 'Well you guys won a championship, but he wasn't there.' "


Not Guilty Plea in Kickbacks


Hardaway Season Over
Golden State Warriors guard TIM HARDAWAY will have surgery next week to repair ligament damage in his left wrist, the team said yesterday.
Hardaway will be in uniform when the Warriors visit the Los Angeles Clippers tonight, but will be lost for the rest of the season. (AP)


Archaeologist of Himself Displays 78 Years of Life
EVERY year about now, people start asking Herman Abrams if he is going to join the party and get rid of stuff.
Well, spring cleaning, shmeaning.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-12  MEXICO TAKES TOUGH STEPS  Mexican Government adopted a tough new economic stabilization plan, which includes new taxes and sharp increases in prices of gasoline and electricity.
A1  FOR GORBACHEV, DAYS OF ANGST  Ten years after he took power, the last Communist leader of the Soviet Union floats across the political landscape like a ghost, a spirit unable to make his presence felt.
A1


Payroll Tax is Jersey City Issue
Mayor Bret Schundler, a Republican, is seeking a payroll tax to avert a big property-tax increase.
State Senator Nicholas J. Sacco, a Democrat who is also Mayor of North Bergen, has introduced a bill to block the tax.
"If the current administration doesn't understand that a payroll tax would be bad for business, then the state has to step in," Mr.
Sacco said.


G.M. to Sponsor Summer Olympics
The General Motors Corporation and the Atlanta Committee for the Olympics Games said yesterday that G. M. would become the domestic car and truck sponsor of the 1996 Summer Olympics and the United States Olympic team.
Though terms of the agreement were not disclosed, G. M.'s category of sponsorship, entitling the company to use the Olympics logos, costs an estimated $10 million.
G.
M. sought the sponsorship because it will be "the 100th anniversary of the modern Olympics and the 100th anniversary of the automobile in America," said Philip Guarascio, vice president and general manager for marketing and advertising of the company's North American Operations.
The Chrysler Corporation was a sponsor of the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona, Spain.


CHRONICLE
DIANA CHAPMAN WALSH, the president of Wellesley College, is to pay a call today on an alumna of the school, MARJORY STONEMAN DOUGLAS, Class of 1912, at her home in Coconut Grove, Fla.
And Dr.
Walsh will come away with a special gift to take back to the college in Wellesley, Mass.: the Presidential Medal of Freedom that Mrs.
Douglas received at the White House in 1993.
Mrs.
Douglas, an environmental activist, has spent much of her 104 years working for the preservation of the Everglades and is the author of the 1947 book, "The Everglades: River of Grass," which is still in print.


Palermo Journal; After the Mafia, a Sort of Children's Crusade
Except for perhaps a brief glimpse of the Villa Malfitano in the movie "The Godfather, Part III," most of the children at the Francesco Vivona school had never even seen the 19th-century estate with cool green lawns and shady trees that lies in the heart of their crowded, dusty neighborhood.
Now the villa is in a sense their baby, adopted through a program that is matching up some 80 Palermo schools with cultural monuments that have long been abandoned, neglected, or hidden from public view.
Modeled after a highly successful effort in Naples, the monument-adoption project has struck an even richer chord here in Palermo, where it is part of the city's effort to repair the moral and physical damage caused by decades spent under the thumb of a secretive and vengeful Mafia.


Review/Fashion; Prada, D &amp; G, Ferretti: Three Shades of Cool
If "The Graduate" had been a movie set in Milan a year ago, Dustin Hoffman would not have been advised to go into plastics.
The insider tip for the future would have been nylon.
Since Miuccia Prada began making chic clothes out of the black nylon she uses for the backpacks that have replaced Chanel handbags for women who care about such things, black nylon has crept onto almost every runway.
So, like any designer with an eye on the future, Ms.
Prada used almost none of it this season.
Where will her imitators go next?
Ms.
Prada's show was her most ambitious yet, capturing at once the swooning sweethearts of Sigma Chi and the cool, clean Courreges girls.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.94
5.91
3.22
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.73
5.75
3.48
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.90
5.94
3.77
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.26
7.33
6.49
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.51
7.54
6.95
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.39
8.42
7.77
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.44
6.45
6.01
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Chock Full O'Nuts Corp.(CHF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Delivering the Anti-Drug Message


Costly Ruling For Borland Is Reversed
A Federal appeals court panel granted a last-minute stay of execution to the financially pressed Borland International Inc. late yesterday, overturning a lower court's copyright-infringement ruling that might have required Borland to pay $100 million or more in damages to the Lotus Development Corporation.
Court documents filed last month had indicated that Borland expected to have only about $47 million in cash by June.
And some analysts had predicted that Borland might have to be sold or file for bankruptcy if it were forced to pay damages to Lotus.


A Cinderella Makes Over Her Life
Australian film makers have a way of celebrating their ugly ducklings in exuberantly high style.
The latest evidence of that is "Muriel's Wedding," P. J. Hogan's gleeful, gaudy tribute to one ungainly misfit and her determination.
To the camera's eye, Muriel (Toni Collette) may be plain, but in her own mind she's a spiritual sister to Abba, the 1970's Swedish bubble-gum group whose greatest-hits album you may be tempted to buy before "Muriel's Wedding" is over.
That urge should pass, but the film's sunny effervescence will linger.
Some may wonder why Abba also turns up in "The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert," and how triumphant-misfit stories like these (another is "Strictly Ballroom") manage to be so intensely campy whether their characters are straight or gay.
When Muriel and a girlfriend don white satin jump suits and blond wigs to lip-sync "Dancing Queen" (the song Muriel equates with life's highest pinnacles), it takes work to remember that neither of them is actually in drag.


3 in Congress Assail G.O.P. Cuts
Three Democratic Congressmen from northern New Jersey yesterday denounced Republican efforts to cut spending for social programs.
"These cuts are deliberately not tough on Republicans' own constituents -- they're tough on the poor," Representative Robert Menendez of Union City said.
Representatives Robert Torricelli of Englewood and Donald Payne of Newark echoed his remarks, saying families in their districts would be severely hurt.


The Catskills, on the Ropes, Rally for an Indian Casino
Pat Croissant invested $1 million in Scalawags restaurant in 1987.
With fewer customers each month, she says she'll lose everything unless the economy of the Catskills picks up soon.
So when the Oneida Indian Nation last week proposed building a casino on the grounds of the Monticello Raceway here, about 90 miles northwest of New York City, she thought her troubles might be over.


Probation for Art Photographer
In a case that raised questions about the hazy line between art and child pornography, a Superior Court judge has placed a father who is also an art student in a special probation program.
Ejlat Feurer's troubles started when he took photos of his nude 6-year-old daughter for a photography class in February 1994.
A photo-processing lab called the police.


Restaurants
Let's cut right to the chase: The new food at Luma is delicious.
And then to the question: Will people be willing to pay for it?


U.S. Presses North Korea to Accept Reactors Made by South
American diplomats sought today to turn up the pressure on North Korea to accept nuclear reactors made by its long-time enemy, South Korea, by insisting that the North was reneging on an understanding that the South would build the reactors.
North Korea threatened on Wednesday to scrap its four-month-old agreement with the United States if Washington tried to force it to accept South Korean reactors.


Riser Foods Inc.(RSR,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 14


Bolek Greczynski, 44, Art Therapist at Creedmoor
Bolek Greczynski, who was known for his work with patients as artist-in-residence at the Creedmoor Psychiatric Center in Queens, died on Saturday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.
Mr.
Greczynski, who lived in Manhattan, was 44.
The cause of death was non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, said a friend, Dr.
Janos Marton, a psychologist at Creedmoor.


Talks in Denmark Redefine 'Foreign' Aid in Post-Cold-War Era
A new definition of foreign aid for the post-cold-war world came into clearer focus today as delegates to the first World Summit for Social Development completed the final conference document, which is to be signed by world leaders this weekend.
In fact, under the new terms, aid is no longer "foreign." Rather, it is a reallocation of money and other resources in both traditional donor countries and the developing world.


Art in Review
'From Haiti'
Leica Gallery  670 Broadway (at Bond Street)  East Village  Through April 5
With all its troubles, Haiti has attracted more than its share of photojournalists.
This show features work by two of the more interesting among them, Maggie Steber and Alex Webb.


Jordan Keeping the Basketball World in Suspense
If Michael Jordan is about to rejoin the Chicago Bulls, he wasn't saying so yesterday.
He also wasn't denying it.
Jordan did not say anything after working out with the Bulls for the third straight day at the team's practice facility in Deerfield, Ill.
He left it to his former coach, Phil Jackson, and former teammates to explain what was going on to a large news media contingent.


For State Assembly: Francisco Diaz Jr.
Next Tuesday's special election to fill the New York State Assembly seat left vacant by the death of Angelo Del Toro offers voters in this Manhattan district a chance to make a break with the self-serving Del Toro political machine.
Of the four candidates, Francisco Diaz Jr. is most promising, and we endorse him.
Mr.
Diaz, the district manager of Community Board 11, has a practical grasp of the difficult issues confronting this largely poor district, which covers most of East Harlem and small swaths of the Upper West and Upper East Sides.
A hard worker, Mr.
Diaz has a proven commitment to helping his community, and a track record of getting things done.


INSIDE
Abortion Clinic v. Landlord
Though he supports abortion rights, a Long Island landlord says he wants to evict an abortion clinic because violent protests could endanger his other tenants.
Page B1.
Jordan May Rejoin Bulls
Michael Jordan, who left basketball 17 months ago and switched to baseball, has been practicing with the Chicago Bulls amid reports that he'll return to them.
Page B9.
Edward L. Bernays Dies
The man known as the "father of public relations" for his legendary techniques in molding public opinion was 103 years old.
Page B7.


Airports to Halt Errant Planes With Foam Blocks
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey said yesterday that it would install foam blocks at the end of some runways at Kennedy, La Guardia and Newark airports, as a kind of flypaper for airplanes that roll too far.
The decision, which will make the Port Authority's airports the first in the world to use such a system, comes almost a year after a plane ran off a La Guardia runway.
In that accident, the pilot of a Continental Airlines MD-80 botched a takeoff, tried too late to abort and left his plane with the landing gear atop the seawall and the nose resting in the mud of Flushing Bay at low tide.
None of the 110 passengers on board were injured in the accident itself, but 29 passengers and the co-pilot were hurt in the evacuation.


Power Cutoffs to Ease in Freezes
People who are behind on their gas or electric bills may have less to worry about in the next wave of cold weather.
The Public Service Electric and Gas Company has promised that when temperatures are expected to be 32 or below in the next 24 hours, it will not disconnect electricity or gas for customers delinquent in their payments.


Home Video
'Federal Hill': black and white, or color? It could be the viewer's choice.
In Hollywood this week, the great "Federal Hill" video coloring brouhaha bounced along on a fresh round of claims and complaints.


Art in Review
Richard Misrach
Curt Marcus Gallery  578 Broadway (at Prince Street)  SoHo  Through March 18
A political edge underlies the lyrical beauty of Richard Misrach's large color photographs.
Mr.
Misrach is among a group of landscape photographers who use seductive images of the sort exemplified by Ansel Adams's grandiose works to convey messages of environmental concern.


The Minutemen Enjoy Another Shining Hour
They were considered vulnerable this time.
No longer unbeatable in their raucous home, no longer perfect against their rivals, the Temple Owls, Massachusetts was playing for more than an Atlantic 10 Conference championship.
The Minutemen were working to achieve stability and build confidence at the most important time of their season.
Tonight, they accomplished all of that.
The Minutemen defeated Temple, 63-44, to win the Atlantic 10 tournament championship game for the fourth straight year.
With a studied self-control, designed to direct their emotions toward the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament next week, the UMass seniors left behind a record of success that will be impossible for any future Atlantic 10 group to top.


McGovern Gets Comfort Of Home and a Lead
There aren't many places on the PGA Tour where a golfer from New Jersey can feel right at home, where the prevalent local accent is heavily laden with traces of Hackensack and Bergen County, and where fans of the Giants and Jets are as numerous as those of the local team.
But Weston Hills Country Club is most definitely one of them.
So it was fitting today that Jim McGovern, born in Teaneck and raised in Oradell, where he lives now, strolled around the grounds here with one of the biggest galleries and shot the lowest number in the first round of the Honda Classic.


Seizing on a Relative Peace, the Queen Visits Northern Ireland


If It's Tournament Time, Then It's Time for Duke
Atlantic Coast Conference
GREENSBORO, N.C., March 9 -- This was less a return to glory than a successful struggle to subdue a reeling opponent.
But any victory is a welcome relief for a Duke squad one step removed from ending its season with the most losses in the school's 90-year basketball history.


Arafat and Peres Break Impasse in Talks
After months of standing still, Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization injected new life into their peace talks today, setting a July 1 target date for an agreement on expanding Palestinian self-rule.
As part of this new spirit, Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. chairman, promised to crack down on the Islamic radicals who have carried out attacks against Israelis, and Foreign Minister Shimon Peres of Israel announced several measures intended to make life easier for Palestinians.
They include loosening border restrictions that have kept tens of thousands of West Bank and Gaza Strip Arabs from sorely needed jobs in Israel.


Corrections
A report in the Daily Briefing column in New Jersey copies yesterday misidentified the location of a Planet Hollywood nightclub that is to open in April.
It is Caesars Atlantic City Hotel Casino, not the Trump Regency Hotel.


Camp Green and No Pay Proves Too Much for 4
They have lost five straight.
They have run more miles than they can count.
And so far, they haven't been paid a dime.
Apparently, some replacement Mets aren't going to take it anymore.


Diner's Journal
An Onomatopoeic Swish
Swish a paper-thin piece of beef through a pot of bubbling broth and this is the sound you will hear: shabu-shabu.
These days that sound can be heard with increasing frequency on West 55th Street as patrons of a new restaurant called Shabu-Shabu East play with their food.
Shabu-shabu is one of the most appealing Japanese culinary traditions, a sort of Asian fondue with a nonsense name that would translate as something like swish-swish.
Each seat in this pristine restaurant is equipped with its own gleaming cooking unit and each diner becomes his own chef.


Delinquent Brothers Find Solace in the Sea
Every so often in "Son of the Shark," Agnes Merlet's close-up portrait of two very young juvenile delinquents in the north of France, the film pauses to reassert its central visual metaphor of fish swimming underwater.
In the imagination of Martin Vanderhoes (Ludovic Vandendaele), the older of two brothers who compulsively commit petty crimes, aquatic life is synonymous with deliverance from a world in which he and his brother, Simon (Erick Da Silva), have no place.
When Martin isn't stealing or vandalizing, he repeats a kind of mantra to himself in which he claims to be "the son of a female shark." Someday, he tells himself, he and Simon will disappear into the bottom of the sea, where they will live happily ever after surrounded by dancing fish.


Clinton to Permit Fund-Raising In the U.S. by Top I.R.A. Figure
Brushing aside strong objections from the British Government, President Clinton has decided to permit Gerry Adams, the political leader of the Irish Republican Army, to make his first money-raising tour of the United States, the White House said today.
Mr.
Clinton has also invited Mr.
Adams to attend a St.
Patrick's Day reception at the White House that will be the first encounter between an American President and Mr.
Adams, the leader of Sinn Fein, the I.R.A.'s political wing.


Car Searches Perpetuate the Drug-War Myth; A Nation of Suspects
To the Editor:
Your March 5 news article concerning searches of automobiles for drugs on I-95 displays two of the worst aspects of the war on drugs.


Man Sets Fire to Himself
A man died yesterday after he set himself on fire in the offices of the International Red Cross in Manhattan, where he had previously protested about human rights violations in Poland, the police said.
The man, who was not identified by the police, had visited the office at 633 Third Avenue several times to make similar complaints, the authorities said.
Yesterday, they said, he came in about 1:30 P.M., shouting that he was going to be deported back to Poland, and threatening to blow up the office.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Mexico adopted a tough new economic plan that suggests a grim near-term future: recession, job loss and personal hardship as unavoidable in recovering from the financial crisis that has severely reduced the peso's value.
Among other things, gasoline prices will jump 35 percent, and the value-added tax is to rise to 15 percent.  [ Page A1. ]


3 in Congress Assail G.O.P. Cuts
Three Democratic Congressmen from northern New Jersey yesterday denounced Republican efforts to cut spending for social programs.
"These cuts are deliberately not tough on Republicans' own constituents -- they're tough on the poor," Representative Robert Menendez of Union City said.
Representatives Robert Torricelli of Englewood and Donald Payne of Newark echoed his remarks, saying families in their districts would be severely hurt.


Dayton Hudson Corp.(DH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Suit Seeks TV Movie Money Under the 'Son of Sam' Law
In one of the first lawsuits filed under New York's revised "Son of Sam" law, Attorney General Dennis C. Vacco asked a court today to force Time Warner to pay $55,000 to the estate of a murder victim whose killing was portrayed in a made-for-television movie.
The law, which was first enacted in 1977 and then rewritten in 1992 after being struck down by the United States Supreme Court, allows crime victims to stake a claim to profits generated as a result of the crimes.
It allows victims, for instance, to file lawsuits seeking compensation from criminals who sell the rights to their stories to publishers and film producers.


Under the Spell of a Majestic Old Valley
IN the brittle light of late winter, the Brandywine Valley, stretching from southeastern Pennsylvania into northern Delaware, emerges in all its muted glory.
From either side of narrow country roads, hay-colored fields rise and fall to the horizon.
Naked tree branches appear pressed against a mottled gray sky, interrupted by an occasional grist mill or puff of chimney smoke.
This is the time of year when the Brandywine's enchantments don't hit you over the head but rather seep into your soul with their desolate beauty.
It is the season most often depicted in a half-century of painting by Andrew Wyeth, who is Brandywine born and bred and, at 77, still an active resident and artist.
"I prefer winter and fall, when you feel the bone structure in the landscape -- the loneliness of it," he said years ago.
"Something waits beneath it. The whole story doesn't show."


CHRONICLE
The beauty salon business in New York may be competitive, but when disaster strikes, the people who cut and color band together.
Take the case of Eva of New York, the salon in the New York Palace Hotel owned by three sisters: EVA RUBACH, ARI TAMAS and ZSUZSI MEZEY.
The owners, their staff and their clients -- some of whom were getting their legs waxed -- had to leave the salon last Wednesday during a fire at the hotel and have not been permitted back.


Is She Loved For Her Money? Well, of Course!
BROADWAY'S heritage is being well served at the Cort Theater where "The Heiress," the Lincoln Center Theater's handsome revival of the 1947 hit, opened last night.
If you would like to see a first-rate production of the kind of comparatively small, well-made play that Broadway once trafficked in, you won't want to miss it.
In fact, most well-made plays of the 1930's and 40's really weren't or, if they were, they were well made from such familiar ingredients that audiences were ahead of them from start to finish.
"The Heiress" is something else.


Hymn to the Life Force And a Pair of Romps
Buffy Miller is energy made visible in "Chi," the new solo by Eliot Feld that had its premiere on Wednesday night at the Joyce Theater.
Ms.
Miller joined Feld Ballets/NY in 1986, and since then Mr.
Feld has created three other solo works for her.
"Chi" unites her dancing with music by one of Mr.
Feld's favorite contemporary composers, Steve Reich.
A score by Mr.
Reich also accompanied Mr.
Feld's "Tongue and Groove," the new solo for Mikhail Baryshnikov offered at the company's opening-night gala on Tuesday.


Probation for Art Photographer
In a case that raised questions about the hazy line between art and child pornography, a Superior Court judge has placed a father who is also an art student in a special probation program.
Ejlat Feurer's troubles started when he took photos of his nude 6-year-old daughter for a photography class in February 1994.
A photo-processing lab called the police.


No Headline
"I don't need anybody's pity! I am not one of those who feels at a loss." MIKHAIL S. GORBACHEV.  [ A10:2. ]


Payroll Tax is Jersey City Issue
Mayor Bret Schundler, a Republican, is seeking a payroll tax to avert a big property-tax increase.
State Senator Nicholas J. Sacco, a Democrat who is also Mayor of North Bergen, has introduced a bill to block the tax.
"If the current administration doesn't understand that a payroll tax would be bad for business, then the state has to step in," Mr.
Sacco said.


House Votes to Help Medical Profession in Court
After intense lobbying, pharmaceutical companies and doctors succeeded today in being included in a sweeping measure taken up by the House that would for the first time set limits in all of the nation's courts on damages awarded in civil lawsuits.
The House is set to vote on Friday on the complete measure, the last bill in a three-part Republican package intended to sharply reduce the number of lawsuits that go to trial.
Like the two previous measures, which were easily passed by the Republican-controlled House, the bill debated today is expected to win approval, though the prospects in the Senate are far less clear.


Not Guilty Plea in Kickbacks


A $250,000 Prize
Officials of Brut by Faberge announced that five events in a new Brut-sponsored international match-racing circuit would offer an annual prize of $250,000, the largest single cash award in sailing history.
Faberge said a sailor must win three of five Brut events to win the award.
PETER GILMOUR of Australia, first in world match-race rankings, is one of several sailors named to a special Brut team.
The Knickerbocker Cup, a match-racing series in Port Washington, L.I., qualifies as one of two United States sites on the circuit.
It will become the Brut Cup of New York.


Metro-North Worker Dies
A track worker for the Metro-North Commuter Railroad was struck and killed by a train yesterday while doing repair work in a Bronx station, a railroad official said.
The incident, at 5:52 P.M. at the Woodlawn station, caused rush-hour delays that affected as many as 40,000 commuters.


World's Fair Reflected Late-30's America
To the editor:
"The End of Dignity" (Op-Ed March 5), criticizing plans to make the American Museum of Natural History "snazzier," proclaims a loss of dignity in museums.
But this evokes an era in American culture that never existed.
There is strong evidence that the public in the late 1930's, like today's generation, preferred bells and whistles to uplifting lectures, and promoters exploited this as they do today.


Historical Reflections


Shawmut and Fleet Agree Merger Won't Cost Jobs
Under intense pressure from Gov.
John G. Rowland, the state's two largest banks announced today that they had revised their merger plans to guarantee that Connecticut would not lose jobs.
At a news conference, Mr.
Rowland and the two top executives of Fleet Financial Group and Shawmut National Corporation said that the newly created bank would bring new jobs to Connecticut to replace any lost because of the merger.


Celtics Deny Report About Lewis
Donna Harris-Lewis drove from her home in Dedham, Mass., where she and her two children live, to the Boston Celtics' offices this afternoon, 19 months after she buried her husband.
They will raise Reggie Lewis's No. 35 to the rafters of the Boston Garden on March 22, yet neither his family nor the franchise has been able to lay to rest the circumstances surrounding his death from heart failure on July 27, 1993.


Landlord Cites Fear of Violence in Bid to Oust Abortion Clinic
Ronald J. Morey says that on the issue of abortion, he supports a woman's right to choose.
Still, the Long Island landlord said today, he wants to evict an abortion clinic with eight years left on its lease because shootings and other violent protests threaten the safety of his other tenants.
"Abortion is not the issue here," Mr.
Morey said after a hearing in State Supreme Court today on his effort to evict the clinic, Long Island Gynecological Services, from his building in Garden City.
"I'm very sympathetic to the clinic and I think it is regrettable that we have to seek eviction. But the fact of the matter is I have an obligation to the safety of every tenant in the building, and that's really the issue here."


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan art shows: PAUL ROTTERDAM, Denise Cade Gallery, 1045 Madison Avenue, at 80th Street (through tomorrow).
Spare canvases, which at first appear to be abstractions, but the rectangle descending from the top of the picture proves to be a window, and the faint points of light glowing within it are leaves on the boughs of a tree (Pepe Karmel).


Orange County Begins Pain of Cutbacks
Three months after becoming the largest government entity ever to declare bankruptcy, Orange County has begun this week to feel the pain of austerity as officials outlined a program of layoffs, deep cuts in services and a sell-off of county assets.
Laying out the real-world meaning of $1.7 billion in losses from risky investments, William J. Popejoy, the county's newly appointed chief executive officer, has been confronting the Board of Supervisors in a series of meetings with a bleak agenda that taps virtually every possible revenue source except taxes.


Rams Move Opposed
Commissioner PAUL TAGLIABUE plans to recommend that the National Football League not approve the move of the Rams from Los Angeles to St.
Louis, The Long Beach (Calif.) Press Telegram reported yesterday.
The newspaper, citing league and team sources, said Tagliabue stressesthree factors in his decision, which is to come Monday, the first official day of league meetings in Phoenix.
The factors are: management's contributions to the Rams' decline, a lack of good-faith negotiations with Orange County leaders and concerns over the Raiders' status in Los Angeles. (AP)


U.S. Seeking 3 Gunmen In Karachi
The United States Ambassador to Pakistan offered a $2 million reward today for information leading to the arrest of the gunmen who leaped from a stolen taxi on a busy Karachi highway on Tuesday and killed two Americans on their way to work at the consulate.
The announcement by the ambassador, John C. Monjo, came as Pakistani police squads fanned out across this sprawling port city seeking clues to the killers' identities.
The Pakistani investigators are to be joined this week by agents from the Federal Bureau of Investigation.


The Spoken Word
GEORGE PLIMPTON, 92d St.
Y, at Lexington Avenue.
The writer, whose new book, "The X Factor," is based on interviews with outstanding achievers, will speak on "The Quest for Excellence." Sunday at 8 P.M.
Admission: $16.
Information: (212) 996-1100.
FIRESIDE READING AND WRITING, Wave Hill, Independence Avenue at West 249th Street, Riverdale, the Bronx.
William H. Banks, Wave Hill's writer in residence, will lead "Meditations on Nature," dramatic readings about humans in nature.
Sunday at 1:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (718) 549-3200.


2 Prisoners Are Shot In Rikers Island Jail
Two prisoners were shot last night with a homemade gun inside a jail on Rikers Island, correction officials said.
One prisoner, Adrian Hernandez, 22, of Manhattan, was hit in the back of the leg and the other, Andrew Jones, 24, of the Bronx, was hit in the stomach by what investigators believe was a single small-caliber bullet.


Car Searches Perpetuate the Drug-War Myth
To the Editor:
I was disturbed to see, in your March 5 news article about police stopping cars along Interstate 95 to search for illegal drugs, that you spoke of stopped drivers being "asked" by police officers for permission to search their cars.
You said that without permission or probable cause, officers may not search.


In the Capital Yesterday
LEGAL SYSTEM OVERHAUL -- As the House moved toward passage of a measure that would for the first time set limits on damages awarded in all civil lawsuits in state and Federal courts, groups representing doctors and pharmaceutical companies succeeded in winning amendments to include their members in the bill's benefits.
The House is set to vote today on the last of three bills that are part of a Republican-sponsored package intended to slash the number of lawsuits that go to trial.
Like the two previous measures easily passed by the Republican-controlled House, the bill is expected to win approval.


New Team at Morrison Knudsen
The Morrison Knudsen Corporation has selected Robert A. Tinstman, a 20-year veteran of the company, to succeed William J. Agee, the chief executive who resigned under fire a month ago.
Mr.
Tinstman, an engineer by training who has run the company's mining group since 1989, has been acting chief operating officer since Feb. 10, when Mr.
Agee's resignation was announced by the company's board.
The resignation ended a six-year tenure in which Mr.
Agee's lavish life style and aggressive accounting practices had steadily undermined his credibility with the company's creditors and employees.


Is Fat Your Fate?
Every year Americans spend $40 billion on books, diets, gadgets, pills and powders that promise to help them lose weight.
Many complain that it is hard going, that the pounds that were gone by Tuesday have returned (with an extra) by Sunday.
Skeptics may suspect them of sneaking chocolates.
The skeptics should hang their heads.
According to a study by researchers at Rockefeller University, the body has a mind of its own -- and it is bent on getting back to its pre-diet weight.
The Rockefeller group recruited 41 people, all of whom were required to live at the university's clinical center while their diet and activities were carefully controlled and rigidly monitored.
Of the total, 18 were obese and the 23 others were of normal weight.
Both groups burned calories more slowly than normal after they had lost weight and faster than normal when they had gained it.
Always their bodies, by adjusting their metabolisms, were seeking to maintain their "natural" weight.


Usery Lectures the Owners As They Add Two Teams
Bill Usery Jr., an admittedly embarrassed mediator, delivered a stern speech to the owners today, but the request may backfire in his attempt to push the striking players and the owners toward a settlement of the baseball strike.
Usery's hourlong appearance, during which he asked the owners to make their "best offer" when the two sides resume talks, was one of two highlights of the owners' final session of their quarterly meetings.


Washington Turns Two Faces to Islamic States
To the Editor:
"Algeria, and the Islamic Challenge" (editorial, March 6) takes a benign view of United States foreign policy in the Middle East and North Africa, and rewards the Clinton Administration for its "nuanced approach" to the region.


Hughes in Venture to Expand Direct TV
Hughes Communications Inc. said yesterday that it had teamed up with three prominent Latin American media companies to create a satellite-delivered television service across Mexico, Central America, South America and the Caribbean.
The $500 million venture, known as Direct TV Latin America, plans to start delivery by November of 144 channels of programming in Spanish and Portuguese to a market estimated at 77 million households.
The partners are Hughes Communications, the Cisneros Group of Companies of Venezuela, Brazil's Televisao Abril and Mexico's MVS Multivision.


RESULTS PLUS
HORSE RACING  Trainer Killed in Car Accident  Maud Frank, a trainer whose horses ran on the New York circuit, was killed with her 4-year-old daughter, Maud Ellen, on Wednesday night when they were hit by a car while crossing a road to a convenience store in Brunswick, Ga., according to the Georgia State Patrol.
Frank, 39, and was returning to New York from Florida.
The 17-year-old driver, who told officers he was blinded by lights from oncoming vehicles, has not been charged, the police said.
Hard luck haunted Frank in recent years.
On Dec. 27, 1993, fire ravaged her 40-acre family farm, the Manor in Manorville, L.I., and killed 28 horses she owned, none of which was insured.
Six horses were saved, including My Memoirs, runner-up in the 1992 Belmont Stakes.
Besides her daughter, Frank had a son, William, 12. (AP) YACHT RACING


Power Cutoffs to Ease in Freezes
People who are behind on their gas or electric bills may have less to worry about in the next wave of cold weather.
The Public Service Electric and Gas Company has promised that when temperatures are expected to be 32 or below in the next 24 hours, it will not disconnect electricity or gas for customers delinquent in their payments.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in Manhattan that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "OEDIPUS AT COLONUS," Pearl Theater Company, 80 St.
Marks Place, East Village.
The Sophocles drama, directed by Shepard Sobel.
Through Sunday.
Performances: tonight at 8; tomorrow at 5 and 9 P.M.; Sunday at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $25.
Information: (212) 598-9802.


Art in Review
Mira Schor
Horodner Romley Gallery  107-109 Sullivan Street  SoHo  Through April 8
The paintings in Mira Schor's 1992 show at Horodner Romley combined cryptic, suggestive phrases ("Area of Denial") with stylized representations of genitalia, provoking the viewer to reflect on the inextricable mixture of the social and the biological.
Her new pictures tip the balance toward the linguistic.
The phrase "public-private," for instance, is broken down into its constituent signs: the letters of "public" are spelled out in a series of small white canvases, interspersed with a second series of pink canvases bearing the letters of "private."


'Nervous' Detective Testifies on Simpson
Detective Mark Fuhrman, a divining rod for the racial undercurrents flowing beneath the O. J. Simpson double murder case, finally took the stand today, with prosecutors laboring to present him as competent, honest and racially tolerant.
Mr.
Fuhrman, more subdued than at the preliminary hearing in July, began to recount his complex relationship with O. J. and Nicole Brown Simpson.
It began a decade ago when Mr.
Simpson smashed the windshield of Mrs.
Simpson's Mercedes with a baseball bat and ended in June, when Mrs.
Simpson and her friend Ronald L. Goldman were stabbed to death.
Mr.
Fuhrman said he found -- the defense has insinuated that he planted -- a bloody leather glove behind Mr.
Simpson's house, matching one found near the bodies at Mrs.
Simpson's house.


Growing Argument Over Best Treatment for 'Sick' Forests
To hear the United States Forest Service tell it, the extensive logging it allowed in the Boise National Forest in the past two years was just what the doctor ordered for an unhealthy forest scarred by a catastrophic fire in 1992.
But environmentalists say what happened in those rugged Idaho woods was malpractice, a costly and careless operation that skirted some environmental laws, broke others and did more ecological harm than good.


Abrams-Led B.C. Halts Hall
Danya Abrams poured through 38 points, including all 8 of Boston College's points in overtime, to lead the 10th-seeded Eagles to a 89-87 victory over seventh-seeded Seton Hall last night in the Big East tournament.
The game was tied 81-81 at the end of regulation when Adrian Griffin's 20-footer at the buzzer bounced off the rim.
Boston College (9-18), losers of seven straight games coming into the tournament, will meet Villanova at 7 o'clock tonight.
The Pirates dropped to 16-13 and await a possible berth in the N.I.T.
Abrams dominated Seton Hall inside most of the night and took control in the overtime.
After Griffin gave the Pirates an 83-81 lead, Abrams scored two baskets and four free throws to put Boston College ahead, 89-86.
His performance offset the hot shooting of Seton Hall's John Leahy, who set a Pirates tournament record with 34 points.
"With all the experiences we've gone through, it was time we got a victory," said Abrams.
"I'm just glad we could keep on playing."


About Real Estate; Shared Listing Grows in Manhattan's Co-Op Market
Manhattan's co-op sales market -- where brokerage firms scramble to both list and sell the same apartment and sellers often list their properties with as many as six agents -- is changing greatly.
Agents and other real estate professionals say the Manhattan market is finally becoming organized more like the rest of the country, where agents routinely share their listings and in many cases are required to do so.
In the Manhattan market, a practice is growing in which a property is listed with one brokerage firm and then shared with other agencies, usually on a 50-50 commission basis.


Soviet Ghost -- A special report; Gorbachev's New Battle: Overcoming His Legacy
Vigorous, opinionated and deeply frustrated, the last Communist leader of the Soviet Union floats across the political landscape like a restless ghost, unable to make his presence felt.
Mikhail S. Gorbachev's name is not even mentioned in most surveys of voters' favorite politicians.
He complains that national television declines his requests for air time.


Abortion Foe Sued in Killing Of Doctor At a Clinic
In an unusual lawsuit filed yesterday in Florida, a leading civil rights lawyer seeks to hold an anti-abortion leader and his organizations liable for the death of Dr.
David Gunn, who was shot in March 1993 outside the Pensacola abortion clinic where he worked.
The lawsuit, filed on behalf of Dr.
Gunn's estate and his children, charges that although the trigger was pulled by Michael Griffin, who has been convicted of the killing, the shooting was part of a conspiracy to stop doctors from performing abortions by any means necessary.


Pittway Corp.(PRY,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dollar Plagued by Peso
A plunge in the peso pulled down the dollar.
The weak peso is threatening United States efforts to restore investors' confidence in Mexico.
Article, page D1.


Probation for Art Photographer
In a case that raised questions about the hazy line between art and child pornography, a Superior Court judge has placed a father who is also an art student in a special probation program.
Ejlat Feurer's troubles started when he took photos of his nude 6-year-old daughter for a photography class in February 1994.
A photo-processing lab called the police.


Condemning Iranian Oil Deal, U.S. May Tighten Trade Ban
The United States is struggling over whether to ban American companies from doing business with Iran, senior Administration officials said today.
The issue took on new urgency this week with the announcement that an American oil company had concluded a $1 billion energy deal with Iran.
The issue strikes at two pillars of the Administration's foreign policy: the desire to promote American business around the world and the determination to contain countries like Iran, which the Administration considers an "international outlaw."


The Hero Is Hoffman, The Villain a Virus
"I hope that 'Outbreak' is like the 'Jaws' of the 90's," the director Wolfgang Petersen has said, offering an invaluable insight into why super-deadly Biosafety Level 4 viruses are such big business this season.
Following in the toxic wake of two scarifying nonfiction books, "The Coming Plague," by Laurie Garrett, and "The Hot Zone," Richard Preston's best seller, "Outbreak" also overwhelmed another, less virulent movie project ("Crisis in the Hot Zone") in its rush to bring one of today's ghastliest medical nightmares to the big screen.
Why?
Well, the fascination of nonfiction virus studies lies in gory details, especially when described in chillingly suspenseful fashion and accompanied by the prospect of a major plague.
But the liquefying organs that loom so large in Mr.
Preston's account have only limited movie appeal, so a bit more entertainment value was necessary.
With that in mind, "Outbreak" invents Dr.
Roberta (Robby) Keough (Rene Russo) and Dr.
Sam Daniels (Dustin Hoffman), ex-spouses who start off spatting about the custody of their two slurpy dogs and re-team to ward off a calamity.
"The fate of the nation, perhaps the world, is in our hands," someone in this film straight-facedly declares.


On My Mind; Losing Money and Nobels
Save a dollar even if you wind up losing two, or three.
Somehow it does not seem the greatest way in the world to run a business, or a government.
But it happens when business management gets panicky, cannot come up with a strategy of cost control, investment and growth and instead just hacks, hacks, hacks.


On Stage, and Off
'A Star Is Born' Again
Sir Andrew Lloyd Webber hasn't, as he has threatened, given up on stage musicals, but his next production is not going to have any music by him.
Last weekend, he purchased the rights to the 1954 classic "A Star Is Born," in which Judy Garland made her screen comeback as a young singer attached to James Mason, a fading Hollywood leading man with a drinking problem.
Sir Andrew plans to bring it to the stage within two years, but whether it opens in New York or London depends on what theaters are available.
Harold Arlen wrote the music and Ira Gershwin the lyrics, including "The Man That Got Away" and "Born in a Trunk." Sir Andrew said he didn't intend to compete with them but, as there are only eight songs in the film, might add others from the Arlen repertory.





Entangled by Law, Boy Stays In Hospital That Failed Him
Justin Bates, 11, lives in a room with a pretty mural of a shipwreck on a wall outside his window, but he cannot see it, and the silence is broken only by soft radio music he can barely hear.
He arches his back when upset, and relaxes when caressed, but he cannot talk or walk, or breathe and take nourishment without tubes in his neck and stomach.
Since Justin was 16 months old he has been in what doctors call a "vegetative state." It was in January 1985 when his mother rushed him, wheezing and listless, to the Broward General Medical Center here.
He was suffering from asthma, the mother was told by the hospital, but by the next day mistakes by staff members had left Justin with severe brain damage.


Confident Bowe Is Looking Ahead
The man he describes as "Michael" and "my friend" is always on Riddick Bowe's mind.
In fact, Bowe has said that after he knocks out Herbie Hide and wins the World Boxing Organization title Saturday night, he will visit Mike Tyson in prison on Monday.


Costner Plans to Direct 'Kentucky Cycle' for TV
Kevin Costner is to direct, produce and star in a television adaptation of Robert Schenklan's 1992 Pulitzer Prize-winning play, "The Kentucky Cycle," it was announced on Wednesday by Robert Cooper, the senior vice president of HBO Pictures.
Mr.
Costner will be directing for the first time since winning the Academy Award in 1991 for "Dances With Wolves." He will also play several roles in the six-hour film, the first original mini-series ever to appear on HBO.


P.L.O. Gets a Date
Ending an impasse, Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization set a July 1 target date for an accord on expanding Palestinian self-rule.
Article, page A3.


Pataki Asks Board of Javits Convention Center to Resign
Gov.
George E. Pataki branded conditions at the corruption-tainted Jacob K. Javits Convention Center "intolerable to me and to all New Yorkers" yesterday, and called for the resignation of its board.
Standing in the lobby of the sprawling exposition hall on the West Side of Manhattan, the Governor said it was time to install a new board, new management and a new inspector general to eliminate mob influence, thefts, no-show jobs and other corruption at the state-operated center.
Mr.
Pataki said he was not ruling out any options, including closing down the exposition palace, to root out lawlessness.


Giuliani Initiates a Review Of Hospital Delivery Rooms
In response to reports of high rates of newborn deaths and injuries at New York City's public hospitals, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi said yesterday that they had begun a review of delivery room care.
Appearing at City Hall, Mr.
Giuliani and Mr.
Hevesi said they had asked the directors of the 11 municipal hospitals and their affiliated medical schools to answer a series of questions about obstetrical care and report back by next week.


A Job Well Done


Admirable Peckinpah
It's been a quarter-century since Sam Peckinpah's "Wild Bunch" stretched the boundaries of screen violence and excited such fiercely divided reactions.
Renowned for its innovative shootouts, this mournful, arch-masculine classic is by now associated with a different kind of battle.
The fight to release a restored, wide-screen director's cut of "The Wild Bunch," which was rated R in 1969 but barely escaped an NC-17 this year, is more significant to Peckinpah's reputation than the slow-motion blood spurts that once seemed so bold.
Peckinpah's legendary problems with studios, producers, ratings and himself have often obscured the real essence of his work.
So has his association with cinematic violence, since two and a half decades have made the much-imitated methods of "The Wild Bunch" look almost tame.
Audiences for "Blood of a Poet: The Cinema According to Sam Peckinpah," a fascinating and comprehensive three-week retrospective beginning today at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center, will discover other sides of the Peckinpah mystique.


Sampras and Agassi Unite for Cup
Pete Sampras and Andre Agassi, the two Americans embroiled in a battle over the No. 1 ranking, tonight announced that their adversarial relationship will be suspended so they can play in the Davis Cup quarterfinal March 31-April 2 in Palermo, Sicily.
Just as Davis Cup captain Tom Gullikson had hoped, Agassi's impromptu scenario for a Dream Team was finally embraced by Sampras following a frenetic week of wooing of both players by Les Synder, the United States Tennis Association's new president.


Art in Review
Martin Puryear
McKee Gallery  745 Fifth Avenue (at 58th Street)  Through April 15
The four big works in Martin Puryear's first gallery show in New York City since 1987 don't signify a change but a continuation of his essential pursuits: the conception of allusive abstract shapes; the use of common materials like wood, wire and tar, and the creation of hand-made sculptures that combine folkloric simplicity with an extreme elegance of touch.


Whitman Seeks New Party Head
The Republican Party controls the State House, the state's Congressional delegation and most county governments.
And Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman, who controls the party, wants the Republican chairwoman to step down in June.


The Soul Of Africa, Distilled In Brooklyn
What if the great cache of World War II trophy art recently put on display by the Russian Government were made up of African sculptures rather than European paintings?
Would they be greeted with the same fervor?
For most Westerners, African art remains a specialty item, a source of fascination, but not an object of love.
There are reasons.
Much African art is small enough to be carried by hand, which can make it seem insignificant.
Because it is often made of perishable materials, surviving objects tend to be recent, suggesting falsely that the art itself lacks a history.
And because the names of artists, even those who had great local fame in Africa, went unrecorded, we seldom look to this art for personalities, or even the personal touch.


Power Cutoffs to Ease in Freezes
People who are behind on their gas or electric bills may have less to worry about in the next wave of cold weather.
The Public Service Electric and Gas Company has promised that when temperatures are expected to be 32 or below in the next 24 hours, it will not disconnect electricity or gas for customers delinquent in their payments.


Executive Changes
CAPITAL INVESTMENTS INTERNATIONAL, New York, a new independent institutional brokerage firm, named Michael J. Maher president and chief executive, Michael H. Sherman co-chairman and strategist, and Robert J. Barbera co-chairman and economist.
MICROFRAME INC., Edison, N.J., named Mark Simmons to the new positions of chief financial officer and vice president of operations.


The Games Go On but Feel a Global Financial Pinch
The Pan American Games, a preamble to the 1996 Atlanta Olympics, opened today in this oceanside resort, but the anticipation of gold medals is tempered by hemispheric political and economic concerns, including the level of future participation by the United States.
The 19-day Pan Am Games are held every four years, in the year preceding the Summer Olympics.
The United States is spending $4.1 million to send a contingent of 750 athletes and 450 coaches and officials to Argentina.
But with the United States Olympic Committee facing the possibility of budget cutbacks after the Atlanta Games, the number of athletes competing in future Pan Am Games could be reduced.


Surprising Scientists, Full Moon Is Found to Play Role in Warming the Earth
The pale light of the full Moon may not tan a midnight swimmer's skin, but scientists have discovered that it does warm Earth's atmosphere.
In a paper being published today in the journal Science, researchers at Arizona State University at Tempe present evidence that the full Moon raises the temperature of Earth's lower troposphere by more than 0.03 of one degree Fahrenheit.
This region of the troposphere extends from the ground to an altitude of about three and a half miles.


Sharpe Pay Disputed
The Green Bay Packers and the National Football League Management Council vowed yesterday to fight a grievance filed on behalf of the All-Pro wide receiver STERLING SHARPE, who is seeking full payment of his 1995 salary despite his release after career-threatening neck surgery.
When Sharpe was released, Packers General Manager RON WOLF said it was too risky to expect the Packers' leading receiver for the last seven seasons to play football again.
The N.F.L. players association filed the grievance. (AP)


Firms Agree to U.S. Review Of Derivatives Operations
In a move that will close a gap in Government scrutiny of sophisticated finance, six big brokerage firms voluntarily agreed today to submit their previously unregulated derivatives operations to the review of Federal regulators.
The initiative is an effort to head off moves in Congress to legislate new controls over the securities industry, in which some participants, like banks, are closely supervised, while others are not regulated at all.


Zale Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Medicus Systems
Shares of the Medicus Systems Corporation, which develops software for hospitals, dropped sharply in Nasdaq trading yesterday.
The company said on Wednesday that it did not expect third-quarter earnings to meet Wall Street's expectations.


Henning Tries New Approach; Thomas and Turgeon Watch
Give Lorne Henning credit for this: He is not afraid to bench anyone.
And that means anyone.
Pierre Turgeon and Steve Thomas sat out the final period against the Pittsburgh Penguins here at the Civic Arena tonight.
The Islanders' top two guns watched from the bench as their teammates tried to battle back from a three-goal deficit.
They were on the bench for two final-period power-plays, one where a goal would have put the Islanders back in the game.
In the end, Turgeon and Thomas sat for the final 20 minutes of what turned out to be a 4-2 defeat in the first game of a 5-game trip.


Washington Talk; Affirmative Action, by Another Name
Judge Stanley Sporkin of Federal District Court as an advocate of affirmative action?
Judge Sporkin, who was appointed by President Ronald Reagan, might not think so.
But when he dismissed an out-of-court settlement that was to forestall prosecution of the Microsoft Corporation on antitrust charges he sounded suspiciously like a person making the case for preference programs based on race and sex.


Gay Minister Ends Fast After Evangelist's Visit
Ending a three-week stalemate, Pat Robertson visited a jail in Virginia Beach, Va., on Wednesday night to meet with a gay religious leader who had been on a hunger strike since being charged with trespassing at Mr.
Robertson's Christian Broadcasting Network headquarters.
An hour after the meeting, the gay leader, Mel White, was released from jail and the network dropped the charge.


Corrections
An obituary on Wednesday about Jean Davis, a philanthropist and the mother of the financier Marvin Davis, omitted a surviving daughter.
She is Joan Davis Chorney of Palm Beach, Fla.


Mayor's Popularity Suffers Sharp Drop in a Poll
After a year of high approval ratings for Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, his austere budget proposals have apparently caused his popularity to sag sharply in the last few months, according to a poll released yesterday.
The poll, which was taken by Quinnipiac College, in Hamden, Conn., indicated that 46 percent of the people surveyed approved of Mr.
Giuliani's performance, compared with 56 percent in a poll conducted by the college in December.
In the same period, the Mayor's disapproval rating increased to 40 percent from 27 percent in the December survey.


Boy Shot Dead While Playing With a Gun
A 9-year-old boy was shot and killed yesterday in a Washington Heights apartment in Manhattan while he and his older brother were playing with a loaded pistol in a closet, the police said.
It was unclear last night whether the boy shot himself or was shot by his 12-year-old brother, who called 911 and alerted a neighbor at 7:15 P.M., shortly after the shooting.
The police characterized the shooting as accidental but said that finding was preliminary.


MEXICO INITIATES AN ECONOMIC PLAN OF EXTENDED PAIN
After weeks of indecision that sent the devalued peso plummeting to new lows, the Mexican Government today adopted a tough new economic-stabilization plan that presents a bleak picture of recession, job loss and personal hardship as unavoidable steps to the nation's recovery.
Unlike previous plans, the Government was unable to reach a binding agreement with labor and business on the harsh steps needed to control inflation and get the economy moving again.
This time, the Government is essentially acting on its own, with Mexican workers and business sure to fight for their own interests.


The Neediest Cases; As Drive Ends, Thousands Have Fund to Thank
In Harlem, an orphaned boy grieving for his parents found solace in art therapy.
In the South Bronx, a single mother returned to school when she found free day care for her toddler.
And in Brooklyn, through counseling, a sorrowful old man finally accepted his wife's death.
They were among thousands whose lives were made better this year by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, whose 83d annual campaign ended last week.
A total of 12,868 donors from Bay Ridge to Bangkok helped raise $4,526,919.95, the third-highest total ever.
Although the campaign ended March 1, the final tally was not completed until yesterday.


Sifting Through the Grab Bag for Pearls
Shows of a museum's recent acquisitions are by their nature grab bags, and the exhibition of such works now on display in the Museum of Modern Art's photography galleries is no exception.
It includes a varied selection of images that have come to the museum, either as gifts or by purchase, over the last two years.
An air of the unexpected surrounds the best acquisitions shows, with curators often seeming like beachcombers proudly displaying treasures washed in by the tide.
The Modern's show, organized by Peter Galassi, head of the department of photography, includes remarkably little flotsam and jetsam, and more than a few undeniable pearls.


No Crabs, Just Big Pinches
Four men dredging for crabs in Raritan Bay had a fairly good night.
They brought in 40 bushels, which they planned to sell.
The men themselves were brought in early Wednesday by a force of Federal and state investigators watching for illegal fishing, which is quite common on the bay.


Ian Ballantine, 79, a Publisher Who Led Move Into Paperbacks
Ian Ballantine, a pioneer in publishing and founder of three important paperback houses, died yesterday at his home in Bearsville, N.Y.
He was 79.
The cause was cardiac arrest, his office said.


Lands' End Inc.(LE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 27


Corrections
A table in Science Times on Tuesday about drugs used to treat arthritis and inflammation classified some generic drugs and their proprietary versions incorrectly.
The medicines -- Diflusinal (Dolibid), acetaminophen (Tylenol), oxyphenbutazone (Tandearil) and phenylbutazone (Butazolidin) -- are approved by the Food and Drug administration for arthritis but are not classified as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.


Art in Review
Kazumi Tanaka  'An Intimate Room'
Kent Gallery  67 Prince Street  SoHo  Through April 22
The sculpture in this young Japanese-born artist's show are ingeniously designed and made.
"Sound-Maker," for example, is an elaborate hand-constructed system of chutes and wooden wheels with interlocking cogs.
When the viewer turns the wheels by means of a handle, dried nuts drop from a small box onto lengths of hollow bamboo to produce a clacking noise.


No Crabs, Just Big Pinches
Four men dredging for crabs in Raritan Bay had a fairly good night.
They brought in 40 bushels, which they planned to sell.
The men themselves were brought in early Wednesday by a force of Federal and state investigators watching for illegal fishing, which is quite common on the bay.


Better Ways to Employ Substitute Teachers
To the Editor:
Regarding your March 1 news article about substitute teachers ("Teacher's Absent. Now What?"):


The Sun Shines, but the Wind Bites


Stojko Repeats, Outdueling Eldredge
Todd Eldredge had already put an exclamation point on his comeback season, skating a stirring and courageous freestyle program to take the lead.
But Elvis Stojko was about to make an even more spectacular comeback of his own to win the world championship tonight.


Edward Bernays, 'Father of Public Relations' And Leader in Opinion Making, Dies at 103
Edward L. Bernays, an early leader in the public relations field who devised or developed many techniques for influencing public opinion, died yesterday at his home in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 103.
Mr.
Bernays was one of the first people to expand what had been a narrow concept of press agentry, or working to influence government policy, into a far more ambitious -- and controversial -- realm of seeking to influence and change public opinion and behavior.


3 in Congress Assail G.O.P. Cuts
Three Democratic Congressmen from northern New Jersey yesterday denounced Republican efforts to cut spending for social programs.
"These cuts are deliberately not tough on Republicans' own constituents -- they're tough on the poor," Representative Robert Menendez of Union City said.
Representatives Robert Torricelli of Englewood and Donald Payne of Newark echoed his remarks, saying families in their districts would be severely hurt.


Tired of Jet Rebuilding, Criswell Chooses Chiefs
JEFF CRISWELL wouldn't mind in the least blocking for JOE MONTANA.
Playing for a winning team, however, was more of an inducement to join the Kansas City Chiefs.
Criswell, an offensive tackle who had been with the Jets since 1988 before becoming a free agent, signed a four-year contract yesterday with Kansas City.
"I've been on an upcoming team or a struggling team for the last eight years," he said.
"I think the Chiefs have proven they can win and get to the playoffs. That was more of the decision than to get an autograph from Joe Montana."


METRO DIGEST
WEAPON OF CHOICE IN SCHOOLS: BOX CUTTER
At first, the two dozen or so students milling about outside Theodore Roosevelt High School in the Bronx agreed that schools need to be made safer.
But in a few moments, swift as switchblades, the students produced a gleaming assortment of weapons.
There was a pearl-handled pocket knife, a pair of brass knuckles and, most favored of all, box cutters.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


Burned Body of a Woman Found at Brooklyn School
Five days after the police found the charred body of a 20-year-old Canarsie woman in the basement of a vacant house, the body of another young woman -- also burned beyond recognition -- was found yesterday morning in Brownsville, Brooklyn.
The police said they had no specific evidence to link the two cases but added that there were some similarities.


For Children
'The Magic School Bus Inside the Earth'
New York Hall of Science  47-01 111th Street  Flushing Meadows Corona Park  Queens  (718) 699-0005  Recommended ages: 4 to 8  Through April 23
Ms.
Frizzle may not yet be a household name but the red-haired, bespectacled schoolteacher has certainly been getting around with her class in her magic yellow school bus.
In the series of books written by Joanna Cole and Bruce Degen and published by Scholastic, Ms.
Frizzle and her entourage have traveled through a human digestive system, into a volcano and around the solar system.
In this new exhibition she and the children are painted on wall murals, but are otherwise absent.


No Surgery Planned For Devils' Daneyko
Ken Daneyko, the Devils' iron-man defenseman, will spend the rest of this month trying to correct ligament damage in his right knee through rehabilitation.
The Devils and Dr.
Barry Fisher, the team orthopedist, made that decision yesterday.
"We're not contemplating surgery at this point," Dr.
Fisher said last night, after examining the results of the magnetic resonance imaging exam that Daneyko had earlier in the day.
"We'll try a strong rehabilitation program."
Dr.
Fisher said that it would take two to three weeks to determine whether Daneyko's problem can be corrected through rehabilitation.
The 30-year-old Daneyko was injured during a firest period fight with Joe Kocur in the Devils' 6-4 loss to the Rangers on Wednesday night at Madison Square Garden.


National Semiconductor Corp.(NSM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 26


Arkansan Offers Plea in Case Linked to Clinton's '90 Campaign
An Arkansas banker pleaded not guilty today to Federal banking law charges stemming from Bill Clinton's 1990 campaign for governor.
A lawyer for the banker, Neal T. Ainley, said everything that his client had done in connection with the campaign's finances had been approved by the bank's owners, who included a political ally of Mr.
Clinton.


Art in Review
Manuel Alvarez Bravo
Witkin Gallery  415 Broadway (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through March 25
Some of Manuel Alvarez Bravo's most famous photographs are of nudes, but the Mexican master, who is 93, is known more generally for Surrealist-tinged images of a wide variety of subjects.
This intriguing show gathers examples of the theme of nudes he has done intermittently since the 1930's.


Bleckner's Melodrama; A Minimalist's Quietude
What does it say that the most ballyhooed exhibition in months is Ross Bleckner's mid-career retrospective at the Guggenheim Museum?
Mr.
Bleckner's name makes the society pages about as often as his friend Bianca Jagger's, and it's hard not to connect that fact with all the publicity preceding the show and the glamorous sponsors who stepped up to finance it.
One of them, the entertainment mogul David Geffen, is also Mr.
Bleckner's friend.
The principal sponsor, Hugo Boss, even furnished Mr.
Bleckner with the suit he wore to his opening, an event paid for by another sponsor, Vanity Fair magazine, which recently published an admiring profile of the artist.
None of this would signify anything, of course, beyond Mr.
Bleckner's personal good fortune, if his work justified a big show at a major museum.
But with 268 paintings and drawings, the exhibition looks absurdly overblown and it has the effect, which retrospectives are supposed to have, of shifting one's opinion of his art -- but in this case, for the worse.


Judicial Panel Seeks to Ease Sealing of Civil Suit Records
A proposal to make the sealing of court records in civil lawsuits nearly automatic, as long as the two sides agree, is scheduled for a vote next week by the judges who set policy for the Federal court system.
But lawyers representing plaintiffs in product-liability cases warned the judges in letters this week that the proposal would significantly add to an already troublesome amount of secrecy in Federal court proceedings.


Thermo Electron Corp.(TMO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Whitman Seeks New Party Head
The Republican Party controls the State House, the state's Congressional delegation and most county governments.
And Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman, who controls the party, wants the Republican chairwoman to step down in June.


Yeltsin to Allow a European Rights Mission in Chechnya
In another gesture to Western opinion, President Boris N. Yeltsin agreed today to allow a human-rights mission from the Organization of Security and Cooperation in Europe to maintain a presence in the secessionist Chechnya republic.
Meeting the Foreign Ministers of Germany, France and Spain, who came here on a mission from the European Union, Mr.
Yeltsin repeated his assurances that Russia is committed to a political settlement of the three-month Chechnya war.


Abroad at Home; Fanatical and Ruthless
Last Nov. 19 newspapers carried an A.P. photograph of a 7-year-old boy, Nermin Divovic, lying dead on a Sarajevo street, blood running from his head.
A Serbian sniper had shot him.
It was not an accident of war.
The sniper had aimed deliberately at a child.
So in that photograph there was the question that haunts the whole Serbian onslaught on Bosnia: What can lead human beings to do such things?


A House G.O.P. Leader Sets $200 Billion in Tax Cuts
Firing the first shot in what is bound to be a long battle over tax policy, Representative Bill Archer, the chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, proposed today a plan for cutting taxes by almost $200 billion over the next five years.
The proposals essentially follow the lines of the Contract With America, the campaign platform of Republican candidates for the House of Representatives last fall.
The main aspects are tax reduction for almost all families of $500 for each child, a lower capital gains tax, tax cuts for working couples and retirees, and a variety of tax breaks for businesses.


Art in Review
'Works on Paper'  'Old Masters to Contemporary'
Seventh Regiment Armory  643 Park Avenue (at 66th Street)  Through Sunday
Close on the heels of "The Art Show" comes Sanford Smith's annual show of "Works on Paper," gathering 95 dealers from Australia, Canada, England, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Switzerland and across the United States in a happy profusion of drawings, watercolors, prints, photographs, posters and illustrated books.
The dealers aren't trying to change the world; they just want to sell their pictures, which seem relatively inexpensive compared with the paintings at "The Art Show" a couple of weeks ago.


Blunders By Lopez Doom Storm
James Scott had played the way you expect a senior to play in his final Big East tournament: plenty of desire, lots of clutch shooting.
Felipe Lopez had played like a freshman: unsure and undependable.
When it came down to the final seconds of St.
John's first-round game against Pitt last night at Madison Square Garden, it would seem only logical that Scott would be the one attempting the Red Storm's two most important shots of the season.
But somehow, on both occasions, with St.
John's needing a 3-point shot to tie the game, the ball wound up in the hands of Lopez, who ruined both chances by missing one basket and making another.


Art in Review
Matthew Ritchie
Basilico Fine Arts  26 Wooster Street  SoHo  Through March 18
If Einstein had been a Baroque artist, his paintings might have looked like Matthew Ritchie's.
Mr.
Ritchie's extra-brainy yet energetic works, which purport to illustrate an elaborate system of the universe, also form an intriguing solo debut.
They look familiar without looking quite like anything you've seen.


Whitman Seeks New Party Head
The Republican Party controls the State House, the state's Congressional delegation and most county governments.
And Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman, who controls the party, wants the Republican chairwoman to step down in June.


Weapons at School: Box Cutters Escape Detection
At first, the two dozen or so students milling about outside Theodore Roosevelt High School in the Bronx agreed that schools needed to be made safer.
But in a few moments, swift as switchblades, the students produced a gleaming assortment of weapons.
There was a pearl-handled pocket knife, a pair of brass knuckles and, most favored of all, box cutters of all variety, some with removable razor blades, some with blades that snapped out at the push of a button, others with plastic handles, one or two that a construction worker might use on a roofing job.


Dollar Dips As the Peso Falls Again
The Clinton Administration faced not one currency crisis but two today as the dollar slipped again, pulled down by a free fall in the value of the Mexican peso.
That decline in the peso is threatening the American effort to keep its neighbor from financial collapse.
"I believe that in time, investor confidence in Mexico will be restored," Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin said in a speech this morning in which he tried to talk up the value of the dollar.
"While markets will move around, the program is sound and it should work."


Take Back the Javits Center
After years of shameful abdication, government and union officials at last seem determined to clean up corruption at New York City's Jacob K. Javits Convention Center.
The crackdown is sorely needed.
Mob-controlled labor racketeering has driven costs at the center so high that New York is losing business, and jobs, to convention centers elsewhere.
Yesterday Gov.
George Pataki took an important first step toward reform by calling for the resignation of all members of the center's board of trustees so he can put in place a new management team, starting with a strong inspector general who has "the background and experience to make sure organized crime does not take advantage of the Javits facility."


Rising Concern About Stress in Lawyers' Lives
If studies showing rising job dissatisfaction among lawyers are anything to go by, not to mention confessions by lawyers at the bar -- the other kind, where the drinks are -- lawyers are lugging around more than their briefcases.
They are shouldering stress, too.
Lawyers cite many factors contributing to stress, like longer hours at work, fewer hours with the family, pressures to make partner, even the low esteem in which lawyers are held.


Transactions
Baseball
EXPANSION COMMITTEE -- Voted unanimously to add the Arizona Diamondbacks and Tampa Bay Devil Rays for the 1998 season.
Football


Big Shots Across the Aisle; New Yorkers in Congress Find a Star Vehicle
Standing shoulder to shoulder -- with the aid of a box that makes Representative Susan Molinari look as tall as her sparring partner, Representative Charles E. Schumer -- the two-member "McLaughlin Group" of New York's Congressional delegation is ready to banter on cue for Channel 2's "Chuck and Sue" show.
On air and off, their now-contentious, now-conciliatory back and forth goes on, often pitting Mr.
Schumer, who is perhaps New York's most vocal opponent of the Republicans' Contract With America legislative program, against Ms.
Molinari, probably its most visible supporter.


Washington at Work; Changeable Senator Faces Big Test
Consistency has never been Senator Larry Pressler's strong suit.
Two years ago Mr.
Pressler, the South Dakota Republican, broke ranks with Republican leaders in Congress to help pass a law regulating cable television prices.
Today he is sponsoring a bill to eliminate those same price regulations.


Balkan Brinkmanship
After smoldering over the winter, the brutish war in the Balkans may be re-ignited by Croatia's President, Franjo Tudjman.
The barrel of kerosene he is carrying is a March 31 deadline for the withdrawal of the 12,000 United Nations troops stationed in Serb-occupied areas of Croatia.
He imagines that Croatian forces, stronger than they were three years ago, can now defeat local Serbian militias and restore these areas to Croatian Government control.
That ignores the virtual certainty that the Serbian Government in Belgrade would respond by sending its own powerful military and Bosnian Serb forces into the battle.


Senator Deals Blow to Affirmative Action
Joining the growing political debate over affirmative action, the Senator who is the new head of a centrist Democratic group with close ties to President Clinton said today that preferential policies based on race and sex were "patently unfair" and had helped lead to a breakdown in society.
"You can't defend policies that are based on group preferences as opposed to individual opportunities, which is what America has always been about," said Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, the new chairman of the Democratic Leadership Council.


CHRONICLE
HAROLD H. KOH, a professor of international law at Yale Law School, has known MICHAEL RATNER, 51, the former legal director of the Center for Constitutional Rights in New York, for only five years.
But, Professor Koh said yesterday, "we have probably worked together 10,000 hours."
The professor and about 500 other guests will pay tribute to Mr.
Ratner tonight for his work battling human rights violations around the world.
Mr.
Ratner, now a volunteer lawyer at the center, will be honored at the 58th anniversary banquet of the National Lawyers Guild at the Sheraton New York Hotel and Towers.


A Chinese Suit Against Lehman
The latest twist in Wall Street's payments spats with China?
You guessed it -- derivatives!
A Chinese Government trading company, the Minmetals International Nonferrous Metals Trading Company, countersued Lehman Brothers Inc. yesterday in Federal District Court in Manhattan, contending that the investment bank induced an employee into making "more than $35 billion in unauthorized derivatives trades unrelated to its business."


Crime and Corruption in Russia
The sole optimistic note in this report on crime in Russia is the hope that it is only a temporary growing pain of democracy and a free-market economy.
But mostly "The Wild, Wild East" is an anthology of bribery, extortion and violence.
Russia's Interior Ministry says criminals control tens of thousands of businesses and hundreds of banks.


Rigors of March Test Well-Balanced Knicks
During the Knicks' current four-game winning streak, four different players have led them in scoring.
First it was Anthony Mason.
Then it was John Starks.
Then it was Patrick Ewing.
And in Wednesday night's 108-100 victory over the Boston Celtics, it was Hubert Davis (22 points), who shot 8 for 11 from the field.
Scoring versatility and depth are two reasons why the Knicks (39-19) find themselves moving in a positive direction.
March is a difficult month for many teams, with players fatigued from the long season, and the playoffs still more than a month away.
But the Knicks' depth and conditioning allow them to cope with back-to-back games and the rigors of the schedule.


Justice Dept. Awarding Grants to Develop Gun Detectors
The Justice Department today announced that it was awarding $2.15 million in grants for the development of new highly advanced gun detectors that would permit the police to spot people carrying concealed weapons on the street or inside stores.
Department officials said that prototypes, which draw on technologies used by the Defense Department to track Russian submarines and locate buried nuclear waste, would be ready within 18 months and that one or more of the detectors would be in production within two or three years.


Study Pinpoints Death Risks From Small-Particle Pollution
One of the largest studies of air quality and health ever carried out shows that fine particles emitted by automobile engines, power plants and other sources can increase the risk of death by 15 percent in the cities with the dirtiest air, compared with the cleanest cities.
Even in cities that meet Federal clean-air standards, the risk of death is 3 percent to 8 percent higher than in the cleanest cities, said the researchers, from the Harvard School of Public Health and Brigham Young University.


Not Guilty Plea in Kickbacks


Assembly Speaker Sets Terms For Backing Welfare Limits
Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver said today that he would support setting time limits on welfare for childless, able-bodied adults if they refuse to enter job-training programs or to search for work.
The comments by Mr.
Silver, a Manhattan Democrat, were his most expansive to date about welfare, and they suggested that the Assembly Democrats plan to position themselves somewhere between existing welfare policies and those of Gov.
George E. Pataki in the coming negotiations over the state budget.


A Wizard Caught in Two Storms
Nothing can cloud the legend of Peter S. Lynch, the mutual fund wizard.
As the manager of the giant Fidelity Magellan Fund from 1977 until his retirement in 1990, Mr.
Lynch racked up one of the best long-term track records in the fund industry.
But it has not been a good year for Peter S. Lynch, the corporate director.
Mr.
Lynch is a director of only two public corporations, Morrison Knudsen and W. R. Grace &amp; Company.
And since January, the boards of both companies have been plunged into controversy centering on the charismatic chairmen who asked Mr.
Lynch to serve as a director.


Privatizing Public Hospitals Just Doesn't Work
To the Editor:
Your series on the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation (March 5 to 7) provides important lessons about the pitfalls of "privatization" of public services.


Anne Frank's Diary, Unabridged


Sports of The Times; A Tale Of 2 Mikes Coming Back
SUDDENLY, everybody is scurrying to confirm Michael Jordan's re-entry.
The more you think about it, Jordan's return to pro basketball becomes as compelling as his exodus to baseball nearly two seasons ago.
The prospect of his return throws dirt on a baseball season that effectively has buried itself and energizes a National Basketball Association season that had hit a flat spot.
Houston is fading, Orlando is dunking and what more can you say about Dennis Rodman's hair?


Corrections
A front-page picture caption on Wednesday about Gov.
George E. Pataki's signing of death-penalty legislation misspelled the surname of a woman shown with the Governor and referred incorrectly to her son, who was killed last year.
The woman, Carol McCauliff, is married to a state trooper, but their son, Thomas, was not a trooper.


Inside Art
Fire on Central Park West
The black cloud hanging over the financially shaky New-York Historical Society is more than metaphorical.
Around 1 P.M. last Friday, welders working in the basement of its 1904 building at Central Park West and 77th Street started a fire, sending oil, smoke and soot seeping through every open air duct in the four-story building.
Since the damage has not yet been assessed, it is too early to tell just how much it will cost to repair the building and restore the art and objects that are now covered with a film of oily soot.
But the society's executive director, Betsy Gotbaum, said she was still "99 percent sure the building can reopen as scheduled on May 11."


No Crabs, Just Big Pinches
Four men dredging for crabs in Raritan Bay had a fairly good night.
They brought in 40 bushels, which they planned to sell.
The men themselves were brought in early Wednesday by a force of Federal and state investigators watching for illegal fishing, which is quite common on the bay.


New Cunningham Work Finds All the Elements Working Together
"Ground Level Overlay," Merce Cunningham's energetic new piece, is first class, filled with imagination.
For a choreographer who insists that music, dance and decor are independent elements rather than interpretations of a mutual theme, Mr.
Cunningham has been more than lucky with his collaborators here.
The 15 dancers look like chic guests at a block party.
The costumes, by Suzanne Gallo, are black and maroon, incorporating trendy leather vests, velveteen tights and lacy trim into their overall stylishness.


Payroll Tax is Jersey City Issue
Mayor Bret Schundler, a Republican, is seeking a payroll tax to avert a big property-tax increase.
State Senator Nicholas J. Sacco, a Democrat who is also Mayor of North Bergen, has introduced a bill to block the tax.
"If the current administration doesn't understand that a payroll tax would be bad for business, then the state has to step in," Mr.
Sacco said.


COMPANY BRIEFS
GLAXO P.L.C., London, said that 82 percent of the outstanding shares of Wellcome P.L.C., London, had been turned over in the company's $15 billion takeover offer.
Glaxo has extended its offer until Thursday.
HARLEY-DAVIDSON INC., Milwaukee, said it planned to buy back up to 4 million of its common shares, or 5.2 percent of the 76.3 million shares outstanding.


Designer Heist


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Kia aims for a foothold in the U.S. auto market with a less expensive sport-utility vehicle.
AUTO companies from around the world covet a share of the United States market because of its size and importance.
Make it here, they believe, and you will have the quality, efficiency and savvy to make it everywhere.
Many, like Yugo and, most recently, Alfa Romeo, don't make it.


I.R.A. Political Chief Agrees to Disarmament Talks With British
In a major concession to British demands, Gerry Adams, the political leader of the Irish Republican Army, said today that his party, Sinn Fein, would agree to discuss with British ministers the crucial issue of I.R.A. disarmament.
The issue of disarmament has been a major obstacle in the Northern Ireland peace plan that was presented by the Irish and British Prime Ministers on Feb. 22.


Market Place; Caremark may soon be a big winner or a big loser. But which?
COMPANIES with legal woes are best suited for investors with a taste for gambling, and Caremark International Inc. is no exception.
If the Government, which began investigating Caremark's payments to physicians in 1991, ends up hammering the company, its recent share price of between $17 and $18 (today it closed at $17.25, down 12.5 cents, on the New York Stock Exchange) might look like the good old days for a long time to come.
On the other hand, many analysts suggest the stock could jump quickly into the low to mid-$20's if the Northbrook, Ill., company manages to avoid a fraud plea or conviction and settles for a few hundred million dollars or less.


Corrections
A dance review yesterday about a performance by Feld Ballets/NY at the Joyce Theater on Tuesday night referred incorrectly to a 1977 Feld work, "Variations on 'America.' " It is a pas de deux, not a solo.


ABM Industries(ABM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Stocks Climb Slightly As Dollar's Fall Slows
The stock market further stabilized yesterday, climbing slightly as the value of the recently battered dollar steadied somewhat in international currency markets at above 90 Japanese yen.
Unlike some trading sessions this month, when a declining dollar has sent stock and bond prices lower, the financial markets went their separate ways.
Bond prices rose, while the dollar declined slightly and stocks managed a small gain.


How a Wild Stray Cat Found Domestic Bliss
To the Editor:
Re "New York Can Do Better by Its Stray Animals," Jane E. Hanley's March 2 letter of concern over the handling of stray animals by the new Center for Animal Care and Control:


Man Ruled Fit for Murder Trial
The man accused of fatally shooting a city narcotics detective in the Essex County Courthouse has been judged mentally competent to stand trial.
The state appeals panel that reached that decision on Thursday also said that lawyers for Al-Damany Kamau must honor his wish not to use an insanity defense.


Mattityahu Peled, Israeli General, 72; Sought P.L.O. Talks
Mattityahu Peled, a former Israeli Army major general and member of Parliament who led initial Israeli efforts toward a peace accord with the Palestine Liberation Organization, died yesterday, the Israeli Embassy in Washington said.
He was 72 and had suffered from cancer.
After Israeli's seizure of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip in the 1967 war, Mr.
Peled became one of the first and strongest advocates of handing over territory to the P.L.O. in return for a peace settlement.


Big Bank Expects Loss For Quarter
The Bankers Trust New York Corporation announced yesterday that it expected to lose as much as $125 million after taxes in the first quarter of 1995.
In a report filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, the corporation, parent of the Bankers Trust Company, said that the losses would stem from two core businesses: trading for its own account, primarily in Latin America, and a slowdown in revenues from the controversial financial instruments widely known as derivatives.


Comparative Literature Contains Multitudes
To the Editor:
The headline of the "Class Notes" column (Education page, March 1) on the Modern Language Association of America survey of 527 English departments reads: "Comparative literature: Times may change, but the writers students read stay much the same." With but one exception ("The Odyssey"), all the titles listed in the article were composed in English.


Liverpool Journal; They're Capturing Suspects on Candid Camera
It was just before 3 P.M. when the call came crackling over the walkie-talkie in the control center: four young males walking through the downtown shopping area, behaving suspiciously.
Within seconds, a security guard sitting at a bank of video screens began searching for the men, pushing buttons to select pictures from among 20 high-resolution cameras placed on streets throughout central Liverpool, and then turning the cameras and zooming in.


Arrest in Theft of Child's Funds
After a Millville child was struck by a car and paralyzed from the neck down, Richard J. Solkin helped set up a fund to aid the boy's family.
Yesterday prosecutors charged Mr.
Solkin with stealing more than $13,000 of the money that people had donated to help the 7-year-old, Devon Fuentes.


Herbert Katzin, 81, Pioneer Eye Surgeon
Dr.
Herbert M. Katzin, an ophthalmologist who was a pioneer in corneal transplant surgery and eye bank research, died on March 4 in his Manhattan home.
He was 81.
The cause was prostate cancer, said his son, Dr. Richard Katzin of Goshen, Conn.


No Headline
"May your message be heard. May your lessons never be forgotten. May our history be always remembered." -- GEORGE C. WALLACE, addressing marchers in Montgomery, Ala.  [ 9:1. ] "Seeing him say that he's sorry ain't gonna do me no good at all." -- RUFUS VANABLE, a participant in the 1965 Selma-to-Montgomery civil rights march who took part in its reenactment yesterday.  [ 9:1. ]


B. R. Bugelski, 81, Psychology Teacher
B.
Richard Bugelski, a scholar known for his contributions to learning theory in psychology, died on March 3 at St.
Joseph's Hospital in Cheektowaga, N.Y.
A resident of Getzville, N.Y., he was 81.
He suffered a brief illness, according to the State University of New York at Buffalo, where he was distinguished professor emeritus of psychology.


Bomb and Gunmen Kill 11 at Mosque in Pakistan
The violence that is tearing Pakistan's largest city apart claimed 11 more lives today when a bomb exploded outside a mosque after Friday Prayers and masked gunmen stormed into the smoke-filled courtyard, loosing volleys of automatic rifle fire at the panicked survivors.
The attack, which wounded at least 22 people, came two days after the execution-style slaying of two Americans driving to work at the United States Consulate.
The bombing intensified a feeling among Karachi's population of more than 10 million that the long history of ethnic, religious and criminal violence here, responsible for thousands of deaths in recent years, has taken a sharp turn for the worse.


Prize Money Is Endorsed
The International Skating Union's powerful 13-member council is set to recommend significant changes in the way figure skating is run, including the offering of prize money at the world championships, Claire Ferguson, president of the United States Figure Skating Association, said today.
Ferguson, a council member, declined to disclose the precise nature of the recommendations, which are scheduled to be announced Saturday.
But she said they "would take us 90 percent of the way we need to go" to answer the challenge posed by lucrative professional events that are draining resources and top skaters from the Olympic-eligible ranks.


POP
British Rockers Jump On the Grunge Wagon  Bush Irving Plaza


CHRONICLE
GIANNI VERSACE will receive an award from the Florida Trust for Historic Preservation.
At a ceremony on May 18 at the Lightner Museum in St.
Augustine, he will get the 1995 Meritorious Achievement Award in Residential Rehabilitation for the renovation of his Mediterranean revival house called Casa Casuarina in South Beach.


Agassi Barb Doesn't Sit Well With Chang
First came the insult, a verbal bullet from Andre Agassi Thursday night, and then came today's misery -- the loss of three match points and being upended by 14th-seeded Thomas Muster, 6-1, 5-7, 7-6 (7-3) in the third round of the Newsweek Champions Cup.
It has not been a pleasant 24 hours for Michael Chang.
"It's the kind of match you hope doesn't happen too often, where you have match points and lose them; no more of those," said the fourth-seeded Chang.
And no more Davis Cup for him either, at least not until some fence-mending is done.


Corrections
An article on March 8 about affiliations between Roman Catholic and non-Catholic health care providers referred incorrectly to an affiliation proposed in Eugene, Ore.
Doctors who wished to perform abortions would lease one part of a clinic there, while the Sacred Heart Health System would lease another part.
Sacred Heart would not own the whole clinic.


The Oil Industry's Iran Policy
American oil companies are pursuing their own foreign policy with Iran, in defiance of United States interests.
Although Washington is trying to discourage any American trade with Iran, and American law bars the import of Iranian products, the largest purchasers of Iranian oil are American oil companies.
They get around the letter of the law by selling the oil abroad, not at home, and using foreign subsidiaries to handle the business.
The latest and most blatant case is a Conoco deal to develop a large Iranian oilfield in the Persian Gulf, a contract that could be worth $1 billion.
Conoco, owned by Du Pont, will handle the deal through a Dutch subsidiary.


Women's Rights? Or Hoodlums' Rights?
Prosecutors say that on Dec. 30, 1994, John Salvi murdered two receptionists at two abortion clinics in Brookline, Mass.
A week later, threatening signs were posted on the walls of a Nassau County clinic that had already been the target of bomb threats and anti-abortion demonstrations.
Several days later the landlord, 1103 Stewart Avenue Associates, which is headed by Ronald J. Morey, promulgated a building rule prohibiting the clinic, Long Island Gynecological Associates, from performing abortions or related procedures on the premises because, they said, doing so endangered the building's other tenants.
Last month Mr.
Morey moved to evict the clinic entirely.


CHRONICLE
The 1995 John Jay Awards of Columbia College were presented on Thursday evening to six alumni, and it turned out that two of them, IRA MILLSTEIN and MILTON HANDLER, had met before -- many times.
Mr.
Millstein, a senior partner in the law firm of Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges, recalled at the awards dinner that he had been an "indifferent student" in the class of '46.
It was not until he was in his second year at Columbia Law School, he said, that he began to shine academically, thanks to his antitrust professor, Mr.
Handler.
He became Mr.
Handler's assistant.


U.S., Protesting Rights Abuses, Ends Military Aid to Guatemala
The Administration announced today that it was suspending the last of its small military aid to Guatemala.
The decision came two days before an American woman plans a hunger strike in front of the White House to draw attention to the disappearance of her husband in Guatemala.
Administration officials acknowledged today that they were suspending the $200,000-a-year program partly in response to pressure from the woman, Jennifer Harbury.
She is seeking the Administration's help to get information about her husband, a Guatemalan guerrilla leader believed to have been captured in 1992.


Don Cook, Author And Journalist, 74
Don Cook, a foreign correspondent who covered the end of World War II in Europe and Western Europe's postwar recovery for The New York Herald Tribune and later for The Los Angeles Times, died on Tuesday at his home in Philadelphia.
He was 74.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 3 about a questionnaire sent by Senator Larry Pressler, Republican of South Dakota, to employees of National Public Radio misstated the scope of his inquiry. (A correction in this space on March 2 misidentified the article in which the error occurred.) The questionnaire sought information about ethnic backgrounds, sexes and previous employment at religious-affiliated broadcasting companies, but it did not ask about religious affiliation.


Head of TV Programming Is Resigning From Disney
Richard H. Frank is stepping down as head of the Walt Disney Company's television programming business, the company announced last night.
Dennis F. Hightower, 53, who headed Disney Consumer Products for Europe and the Middle East, was named to succeed Mr.
Frank.
That unit includes book and magazine publishing, merchandise, music and software for Europe and the Middle East.
The company said Mr.
Frank would continue to consult for Disney.


W. E. Steckler, 81, U.S. District Judge Serving 45th Year
William E. Steckler, a Federal district judge in Indiana who was in his 45th year on the Federal bench, died on Wednesday at his home in Indianapolis.
He was 81.
The cause was non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, said his secretary at the Southern District of Indiana, Patricia Springman.


I.M.F. Agrees to Give Russia $6 Billion Loan
Vowing that their most important task this year is to cut inflation, Russian leaders agreed with the International Monetary Fund today on terms for a $6.4 billion standby loan.
The loan will be disbursed monthly so the fund can be sure Russia is keeping its economy on track, and the money is already accounted for in Moscow's 1995 budget.


Messiaen Festival In Paris
The neo-Florentine Eglise de la Trinite is best known for the fact that the composer Olivier Messiaen was the organist there for 61 years, until his death three years ago.
Now the church is using his considerable output of organ music to reach out to the community beyond, in a Messiaen festival also sponsored by the city of Paris and its program to encourage performances of religious works.


Queens Holy Land; Paying Homage at Rebbe's Grave
Homeowners in Cambria Heights, Queens, a quiet enclave of the city's black middle class, never imagined that the death of Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson would have any reverberations for them.
But within days of the Lubavitch Hasidic leader's death last June, yellow buses filled with his followers began daily forays into the Queens neighborhood, carrying a kind of Old World funeral procession past brick houses on the way to the Montefiore Cemetery.


Knudsen Loses in Bidding On California Rail Contract
In a serious setback to the already battered Morrison Knudsen Corporation, the Bay Area Rapid Transit district in San Francisco announced today that it had awarded a $330 million contract, its largest ever, to AEG Transportation Systems Inc. to refurbish its aging fleet of 439 rail cars.
The contract represents a boon to AEG Transportation, which is owned by a German conglomerate, the AEG Daimler-Benz Industrie group, and is refurbishing rail cars for the first time.


A Little Tramp Joins the Clan
Roland Petit's National Ballet of Marseilles has come to the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts this week with "Chaplin Dances," Mr.
Petit's modest but charming homage to one of the great dancers of all time.
Mr.
Petit does not tell us anything we do not know but he places Chaplin's Little Tramp in a historical pantheon.
Performers dressed as Nijinsky, Isadora Duncan, the 19th-century mime Debureau and even Marcel Marceau welcome him into the same clan in this chamber ballet for seven dancers; the original title, "Charlot Danse Avec Nous" (Charlie Dances With Us), is more to the point.


In a New Light, Actions of Past Sink a Nominee
Michael P. C. Carns said today that he knew he might have a problem over a young Filipino man he had helped bring into the country even before he was nominated to be the next head of the Central Intelligence Agency.
But it was not until agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation appeared at the door of his mother's house in California last week, bearing papers and a long list of painful questions, that he knew just how big a problem it might be.


INSIDE
New Trend in Thievery
In what the police call a prevalent new scheme, shoplifters from Long Island to Delaware are using foil-lined shopping bags to circumvent store alarms.
Page 25.
A Home for Nuclear Waste
A month after the Mescalero Apaches of New Mexico quashed a plan to allow utilities to store nuclear waste on their reservation, they abruptly reversed themselves.
Page 6.
Dinkins Attacks Giuliani
David N. Dinkins demanded an apology from his successor, Rudolph W. Giuliani, for what he called a calculated attempt to slander the former Youth Commissioner.
Page 27.


Late and Precise Penderecki Conducted by Penderecki
Some 35 years ago, Krzysztof Penderecki wowed music audiences with an orchestral and choral style that glorified the imprecise.
This repertory of mumbles, murmurs, crowd-scene shrieks and other deliberate approximations was subsequently abandoned in favor of hardheaded clarity: the "Sinfonietta per Archi," which he performed with the Warsaw Sinfonia at Carnegie Hall on Wednesday night, is from 1991.
The analogy of 1960's hair now clipped to lawyer length is tempting, but maybe Mr.
Penderecki simply ran out of theatric devices.
This brief piece juxtaposes long viola, cello and violin solos in wide-spaced intervals with pounding string chords, buzzing triplets and busy fugal textures.
The "Sinfonietta" is well-built music.
It never forgets its original premises and refers back to them at the right times.
Its buttoned-down rectitude may seem odd next to memories of "Threnody" or "The St. Luke Passion," but the music works.


CHRONICLE
ISAAC STERN doesn't need to play his violin to bring an audience to its feet.
The virtuoso received ovations on Thursday from Minnesota lawmakers in St.
Paul when he said at a committee meeting that the Federal and state governments must support the arts, The Associated Press reported.


Ferraros Join Farm Team
Peter and Chris Ferraro, the Long Island twins who may someday become Rangers, took another step on their roundabout route toward Madison Square Garden yesterday when they joined the Binghamton Rangers of the American Hockey League.
Although under contract to the Atlanta Knights of the International League, they were released by the Knights' general manager, Joe Bucchino.


Hide: Undefeated and Still Talking
Herbie Hide certainly is cheeky, as well as undefeated.
As Riddick Bowe uncomfortably strutted on stage the other day, Hide whispered to another heavyweight, Jorge Luis Gonzalez: "He's got no heart. You'll see Saturday night."


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Classifying Schoenberg As a Baroque Composer?  Four Nations Ensemble Miller Theater


New Coaches For L.I.R.R. Will Have Two Levels
After more than 40 years, double-decker coaches will return to regular service on the Long Island Rail Road in 1997, railroad officials announced today.
The board of the Metropolitan Transportation Association today approved the purchase of 114 two-level cars, which will seat 142 riders, compared with 120 on the current single-level cars.


Orono Journal; In Maine, Being 'Good' Is Praise Enough for a Star
The most celebrated athlete in the state of Maine is a 19-year-old basketball player who happens to be a woman.
Cindy Blodgett, No. 14, the freshman point guard for the University of Maine's winning Black Bears.
"That girl is good," said one of her legion of fans, 73-year-old Bud Whitney, with a laconic understatement that people in Maine understand as lavish praise.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CARGILL INC., Minneapolis, will build a $30 million glucose plant in southwestern Poland to serve the local consumer market.
KEYSTONE INTERNATIONAL INC., Houston, a maker of valves and other flow-control products, said it planned to cut 270 jobs.
The cuts will save the company about $11 million a year.


Student-Run Airport Bus Hits Sudden Bump
Suddenly the price of a trip from Princeton University to Newark International Airport is absurdly cheap -- and that worries many students here.
As students were making plans for spring break, which began today after classes ended, the Princeton Airporter shuttle service began printing coupons in the campus newspaper that reduced the price of the trip from Princeton to Newark International from $19 to $5.
What is motivating the price cut, some students fear, is an effort to drive out of business a year-old shuttle service operated by students.


Blood and Other Signs Led To Search, Detective Says
The prosecution and witness team of Marcia Clark and Mark Fuhrman today stopped their story just short of the point last June when Mr.
Fuhrman found a bloody leather glove behind O. J. Simpson's house.
Instead, they closed the week with the puzzling array of items, including a shovel, a towel and a mammoth plastic bag, found in Mr.
Simpson's Bronco.
No knife or bloody clothes have been recovered in the Simpson case, and Ms.
Clark, the chief prosecutor, offered nothing today linking the new exhibits to the missing pieces of the puzzle.
The items could help prosecutors prove not only that Mr.
Simpson killed his former wife, Nicole Brown Simpson, and her friend, Ronald L. Goldman, but also that even the aftermath was neatly planned.


Of Terrorist Videos And Police Reports
To the Editor:
Mohammed al-Hassan (letter, Feb. 25) of the Islamic Association for Palestine denies any connection to terrorist training videos.


Arafat Pledges to Prosecute Terrorists, but Faults Israel
Yasir Arafat promised Secretary of State Warren Christopher today that he would do his best to prosecute and punish Palestinian terrorists, but he blamed Israel for helping create the groups responsible for the terrorist wave against Israeli targets.
Reflecting the complicated and uneasy relationship the United States has with the P.L.O. leader, Mr.
Christopher said Mr.
Arafat had made a "100 percent" commitment to bring terrorists to justice, but at the same time pressed him to take tougher measures to arrest, prosecute, punish and disarm them.


U.S. Agency Criticizes 2 Big Wall Street Firms
Proposed yesterday to cease doing business with Salomon Brothers Inc. and Morgan Stanley &amp; Company because it said the two firms had violated the agency's rules that cover gifts and entertainment for employees of the agency.
The decision may be largely symbolic.
The agency, set up by Congress in August 1989 to manage and sell failed savings institutions, is winding down its activities, having sold 744 savings institutions and overseen asset sales and the collection of more than $384 billion.


10 Years in Child's Death
A man who lost his temper with a 3-year-old who had diarrhea was sentenced to 10 years in prison yesterday in the child's death.
John F. Boyle admitted slapping Corey Tingle when the boy soiled the bed; he said the boy then fell and hit his head on the bathtub.


Little Cheer in Jobs Data for New York Area
While declining national unemployment figures touched off joy in Washington and buoyed the stock markets yesterday, the celebration left New York City, New York State and New Jersey mainly on the outside looking in.
The latest monthly unemployment figures left no doubt that if the national economy was heating up, the region was still feeling the effects of the recession's big chill.


Space Station Insures a Future for Our Children
To the Editor:
Your editorial "Is NASA Among the Truly Needy?" (March 6) is right on the mark in stating that the proposed space station "makes minimal sense unless it is part of a broader plan of space exploration." But your conclusion, that such a plan is so far in the future that we should cancel the station, is simply wrong.


NOMINEE FOR C.I.A., IN A CONTROVERSY, ABANDONS HIS BID
Michael P. C. Carns, the retired Air Force general whom President Clinton selected to be Director of Central Intelligence, said today that he was withdrawing from consideration after the Federal Bureau of the Investigation uncovered a tangled set of personal circumstances that appear to have included violations of labor and immigration law.
Mr.
Clinton, who has been without a chief intelligence officer for more than 10 weeks, immediately chose John M. Deutch, the Deputy Defense Secretary, to replace General Carns as his new nominee for the intelligence post, a senior White House official said.


Interim Dance Director
Cynthia Mayeda has been named interim director of the dance program of the National Endowment for the Arts, effective at the end of the month.
Ms.
Mayeda replaces Sali Ann Kriegsman, who has been appointed director of the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival.
Ms.
Mayeda, a former chairwoman of the Dayton Hudson Foundation in Minneapolis, has been a member and a chairwoman of the endowment's peer review panels in dance, theater and challenge-grant programs.
She will direct the dance program part time while a new director is sought for the $7 million program.


Stocks and Bonds Soar on Positive Jobs Report
In the first big rally since the dollar began falling sharply this month, financial markets rose yesterday, with stock prices hitting record levels, bond prices moving higher and the dollar gaining against the German mark.
The Dow Jones industrial average jumped more than 65 points and closed at a record 4,035.61, up 52.22 points.
Other leading stock indexes exceeded or came close to records, too.
Stocks from General Electric to Coca-Cola to Lotus Development all rose sharply on heavy New York Stock Exchange volume of 383 million shares.


John Colman Dies; Pianist Was 82
John Colman, a piano accompanist for many major ballet and modern dance choreographers, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 82.
The cause was apparently a heart attack, said his nephew Jonathan Snaith.


Rainstorm's Fury Continues in California, With the Damage Mounting
Rain battered and humbled Northern and Central California again today as a winter storm continued with awesome relentlessness.
Hundreds of roads were submerged, some covered by up to six feet of water, bridges were washed out and telephone and electrical service were disrupted by heavy rains and gale-force winds that began sweeping off the Pacific Ocean on Wednesday night.


At Issue in College Sit-In: Desire to Keep Studying
It did not look like much of a protest, with about two dozen students scattered around a college library, cramming for midterm exams.
But a glance at the clock showed that the time was 4:22 A.M.
Under a new austerity schedule, the library was supposed to have closed for the night more than six hours earlier.
And the students, holding their ground in perhaps one of the final battles to save Upsala College, were demanding nothing less radical than the right to study for another year.


Violinist Cancels Recital
The violinist Nadja Salerno-Sonnenberg has canceled her Carnegie Hall debut recital on Monday, which was to have been presented under the auspices of the 92d Street Y. Ms.
Salerno-Sonnenberg, who is recovering from a finger injury, is to appear as scheduled with the New York Chamber Symphony at the Y on March 25 at 8 P.M. and on March 26 at 3 P.M.
Information about refunds: call the 92d Street Y: (212) 996-1100.


Dinkins Demands Apology After Youth Services Report
Former Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday demanded that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani apologize for what Mr.
Dinkins called a calculated attempt last year to slander the man who served as Mr.
Dinkins's Youth Commissioner.
"They owe him a deep apology," Mr.
Dinkins said of the official, Richard L. Murphy.
"It should be a public apology, and the Mayor should call to task the people responsible."


Revival Of 'Rune,' An Exception
He could have called it "Shapes in Space" or "Stops and Starts." Either title would have been appropriate.
But when Merce Cunningham choreographed a new dance back in 1959, he chose "Rune" for its title.
Indeed, dance researchers have found that Mr.
Cunningham initially thought of calling it "Autumn Rune" or "Sound of Autumn." But "Rune" was what he settled upon.
The work was seen for the first time since 1983 in an impressive revival by the Merce Cunningham Dance Company on Thursday night at the City Center.
Its choreography proved as amazing as its title was evocative.


Corrections
A listing on the Consumer's World page of The Home Section on Feb. 23 with an article about repairing problems in a credit report misstated the telephone number for a national credit reporting bureau, the Trans Union Corporation.
Its number is (610) 690-4909.


Jordan Once Again Looms In Chicago's Hoop Dreams
The front-page headlines in the daily newspapers today portrayed the mood in this town, which was toddlin' more than ever: "Jordan Works Out and Whole City Sweats" (Tribune); "Say It's So, Mike" (Sun-Times); and the headline that topped The Tribune's column by Mike Royko, to many the voice of Chicago, said: "City Has Hope That 2nd Coming Is Near."
All this for what had been unconfirmed reports that Michael Jordan was considering returning to the city and to the team where he perfected, if not invented, the extraordinary feat of flying to the hoop.


Morris B. Zale, 93; Led Jewelry Chain
Morris B. Zale, founder of the jewelry-store chain the Zale Corporation, died on Wednesday at Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas.
He was 93 and lived in Dallas.
The cause was pneumonia, said his son Donald.


Business Digest
The Economy  New jobs were found by an unexpectedly large number of Americans in February, as the unemployment rate matched a four-year low, dropping three-tenths of a point to 5.4 percent, the Labor Department reported.
Traders in financial markets were exuberant, buying American assets in the belief that the economy was growing fast enough to keep any threat of recession at bay.  [ Page 1. ]  The celebration of lower unemployment figures left New York City, New York State and New Jersey mainly on the outside looking in.
New York State's rate stood at 6.1 percent, up from 6 percent in January.  [ 49. ] Kevin D. Mitnick, the computer hacker, was indicted on 23 counts of fraud in a Federal court in North Carolina.  [ 48. ] The R.T.C. proposed ceasing business with Salomon Brothers and Morgan Stanley, saying they had violated gift-giving rules.  [ 38. ] Markets  Financial markets surged in their first big rally since the dollar began tumbling this month.
Stocks hit record levels, with the Dow industrials galloping 52.22 points ahead to close at 4,035.61.  [ 37. ] Bond prices also rose strongly.
The yield on the long bond fell to 7.46 percent from 7.51 percent on Thursday.  [ 48. ] The dollar rose against most major currencies for a third day, helped by the jobless report and a rally in the Mexican peso.  [ 47. ] Wheat futures prices fell sharply after the United States Agriculture Department trimmed its export forecast.  [ 47. ] International  Mexico's tough economic recovery program cheered markets, but left many Mexicans fuming over big price increases and higher taxes.
The peso surged 18 percent.  [ 37. ] The president of Brazil's central bank vowed to defend the nation's currency at all costs.
Brazilian and other Latin American stocks and bonds soared in response.  [ 46. ] Companies  Bankers Trust New York said it could lose $125 million in the first quarter because of trading in Latin America and a slowdown in revenue from derivatives.  [ 37. ] Richard Frank will leave the Walt Disney Company, where he heads the television and telecommunications unit.
But savvy homeowners can act to protect themselves.  [ 36. ] Many advisers raise the red flag on new stock issues, but fans say now may be the time to buy.
Francis Flaherty: Investing.  [ 36. ] Homeowners' tax deductions for depreciation for business use of a home can haunt them when they sell their houses.  [ 36. ]


William Cotter, 74, Ex-Official In C.I.A. and Postal Service, Dies
William Joseph Cotter, a retired official of the Central Intelligence Agency and chief inspector of the United States Postal Service, died on Wednesday at his home in Fairfax, Va.
He was 74.
The cause was a stroke, his family said.


March Is Always a Maddening Time for Huskies
The glass is always half-empty in Connecticut in March.
That is the reality confronting the Huskies, the team that has finished alone in first in consecutive Big East regular seasons at a time when that unprecedented accomplishment is somehow considered moot.
They stepped carefully into a new, uncertain season yesterday with an 81-78 victory over Pittsburgh in the quarterfinal round of the Big East tournament, an outcome that created more questions than it answered.
Connecticut's businesslike approach could lead the Huskies to look back on a 4-point deficit with 4 minutes to play -- and the possibility of a fourth quarterfinal defeat in the last five tournaments -- and the clear-minded response that allowed them to avoid a crisis.
"We don't have any mottos about not losing," said Donny Marshall, whose 22 points included 10 of 12 free throws.
"Our play just shows we don't want to lose."


Providence Has Surprise For Syracuse
Jason Murdock's two free throws with one second left in overtime gave sixth-seeded Providence a 71-69 victory over third-seeded Syracuse last night in a wild finish that punctuated an improbable comeback by the Friars.
Murdock went to the line after Lucious Jackson of Syracuse was called for a foul during a scramble for a loose ball as time ticked down.
The ball was knocked free when Lawrence Moten of Syracuse stripped it from Providence's Eric Williams.
Murdock and Jackson lunged for the ball as the whistle and the buzzer sounded.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a plan by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey to install foam on airport runways to stop runaway planes referred incompletely to the installation at La Guardia Airport.
The plan there includes foam on Runway 13-31 at the point where a Continental jet rolled off in March 1994 in an aborted takeoff.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.88
5.92
3.17
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.75
5.73
3.48
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.91
5.90
3.76
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.21
7.26
6.44
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.46
7.51
6.90
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.35
8.39
7.74
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.42
6.44
6.05
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Review/Fashion; Armani and Ferre: A Study in Contrast
When Giorgio Armani traveled halfway around the world to put on his recent "Fire and Ice" spectacle in Los Angeles, it seemed reasonable that he would recreate the show space in the basement of his Milan headquarters, from the runway lighted from beneath to the boxy seat cushions.
But when he did the same thing just halfway across Milan, in a show space for 1,200 people, it seemed something else: decadent.
Is the world ready for the rebirth of the excessive-designer era again, with its heady half-million-dollar perfume send-offs, its grandeur and its posing?
The party, for the same 1,200 people, on Thursday night after the showing of Armani's fall and winter collection, was for Acqua di Gio, his new perfume.


Woman Shot in Driveway
A 65-year-old woman was shot in the face last night outside her home in West Caldwell, N.J., in an apparent carjacking, the police said.
The woman, Sheila Gillespie, had just pulled into her driveway in her blue 1990 Honda Accord at 9:30 P.M.
When she stepped out to open her garage door, a man walked up to her and shot her once near the left eye, said Harry Jensen, chief of the West Caldwell police.


THEATER
Lust, Power and Regicide (What a Swell Party This Is)  'Edward II' Chain Lightning Theater


Union Pacific to Buy Chicago and North Western
After decades of increasingly close ties, the Union Pacific Corporation has agreed to buy the 70 percent of the Chicago and North Western Transportation Company it does not already own for $35 a share, or nearly $1.1 billion.
Union Pacific, which is based in Bethlehem, Pa., owns the nation's largest railroad, with 17,800 miles of track in 19 Western states, along with oil and gas operations and Overnite Trucking.
The C.&amp;N.W., based in Chicago, is the eighth-largest freight line, with 5,600 miles in 9 states, and also operates Metra, this city's commuter-rail service.
The merger deal was struck just two days after the Interstate Commerce Commission gave the Union Pacific final clearance to discuss any arrangement it wanted for expanding its control of the C.&amp;N.W.


Mexico's Plan Drives Peso Up 18%
Mexico's turbulent financial markets responded enthusiastically today to the economic recovery plan that the Government introduced on Thursday night, while ordinary Mexicans fumed over big price increases and higher sales taxes required by the tough measures.
The peso, after declining for six straight days, rebounded strongly, gaining 18 percent over Thursday's level to close at 6.3 to the dollar.
On Thursday, the peso had plummeted to 7.45 to the dollar, its lowest point since the currency was devalued in December.


Officer in Harlem Indicted
A police officer arrested in the 30th Precinct corruption scandal in Harlem was accused of perjury in an indictment unsealed yesterday in Manhattan.
The charge against Officer Edward M. Checke came six months after his arrest in September.
He is accused of lying about the details of the arrest of Reynaldo Clinton on Sept. 28, 1992, on a charge of criminal possession of half a kilo of cocaine.
Mr.
Clinton pleaded guilty to the charge but was released in November 1994 because Officer Checke's account had become suspect and the charge was dismissed.
Officer Checke pleaded not guilty in an arraignment yesterday.


Henry Solomonoff, Ballet Founder, 87
Henry Solomonoff, a musician, artist and businessman who helped found the American Negro Ballet, died last Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 87.
The cause was cancer, said Stephanie Reich, his daughter.


Burned Body Wasn't That Of a Student
The burned body of a woman found inside a suitcase behind a Brooklyn school on Thursday is not that of Stacy Pennant, a 21-year-old Queensboro Community College student who has been missing since early February, the City Medical Examiner's office said yesterday.
But officials say they still do not know the identity of the dead woman -- nor that of another woman whose body was found in a swampy area in Queens yesterday afternoon.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  DINKINS DEMANDS APOLOGY OVER INQUIRY  Former Mayor David N. Dinkins demanded that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani apologize for what Mr.
Dinkins called a calculated attempt to slander the man who served as Mr.
Dinkins's Youth Commissioner, Richard L. Murphy.
Mr.
Dinkins's remarks came three days after the city's Department of Investigation concluded that many of the Giuliani administration's allegations of financial mismanagement and political corruption in the Youth Services Department under Mr.
Murphy were exaggerated or unfounded.
Page 27.
SAVING THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL  You listen to Miep Gies, the 86-year-old woman who saved Anne Frank's diary, and you marvel at the still echoing boldness of what she says were just small deeds.
But 50 years ago, when nothing seemed possible, small deeds loomed powerfully heroic.
All she did was seize the day and make it possible for the whole world to better remember its innocent dead.
Carpe diem.
Memento mori.
About New York, page 27.
AMMUNITION IN DEATH PENALTY CHALLENGE Resistance to the death penalty among several of the city's district attorneys could provide a strong tool for challenging the law in court by proving that it will not be applied fairly to all murderers, civil libertarians say.
Page 27.
TESTS SHOW BODY IS NOT MISSING STUDENT The burned body of a woman found on Thursday stuffed inside a suitcase behind a Brooklyn school is not that of Stacy Pennant, a 21-year-old Queensboro Community College student who has been missing since early February, the city medical examiner's office said.
But officials say they still do not know the identity of the dead woman.
Page 27.
REGION  SLOT MACHINES?
WELL, NOT QUITE To both its proponents and critics, the slotless slot machine, as it is known, represents something of an artful high-tech dodge of state laws that prohibit slot machines in New York, even on Indian reservations where casino gambling is allowed.
They provide the individualized, fast-paced and uncomplicated gambling that slot machine users crave.
But because they have no levers, do not require players to insert money and do not return money -- a player's winnings or losses are recorded on computer -- the terminals don't seem to fit the legal definition of a slot machine.
Page 28.
DEMANDING THE RIGHT TO KEEP STUDYING It did not look like much of a protest, with about two dozen students scattered around a college library, cramming for midterm exams.
But a glance at the clock showed that the time was 4:22 A.M.
Under a new austerity schedule, the library was supposed to have closed for the night more than six hours earlier.
And the students, holding their ground in perhaps one of the final battles to save Upsala College, were demanding nothing less radical than the right to study for another year.
Page 28.
STUDENT-RUN BUS HITS A SUDDEN BUMP Suddenly the price of a trip from Princeton University to Newark International Airport is absurdly cheap -- and that worries students.
As they were making plans for spring break, the Princeton Airporter shuttle service began printing coupons in the campus newspaper that reduced the price of the trip from Princeton to Newark International from $19 to $5.
What is motivating the price cut, some students fear, is an effort to drive out of business a year-old shuttle service operated by students.
Page 28.


Anderson and Coleman Making It Fun for Nets
With the game in hand, Kenny Anderson bobbed his head and laughed.
Derrick Coleman traded playful insults with his favorite playmaker.
Somewhere in Chicago, they may soon be celebrating the return of the game's greatest player.
Somewhere in Secaucus, these two will have to do.
This was not a highlight reel from last season.
These were the Nets over the past three games.
They run, they have fun.
They crumbled the Celtics by their largest margin of victory this season, 111-81, tonight at the Boston Garden, and they accomplished the feat with their best players toying with their opponents for most of the four quarters.


Walter B. Smith 2d, An Ex-Diplomat, 65
Walter Burges Smith 2d, a retired Foreign Service officer who specialized in Eastern European and Middle East affairs, died on March 1 at Sibley Memorial Hospital in Washington.
He was 65 and lived in Chevy Chase, Md.
The cause was lung cancer, his family said.


Double-Decker Cars To Return to L.I.R.R.
After more than 40 years, double-decker coaches will return to regular service on the Long Island Rail Road in 1997.
The board of the Metropolitan Transportation Association approved the purchase of 114 two-level cars, which will seat 142 riders, compared with 120 on the current single-level cars.


More Talks Next Week
Negotiations in the baseball strike, which completes its seventh month Saturday, are tentatively scheduled to resume Wednesday in Florida.
Labor representatives for the players and the owners last negotiated in Scottsdale, Ariz., in six days of meetings that ended last Saturday.


Chinese Aide Conciliatory Despite 'Foolish' U.S. Stand on Rights
Striking a slightly conciliatory note, Foreign Minister Qian Qichen said today that China would continue its human rights dialogue with the United States despite Washington's "foolish" attempts to censure Beijing over its rights record.
Taking questions from Chinese and foreign reporters at a televised news conference, Mr.
Qian also said the pro-democracy petitioners to the current session of China's parliament had "ulterior" motives in calling for reforms and for an investigation into high-level corruption.


Where Ballgames Began (and They Didn't Complain About Parking)


The Lies About Youth Services
In its zeal to find waste, fraud and abuse in New York City government last year, the administration of Mayor Rudolph Giuliani made scapegoats of the Youth Services Department and smeared its former director, Richard Murphy.
Mayoral aides charged that the agency had overspent its budget by millions, funneled gobs of money into the re-election effort of former Mayor David Dinkins and perhaps even tried to obstruct an investigation by stealing computer files from its offices.
A report by the city's own Department of Investigation now finds the key allegations untrue or distorted.
The report finds fault with Mr.
Murphy's accounting but generally puts the lie to the smear campaign waged against him by the Giuliani administration.


Villanova Gets a Scare From Boston College
Villanova, the team seeded second and the one headlined by the league's player of the year, Kerry Kittles, was not supposed to break much of sweat against 10th-seeded Boston College in the quarterfinals of the Big East tournament last night at Madison Square Garden.
The Eagles, who finished the regular season with seven straight losses and were 9-18 over all, had done well by defeating seventh-seeded Seton Hall on Thursday.
Few expected they would have a chance of upsetting the Wildcats, ranked 13th in the nation.
But sometimes expectations don't match reality.


RESULTS PLUS
HIGH SCHOOL BASKETBALL  Court Rules Christ the King Can Play  The nationally ranked girls' basketball team from Christ the King High School in Middle Village, Queens, won clearance yesterday from Justice Luther V. Dye of the New York Supreme Court to keep playing.
The court ruled that the principals' committee of the Catholic High School Athletic Association could not bar the team from league play the rest of this season and all next season.
The team will meet St.
Francis Prep at 8 tonight at Bishop Ford High School in Brooklyn for the diocesan championship, with further tournament games if it wins.
The C.H.S.A.A. limits its member teams to one unapproved trip a season beyond the metropolitan area, and Christ the King played tournaments in Altoona, Pa., in early December and in Pickerington, Ohio, in late December.
It said the league president had given verbal permission for the Altoona tournament.
N.B.A.
Orlando Wins, Clinches Playoff Berth  Shaquille O'Neal had 26 points and 15 rebounds and the Orlando Magic clinched a playoff berth last night with a 97-85 victory over the visiting Portland Trail Blazers.
The Magic improved the best record in the National Basketball Association to 47-14, including a 31-1 mark at Orlando Arena.
Otis Thorpe led Portland with 21 points. (AP) SPURS 100, 76ers 94: David Robinson had 33 points and 12 rebounds, leading San Antonio past Philadelphia.
Dennis Rodman had 22 rebounds for the visiting Spurs, who have a record of 19-2 since Jan. 24.
Dana Barros had 24 points for Philadelphia. (AP) BULLS 99, CAVALIERS 76: Toni Kukoc scored 19 points as Chicago moved over .500 for the first time since Jan. 31.
Tyrone Hill scored 13 points for visiting Cleveland, which lost for the sixth time in seven games. (AP) PACERS 112, SUNS 97: Rik Smits had 22 points and Mark Jackson and Derrick McKey added 21 apiece to lead Indiana to the victory in Phoenix.
Without Kevin Johnson, who limped off with a groin strain in the first period, the Suns committed 18 turnovers. (AP) N.H.L.
Rain Washes Out Game in San Jose  The game between the San Jose Sharks and the Detroit Red Wings was canceled last night because of flooding on roads surrounding the San Jose Arena.
The game was tentatively rescheduled for April 7 in San Jose.
The game previously scheduled for that date, against Edmonton, was tentatively rescheduled for April 6. (AP) YACHT RACING  High Winds Scuttle America's Cup Race  The final day in the fourth round robin of the America's Cup defender series was called off yesterday because of heavy winds.
Young America was scheduled to meet Stars &amp; Stripes.
But before the start of the match, winds on the course off San Diego were measured at more than 20 knots, the maximum allowed.
With forecasts calling for worsening weather, the race was not rescheduled.
The semifinals begin next Saturday.
GOLF  O'Meara Takes Lead in Honda Classic  The tour veteran Mark O'Meara, winless since the 1992 AT&amp;T Pebble Beach National Pro-Am, continued his steady climb back to form yesterday in the Honda Classic in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
O'Meara, 38, shot a round of 65 for a total of nine-under-par 133 and a three-stroke lead over Blaine McCallister (66) and Andrew Magee (67).
The first-round leader, Jim McGovern, who opened with a 65, struggled to a 74 and stood at 139, three under par and six shots back.
TRACK AND FIELD  Villanova In Hunt for Indoor Title  Jen Rhines, a Villanova junior from Liverpool, N.Y., set a meet record in winning the women's 5,000 meters at the National Collegiate Athletic Association indoor championships last night in Indianapolis.
She won by more than 20 meters in 15 minutes 41.12 seconds, breaking the record of 15:48.17 set by Valerie McGovern of Kentucky in 1990.
The Wildcats are one of five teams in the race for the women's overall championship.
The others are defending champion Louisiana State, Texas, Wisconsin and U.C.L.A.
The men's team title appears to sewed up by Arkansas for the 12th straight time.
The Razorbacks didn't win any of last night's five finals, but took second places in the 200 meters, 5,000 meters and high jump.
OTTEY SPRINTS TO ANOTHER GOLD: Merlene Ottey of Jamaica, at 34 the oldest of the world's top women sprinters, added another medal to her record collection yesterday, winning the 60-meter dash at the World Indoor Championships in Barcelona, Spain.
Ottey caught Melanie Paschke of Germany about halfway through the race and won by more than a yard in 6.97 seconds. (AP)


Probation for Faking Abduction
Michelle Lodzinski, who is suspected of abducting and slaying her 5-year-old son in 1991, is under house arrest.
That restriction was imposed by Judge Nicholas H. Politan of United States District Court in sentencing her to three years' probation for faking her kidnapping last year.


Space Station Insures a Future for Our Children; The Inspiration Factor
To the Editor:
I was greatly disturbed by the tone of "Is NASA Among the Truly Needy?" (editorial, March 6).
Growing up in Britain in the 60's and training as a scientist, I was particularly attracted to this country by the vigor of the space program.


Calumnies on Jewish Bankers Resurface
To the Editor:
In the excerpts accompanying "Pat Robertson Says He Intended No Anti-Semitism in Book He Wrote Four Years Ago" (news article, March 4) you quote without comment from Mr.
Robertson's writings that "a German banker, Paul Warburg, succeeded in establishing the Federal Reserve Board," which Mr.
Robertson characterizes as being part of a conspiracy by European financiers to "control" the United States economy.


Observer; Dreamers, Axes in Hand
After grousing about it for eternities, Republicans are finally making a sincere effort to destroy the welfare state.
For the past 60 years Republicans have been saying the welfare state was destroying us, or would destroy us, and we'd better destroy it first, or else.


Tax Deals On Homes Can Often Backfire
HOMEOWNERS who turn a room into an office may reap tax deductions.
And if they convert a bedroom into a rental unit for extra income, they may depreciate the rental property on their taxes.
In both cases, though, claiming those deductions can come back to haunt them when they sell their houses.


Mexican Corruption Investigation Widens
Mexican officials say a former Deputy Attorney General charged with trying to thwart an investigation into his brother's assassination last year also appears to have engaged in other corruption, including the embezzlement of more than $ 750,000 in Government money.
Mexican and American law enforcement officials, who say the former prosecutor, Mario Ruiz Massieu, hid about $ 10 million, are still investigating the possibility that some of the money may have come directly or indirectly from bribes paid by powerful cocaine traffickers.


Executive Changes
CANON U.S.A.
INC., Lake Success, L.I., appointed Tod Pike president of its MCS/Canon sales subsidiary.
EPSON AMERICA INC., Torrance, Calif., named John D. Lang chief operating officer.


U.S. JOBLESS RATE TUMBLES TO 5.4% ON SURGE IN HIRING
An unexpectedly large number of Americans found new jobs in February, and the unemployment rate matched a four-year low by dropping three-tenths of a point, to 5.4 percent, the Labor Department reported today.
After a tumultuous week in the financial markets, as the dollar hit record lows against both the German mark and the Japanese yen before recovering somewhat, investors found something to cheer in the latest figures.
Under the weight of a yearlong series of interest-rate increases engineered by the Federal Reserve, economic growth is finally showing signs of slowing to a pace that could help extend the expansion that began in 1991.


Wife Killer to Live With No. 2
He thought his wife looked like a devil in the form of a fish.
Seven years ago, he stabbed her more than 100 times with a screwdriver.
Yesterday, a judge said Michael Komons could leave a group home to move to his new wife's house in Highlands.
Judge Leonard Arnold of Somerset County Superior Court said that if Mr.
Komons, 57, a manic-depressive, takes lithium, he can cope with everyday life.


Tribe's No-Arm Bandits Called a Dodge
It didn't look like a slot machine, but it was close enough for Ray Raymond.
He sat down before the squat black and chrome terminal, inserted a plastic card, punched in his private identification number and watched the video screen come alive.
For the next three hours, the 55-year-old Syracuse retiree played a computerized version of Keno, betting $1 every 10 seconds on the same five numbers.
By the time he quit, he had won $225 -- without once depositing a coin.


Religion Journal; Grand Plans to Tell a Billion About Jesus
Over a career that began when Harry S. Truman was serving his first term as President, the Rev.
Billy Graham has preached before about 79 million people at indoor and outdoor stadiums the world over, from Adelaide, Australia, to Zurich.
"Those are just the ones we have records for," said Larry Ross, a spokesman for the Billy Graham Evangelistic Association, the organization that arranges the evangelist's events.
The association believes that the true figure may be 30 million people higher, Mr.
Ross said, if smaller speaking engagements are included.


Bridge
Half a century ago the Philadelphia area had a group of outstanding players who were consistently prominent in national championships: B. Jay Becker, John Crawford, Charles Goren, Olive Peterson, Sidney Silodor, Charles Solomon, Peggy Solomon and Sally Young.
The last survivor was Peggy Solomon, who died a week ago at the age of 86.
Her great year was 1944, when she won the National Board-a-Match Teams and was a runner-up in the Spingold Knockout Teams.
She became Life Master No. 33, and the third woman to attain that title, then far more prestigious than it is now.
In a long playing career, which included international appearances, she won 8 other national titles and finished second on 13 other occasions.


Latest Tool Of Shoplifters: Metal in Bags
In what the Nassau County police called the method of choice for professional shoplifters, five people have been charged with using shopping bags lined with metal to circumvent store security systems and steal more than $8,000 in merchandise from a mall in Massapequa.
The suspects, all illegal immigrants, may be part of a shoplifting ring operating along the East Coast, the police said.


Giants Eye Changes On the Defensive Line
The Giants appear to be making major changes on their defensive line.
They have signed one lineman and are making a big pitch to another.
The moves could affect the way the Giants negotiate with the veteran defensive tackle Erik Howard.
First, the Giants yesterday signed the Minnesota Vikings' backup defensive end, Robert Harris, a restricted free agent, to a three-year offer sheet valued at nearly $5 million.


Man Indicted in 130 Break-Ins
The son of a newspaper deliverer, who apparently used his father's delivery list to determine when the customers were on vacation, was indicted yesterday on charges that he committed more than 130 burglaries.


Secrecy Rules, Secretly Arrived At
The U.S.
Judicial Conference, which writes rules for the Federal judiciary, has a secret plan to vote on court secrecy rules at its regular, secret meeting in Washington on Tuesday.
The rules themselves would make secrecy more routine in courts that should be open.
The furtive method of adoption is unworthy of the conference, headed by Chief Justice William Rehnquist, which should be trying to make the courts, and its own process, more open.
Before the conference is a proposal to make the pretrial sealing of court records, which now requires a showing of "good cause," nearly automatic if the two sides agree.
The trouble with this idea is that while secrecy may suit the contesting parties, it may trample on broader public concerns.


Devils Roar Back for Rare Road Victory
When the Tampa Bay Lightning scored a goal with 40.9 seconds left in the second period tonight to move ahead of the Devils, 1-0, it put matters squarely against the New Jersey team.
After all, the Devils came in a lowly 0-5-1 when trailing after two periods.
Just as bleakly, they carried a 2-8-1 road record into the game.


Mets Grouse and Gripe as Green Grins
Manager Dallas Green says that his replacement Mets should shut up and work harder, and that their complaints about his major league conditioning program represent more proof that they are not major league quality players.
The replacement players say Green is being inflexible and, in the words of Stanley Jefferson, "not smart" for refusing to retool his program to suit their lower fitness levels.


A Hacker Is Indicted In Computer Fraud Case
Kevin D. Mitnick, the fugitive computer hacker who was captured by Federal authorities on Feb. 15, was indicted Thursday on 23 counts of fraud involving computer-access devices.
The indictments, filed in Federal District Court in Greenville, N.C., some 85 miles from here, charged Mr.
Mitnick with one count of possessing device-making equipment, one count of possessing unauthorized access devices and 21 counts of using a counterfeited access device.


An Office in Cyberspace


About 'Your Money'
These pages end publication with this issue.


Cocaine's Reality, by Garcia Marquez
Speaking with the wisdom of 67 years and the gravity befitting a Nobel Prize winner, Gabriel Garcia Marquez proposed a new solution for the eternal problem of his country's cocaine exports to the United States.
"All the money that Colombia invests in fighting drugs should be invested in the United States to research synthetic cocaine," the novelist said in an interview recently.


The Woman Who Saved the Diary of a Young Girl
YOU listen to Miep Gies, the 86-year-old woman who saved Anne Frank's diary, and you marvel at the still echoing boldness of what she says were just small deeds.
But 50 years ago, when nothing seemed possible, small deeds loomed powerfully heroic.
All she did was seize the day and make it possible for the whole world to better remember its innocent dead.
Carpe diem.
Memento mori.
The stakes were high -- death, arrest, the threat of torture -- and she had only minutes in which to act, to scoop up scattered pages and save them from oblivion, remarkable pages of life-affirming testimony written in a secret attic where the dark-eyed Jewish girl hid from those who ultimately found her and killed her.


Nuclear Waste Dump Gets Tribe's Approval in Re-vote
A little more than one month after the Mescalero Apaches in southern New Mexico rebuked their tribal leaders by voting against a plan to store nuclear waste on the reservation, they have abruptly reversed themselves and decided to go ahead with the lucrative project.
After weeks of intense lobbying by the plan's supporters, who asserted that environmentalists and other outsiders had earlier misled the people into forgoing high-tech jobs and millions of dollars for schools and social services, the Mescaleros turned out in record numbers for a second vote on Thursday.


Borland's Stock Surges After Ruling
Shares of Borland International Inc. surged today after a ruling late Thursday that the company had not infringed copyrighted material in the Lotus Development Corporation's 1-2-3 spreadsheet program.
Borland shares closed at $9.75, up $1.25, in heavy Nasdaq trading.
Lotus shares also rose, although by a smaller percentage, to close at $44.50, up $2.50.
The movement in Lotus shares reflected the minimal impact that the ruling, by a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit in Boston, is expected to have on the company's operations.
Although Lotus had said it expected to receive more than $100 million in damages in the suit, Borland had less than half that amount in cash, and few analysts expected the outcome to be material to Lotus.


Flat European Sector Was Best Overseas
Although it's not saying much, Europe was the best of the overseas stock sectors last year.
Its markets were flat over all, while markets elsewhere turned in losses.
To make the list of top European funds for the last three years, managers had to cherry-pick stocks from many countries and industries.
Foreign fund managers who use the top-down approach -- choosing countries that look promising, industries there and then specific stocks -- have had less success since the European exchange rate mechanism collapsed in 1992, leaving the Continent's economies less closely linked.


Pondering an 'Afternoon'


Balking Prosecutors: A Door Opens to Death Row Challenges
The resistance to the death penalty among several New York City district attorneys could provide a strong tool for challenging the law in court by proving that it would not be applied fairly to all murderers, civil libertarians say.
Earlier this week, Robert T. Johnson, the Bronx District Attorney, said he would refuse to seek the death penalty once the state's new law takes effect on Sept. 1, and the prosecutors in Manhattan, Queens and Brooklyn have all expressed reservations about the legislation.


Muriel Resnik Dies; Playwright Was 78
Muriel Resnik, a novelist and playwright best known for her comedy "Any Wednesday," died on Monday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 78 and had recently lived in Beaufort, N.C.
The cause was heart failure after a long illness, said her husband, Victor Jackson.


Bomb Wounds 63 in Families of Algiers Police
Hours after a new warning from Islamic militants, a car bomb exploded today in Algiers, the Algerian capital, near housing for police officers and their families, wounding at least 63 people.
The Armed Islamic Group, considered the most violent faction battling the Algerian Government, had warned hours earlier that it would begin a campaign this weekend to kill wives, daughters and other women related to police and army personnel unless fundamentalist women were freed from Algerian prisons.


House Passes New Standards Limiting Awards in Civil Suits
With little suspense and overwhelming support from the new Republican majority, the House today easily passed a measure that for the first time would set standards in all of the nation's courts for civil lawsuits.
The measure was approved by a 265 to 161 vote, giving the House Republicans a clean sweep this week on all three bills that made up a legislative package intended to sharply reduce the number of lawsuits nationwide.


Exploring the Territory Around the Quietest Sounds
The New York Philharmonic concert on Thursday evening at Avery Fisher Hall ended precisely where it had begun: on the indefinable threshold between silence and the quietest sound.
If the effect seemed slightly less stunning on the last notes of Tchaikovsky's "Pathetique" Symphony, it was only because Valery Gergiyev had by then made such wonders seem routine.
In the first work, Anatoly Liadov's tone picture "The Enchanted Lake," the beginning was truly remarkable to a listener unable to see either the conductor's hands or the back stands of the cellos.
At some point, a presence -- half sound, half atmosphere -- arose from a suspenseful silence.


Does Chaos Mix With Jewish Music?
Chaos descended on the New England Conservatory from Tuesday to Thursday here, as students and faculty members undertook a bewilderingly wide-ranging survey of Jewish musical traditions and Jewish composers.
Klezmer dances, synagogue songs, Mahler lieder, 12-tone chamber works, Copland's "Quiet City," European avant-garde creations and a Beastie Boys rap collided in the genteel surroundings of Jordan Hall.
Anyone looking for a coherent perspective on Jewish music would have come away from the three-day affair, entitled "A Question of Identity: Music From the Jewish Community," disappointed and dismayed.
It was, I think, a necessary incoherence, the right kind of chaos.
Too many people in the past have been terrifyingly certain about what Jewish music is or should be.
The Nazi campaign of destruction against the Jewish community of Europe was predicated in large measure on a description of Jewish culture.
Nazi musical views drew on the writings of Richard Wagner, particularly the infamous essay "Judaism in Music," a pivotal document of modern anti-Semitism.
This cataclysmic string of definitions warns us not to define.


Emotional March Gains a Repentant Wallace
The marchers swarmed around the old man in the wheelchair, some to tell him he was forgiven, some to whisper that he could never be forgiven, not today, not a million years from now.
Yet to all of the people who retraced the steps of the Selma-to-Montgomery civil rights march 30 years ago, George C. Wallace offered an apology for a doomed ideal.
The former Alabama Governor, whose name became shorthand for much of the worst of white Southern opposition to the civil rights movement, held hands with men and women he had once held down with the power of his office.
To one aging civil rights war horse, he mumbled, "I love you."


Sports of The Times; The Rookie Has Earned His Minutes
THE Big East Conference keeps changing.
When it started back in 1980, it was just a nasty little seven-team scrum in the Northeast, but next year there are going to be 13 teams spread out from Miami of Florida to West Virginia to Notre Dame of Indiana.
Big, but not totally East.
There has been another change in the Big East.
In the 16th year of the Big East, John Thompson of Georgetown has gone against all his principles, all his history, all his dogma, all his control-freakiness, and has sent out a freshman guard and let him play the noble game called hoops.


After Some False Starts, Bobek Glides to the Top
Since she began practicing her spiral in the living room to please her mother, Nicole Bobek has worked with enough coaches to staff a large skating academy.
And today at the world championships, after that now-matchless spiral and four clean jumps had put her at least temporarily on top of her sport, it seemed as if the American teen-ager's shaky past and dreamy present were converging just outside the kiss-and-cry area.
No matter who was doing the talking, the consensus was that, after many a detour, Bobek had finally arrived.


Group to Pay $1 Billion In Sammons Cable Deal
Sammons Communications Inc. agreed to sell 650,000 of its 1.1 million cable television subscribers yesterday for $1 billion to a group that includes the leveraged buyout firm Hicks, Muse, Tate &amp; Furst and Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
Sammons, based in Dallas, has been for sale for some time.
It had been widely rumored in the cable industry that the buyers would be a consortium of companies with cable interests, including Tele-Communications Inc., Intermedia Partners, Knight-Ridder, Lenfest and others.


Man Is Convicted Of Endangering Girl
A Brooklyn man with a previous rape conviction was found guilty yesterday of endangering the welfare of a 9-year-old girl but acquitted of the more serious charge of attempting to kidnap her from a playground near Prospect Park.
A State Supreme Court jury in Brooklyn returned the verdict in the trial of Richard Mickens, 37.
In the August 1994 incident near the park, the police said that Mr.
Mickens first tried to lure the girl to his home, then began dragging her by the arm until passers-by intervened.


U.S. Panel to Scrutinize Police
Federal officials named an assistant United States Attorney and two F.B.I. agents yesterday to investigate allegations of police brutality and corruption throughout the state.
Assistant Attorney Alberto Rivas and special agents Robert DelGrosso and Rita Yonker will handle citizen calls, the United States Attorney, Faith S. Hochberg, announced.


How to Avoid Remodeling Disasters
As veterans of two home remodeling projects, my husband and I approached an ambitious renovation of our latest house with some street-smart tactics.
The contractor said the new kitchen could be completed in four weeks -- six weeks, tops.
We doubled that estimate and started work in June, certain it would be done by the time our children returned to school in the fall.
Thanksgiving was more like it.
When we asked how a four-week construction project could stretch to more than four months, the contractor had a disarmingly simple answer.
"I lied," he said.


G.O.P. Senators Would Kill 4 Agencies and Slash Benefits
The Senate's Republicans moved belatedly but forcefully into the debate on Federal spending cuts today, disclosing proposals to abolish four Cabinet departments and slice as much as half a trillion dollars over the next five years from the growth in entitlement programs like Medicare and farm subsidies.
This was the first concrete indication that Republican senators, like their House counterparts, intended to follow up on their repeated demands for a balanced Federal budget with an actual plan to achieve it.
And it placed the political onus on the Senate's Democrats, who complained only Wednesday that Republican budget policy was all talk and no action.


Maurice Freeman, Silver Expert, 85
Maurice Freeman, an authority on antique and modern silver and silver plating, died on Sunday in his Manhattan home.
He was 85.
The cause was Parkinson's disease, said his daughter, Carole Gliedman of Scarsdale.


Man in the News: John Mark Deutch; Reluctant Helmsman for a Troubled Agency
If intelligence were the sole prerequisite for the job of Director of Central Intelligence, John M. Deutch, the Deputy Defense Secretary, would be extraordinarily qualified.
His colleagues say he has a first-class mind, with an ego and energy to match it.
In two years at the Pentagon, Mr.
Deutch has shaken up multibillion-dollar programs, taken a leading role on foreign policy issues, confronted the problem of the spread of nuclear weapons and represented the United States abroad.


Prisoner Lawsuit Bill Has a Hidden Agenda
To the Editor:
The four state attorneys general (letter, March 3) make an important distinction between restricting prisoners' frivolous lawsuits and restricting the ability of the Federal courts to act in serious cases involving dangerous prison conditions.
But proponents of the Stop Turning Out Prisoners Act have tried to hide the damaging consequences of their bill by implying that its purpose is to end frivolous prisoner lawsuits.


Krone Is Back Racing
After two months on the sidelines with a fractured finger, Julie Krone returned to racing today at Gulfstream Park.
But her return was no artistic success.
She rode eighth and next to last aboard In Her Glory in the seventh race, then ran fifth and next to last aboard Punch Line in the Gulfstream Park Sprint Handicap, which was won by last year's sprinting champion, Cherokee Run.


New Issues Are Easier To Buy, but Still Risky
HERE'S a hot idea: a company that allows customers to reserve seats at movie theaters.
Not interested?
How about a company that makes that staple of late-night TV -- infomercials?
Or maybe a store like Toys "R" Us that carries infant goods instead of toys?
With baby boomers making their own boomlet, it may be just the ticket . . . .
The ticket, that is, to riches.
And that is the pitch for initial public offerings of stock.
All three of these ideas were offered to the public in the form of new stock issues in 1994, for Movie Fone, Positive Response Television and Baby Superstore, respectively.
In each case, quick-fire investors hoped to bag the next Microsoft or maybe the next Boston Chicken, whose shares rose 140 percent from the offering price on their first day of trading in late 1993.
So far, two of these three 1994 deals have been good deals for anyone who got in early.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  PAKISTAN'S WORSENING VIOLENCE
At least 11 people died in an attack on a Karachi mosque.
The assault, two days after the slaying of two Americans, intensifies a feeling that the city's ethnic and religious violence is growing worse. 1  INQUIRY EXPANDS IN MEXICO
Mexican officials say a former Deputy Attorney General charged with trying to thwart an investigation into the slaying of his own brother also appears to have embezzled Government funds. 3  SOLVING THE COCAINE PROBLEM
Gabriel Garcia Marquez, a writer and Nobel Prize winner, proposes a new solution for the eternal problem of Colombia's cocaine exports to the United States. 3  P.L.O.
PLEDGE TO FIGHT TERRORISM
Yasir Arafat promised Secretary of State Warren Christopher that he would do his best to prosecute Palestinian terrorists, but he blamed Israel for helping create the groups responsible for terrorism. 5  BOMB ATTACK IN ALGERIA
Hours after a new warning from Islamic militants, a car bomb exploded in Algiers near housing for police officers and their families, wounding at least 63 people. 5  CHINA CONCILIATORY ON RIGHTS
Beijing said it would continue its human rights dialogue with the U.S. despite "foolish" attempts to censure China over its rights record. 5  Russia agrees with the I.M.F. on a 6.4 billion loan. 5 The U.S. is suspending the last of its military aid to Guatemala. 3  Liverpool Journal: Big Brother is definitely watching. 4  National 6-9  SHIFT IN C.I.A.
NOMINEES
Michael P. C. Carns withdrew as the President's choice for Director of Central Intelligence, and Mr.
Clinton immediately chose John M. Deutch, the Deputy Defense Secretary, for the post.  1  DOOMED BY BACKGROUND CHECK
When the F.B.I. background report on General Carns reached the White House, everyone involved decided that the nominee might be dragging too much baggage into hearings before a Republican Congress.  1  APOLOGY FOR A DOOMED IDEAL
On the 30th anniversary of the Selma march, George Wallace, one-time nemesis of the civil rights movement, offered words of conciliation to those he had oppressed while Governor of Alabama.  1  JOBLESS RATE FALLS TO 5.4%
An unexpectedly large number of Americans found new jobs in February, as the unemployment rate matched a four-year low, dropping three-tenths of a point to 5.4 percent.
Financial traders rushed exuberantly to buy American assets. 1  CIVIL-SUIT LIMITS PASS
In an effort to discourage lawsuits, the House easily passed a measure that would set standards and curtail damage awards in civil courts.  1  PRIDE OF MAINE, ON COURT OR OFF
The best athlete in the Maine is a home-bred female basketball player for the Black Bears of the University of Maine.  6  REVERSAL ON NUCLEAR WASTES
In a second tribal vote, the Mescalero Apaches of New Mexico reversed their January decision against storing nuclear waste on their land.  6  TESTIMONY ON SIMPSON'S BRONCO
A detective testified about a puzzling array of items found in O. J. Simpson's Bronco, including a shovel and large plastic bag.  6  SENATE'S TURN WITH BUDGET AX
Republicans proposed abolishing four Cabinet agencies and cutting up to $500 billion from the growth of entitlement programs.  8  MINISTERING TO THE WORLD
Religion Journal: In a three-part program the Rev.
Billy Graham will try to tell one billion people, a fifth of the world, about Jesus.  9  Destructive rains pounded Northern California for a second day.  9  Metro Digest 25  Business Digest 37  Sports 30-35  CHICAGO AWAITING JORDAN
Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23  Editorials  The oil industry's Iran policy.
The lies about Youth Services.
Women's or hoodlums' rights?
Secrecy rules, secretly arrived at.
Letters  Russell Baker: Dreamers, axes in hand.
Georges de Menil: Chernobyl, a  living tomb.
Farai Chideya: Affimative action as equality?
I'm still waiting.
Jennifer L. Eberhardt, R. Richard Banks: Rutgers, race and reality.
Chronicle 24  Bridge 19  Crossword 16


Woman Is Shot in Carjacking
A 65-year-old woman was shot in the face last night outside her home here in an apparent carjacking, the police said.
The woman, Sheila Gillespie, had just pulled her blue 1990 Honda Accord into her driveway at 9:30 P.M.
When she stepped out to open her garage door, a man walked up to her and shot her once near the left eye, said Harry Jensen, chief of the West Caldwell police.


POP
A Melodic Sensibility Over Loping Tubas  Henry Threadgill, composer and saxophonist Sweet Basil


Van Voorhees Hearing Tomorrow
The decadelong battle over whether to build an eight-level parking garage across from Long Island College Hospital still isn't over.
Many observers thought the last legal hurdle had been cleared on Jan. 31 when New York Supreme Court Justice Carol E. Huff dismissed a lawsuit filed by Friends of Van Voorhees Park.
But now J. Peter Flemming, a lawyer and the group's president, said the organization would appeal.
The hospital won approval from the City Council in September 1993 to buy the land occupied by Upper Van Voorhees Park and convert it into a 430-car garage.
The lawsuit, filed by Friends of Van Voorhees Park last December, alleged that the city failed to consider alternative sites for the garage during the environmental review process and that the City Council had no right to allow the transfer of the park to the hospital because the Board of Estimate was dissolved before it could approve the sale of the park's land.


Patricia Hanley, Thomas Wynn 3d
Patricia Alice Hanley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles E. Hanley of Upper Brookville, L.I., was married yesterday to Thomas Joseph Wynn 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Joseph Wynn Jr. of Dighton, Mass.
The Rev.
Mario Costa performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York.
The bride, 26, will be known as Patricia Hanley Wynn.
She is a graduate of Fairfield University, as is the bridegroom.
The bride is a casualty underwriter at the General Reinsurance Corporation in Boston.
Her father is the president and her mother is the chairwoman of Thomas C. Wilson Inc., a pneumatic tools manufacturer in Long Island City, Queens.


Chief for World Bank
President Clinton has nominated James D. Wolfensohn, an investment banker and patron of the arts, as president of the World Bank, a post traditionally held by an American.
Article, page 20.


DC-9's Could Land At Republic for 30 Years
Fifty year ago Republic Airfield in Farmingdale contained acres of P-47 Thunderbolts built there to defend American bombers from the Luftwaffe.
Now it's time for people like me, who flew those bombers, to return the favor by helping to defend Republic Airport.


The Trickle-Down Theory of Architecture
THE PUBLIC CONTINUES TO BE fascinated by the architecture of wealth and privilege.
Whether it is brought to us on television, in movies, or in magazines, we can't get enough of it.
Undoubtedly, a bit of voyeurism is involved here.
But I think there is more to it -- perhaps a kind of fascination with our architectural roots.
For the homes of the wealthy really have influenced the way we all live.
At first glance, a trickle-down theory of domestic architecture has little to recommend it.
After all, it is the Colonial saltbox and the California bungalow, not the antebellum plantation and the Connecticut estate, that are the sturdy prototypes for Middle American housing.
When William Levitt built his trend-setting postwar suburbs on Long Island the houses were intended to resemble Cape Cod cottages, not scaled-down Newport mansions.
Nevertheless, we may be keeping up with the Vanderbilts without realizing it.


Non-City Athletes Are Few
Tyrone Rushie was still perspiring minutes after winning the high jump in yesterday's New York State Federation Track and Field Championships at the Armory on 168th Street.
Although he was happy with his jump of 6 feet 8 inches, the junior from Mount Vernon High School in Westchester wasn't exactly thrilled with the competition.
"It feels better when you defeat true champions," said Rushie.
"But the city kids win everything. That's why no one else is here."


CYBERIGHTS
In "Cyberights," Max Frankel hits all the right notes about the attack on intellectual property in new technologies ("Word and Image," Feb. 12).
But embedded in Frankel's column is a rich digital irony.


Self-Help on the Road
One trip to the police station to bail out a towed-away rental car will make you realize that Philip Grosse, a retired language teacher, had a brainstorm with his guides to French and Spanish traffic signs.
The booklets list traffic-sign terminology alphabetically in the respective language, making it easier to find an expression as you are driving.
Conversely, when it comes to requests like asking to check the oil or to fill up the fuel tank, English equivalents are listed first.


THE COUNTER COUNTERCULTURE
In reading "The Counter Counterculture," I searched for words such as more civility, compassion and justice for all and never found them.
RUTH L. HARDER Austin, Tex.


Crackdown on Ave. C Peddlers
For years, a stretch of Avenue C from Sixth to 10th Streets turned into Alphabet City's version of a garage sale on Sunday mornings.
Local residents poured out of their apartments with second-hand clothing, furniture and appliances -- things they no longer used or had found discarded in fancier precincts of the city -- and spread them on flattened cardboard boxes, where browsers, bargain hunters and even some antique dealers perused them.
Now, this informal bazaar is the target of a police crackdown, consistent with a city policy to move unlicensed peddlers off the street.
In some cases, vendors are moved into legal, outdoor market areas, as happened last year when 125th Street vendors were moved to a lot on 116th Street.
But the Avenue C vendors are not being relocated.


New Jersey Q &amp; A: Jorden Schiff; For Principal, 28, Youth Is No Barrier
AT an age in life when most people are working on the first rung of their career ladders, Jorden Schiff is closing in on the top rung of his.
In January of this year Mr.
Schiff, who is 28, became one of the youngest public school principals in the state when he was hired by the High Bridge School District to take over the top job at the 300-student High Bridge Elementary School.


Washington Talk; Term Limits: Change Nobody Wants
So far, opponents of term limits have been spared any heavy lifting.
The supposed supporters are doing just fine at running it into the ground themselves.
For the first time in their 100-day gallop through the 10 items of their Contract With America, House Republican leaders have had to postpone a vote for lack of support.


'In the Natural State' And Hunting
Re the Jan. 29 letter to the New Jersey editor by Gloria J. Binkowski, V.M.D., about Pete Dunne's "In the Natural State":
The vast majority of people are meat eaters.
If Gloria Binkowski's ancestors were not hunters, she would probably not be here today.


Pay Attention to Bulbs. Begin Cleanup.
Fertilize spring flowering bulbs.
Take note of what bulbs are popping up.
Keep a journal on what is blooming when and what combinations of colors and textures work.


Clinton to Recommend Wolfensohn to Head World Bank
President Clinton has chosen James D. Wolfensohn, an investment banker and arts patron, as president of the World Bank, the White House announced today.
The selection is formally a recommendation to the World Bank's directors, who elect the president.
By tradition, the World Bank presidency goes to an American and the directorship of the International Monetary Fund to a European.


World Markets; Is South Korea Poised to Rise Again?
IT may seem foolhardy to write again about a so-called emerging market when blood is running all over the floor of Latin America's stock exchanges, but then is South Korea really an emerging market, given that the term is virtually synonymous with being a developing country?
The International Finance Corporation, the World Bank's business promotion arm, coined the emerging market designation and includes South Korea in its index of such markets, as do other financial houses tracking these new and relatively undeveloped stock exchanges.


The Executive Life; At the Beck and Call Of the Overbooked
RODNEY VANAUSDAL was on his way from Chicago to the Kentucky Derby with three friends when their rented motor home broke down, leaving them stranded in Rensselaer, Ind.
Under the circumstances, most executives would have hoped for an able mechanic to arrive on the scene.
Mr.
VanAusdal, a lawyer with Williams &amp; Montgomery in Chicago, called his corporate concierge.
His what?


A Boon for the Rangers: Tear Down the Forum
As far as the Rangers are concerned, the wrecking crew can show up this week and immediately begin the demolition of this old Forum.
Melt the ice with rock salt, send the cornerstone to the Hall of Fame and divide the rest of the temple of hockey into thousands of cherished souvenirs.
Just don't force the Rangers to come back and play any more games here, where they rarely win.
In what might have been their last visit here, the Rangers lost tonight by 3-1 to the Canadiens, a team that had been in a terrible slump.
Most painful for the Rangers was Montreal's winning goal.
It was scored by Benoit Brunet in the second period, but was accidentally set up by Mark Messier, the Ranger captain, with a bad pass late from deep in his own end of the ice.


It's Black and White And Not an Ear of Corn
IOWANS, resolutely stable people situated in the midst of what big-city fashion types would call flyover country, have long had to be content with being on the cutting edge of corn harvests, or perhaps of a Presidential election now and then.
But this season, the Hawkeye state has planted the seeds of its own fashion trendlet.


Kimberly Harke, William Sushon
Kimberly Michelle Harke, the daughter of Michael and Donna Harke of Norwalk, Conn., was married yesterday to William Joseph Sushon, the son of William and Margaret Sushon of Neshanic Station, N.J.
The Rev.
Michael Jones performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas the Apostle Roman Catholic Church in East Norwalk, Conn.
Mrs.
Shuson, 23, graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
She is a legal consultant on medical-management affairs at Met Life Health Care, a managed care company in Westport, Conn.
Her father is the president of AAP Inc., electrical contractors in Norwalk.
Her mother is an occupational health nurse at Cytec Industries, a chemical company in Stamford, Conn.


In Police Scandal, a Taxpayer Windfall
O.
L.
Shedrick suddenly has a few extra dollars to buy a new lawnmower, a few shovels and other equipment for his tiny landscaping business.
"It's just like I found money," he said.
"I'd never heard of anything like this in my life."
Things are also looking up for Harvey Strange, who figures he may finally get around to building a patio for his house with the $362.10 check he picked up this morning at Village Hall.
"This comes in really handy," Mr.
Strange said.
"I'd been planning to do some work on the house for a while now."


Bowe Stops Battered Hide in 6th to Win W.B.O. Title
Riddick Bowe, who wasted the world heavyweight championship by overeating and not training hard enough, became a major player in the tangled boxing game tonight by smashing his way over Herbie Hide to win the World Boxing Organization version of the crown.
It was a game performance by the overmatched Briton, who was knocked down seven times and finally was counted out at 2 minutes 25 seconds of the sixth round.


The Executive Computer; Software That Pits Alarmists Against Devil's Advocates
IMAGINE a security system for your home that would electronically scan your property and alert you to any chinks in the armor that might make you a target for burglars and vandals -- a broken window latch, maybe, or door left ajar.
Now, what if the same system could canvass every house in the neighborhood?
Would you want your neighborhoods to have it?
The burglars and vandals?
All of a sudden, you don't feel quite so private or safe.


Bytes Make Might
YOU'LL THEN BE able to pick up your telephone and call your son or daughter, who you are watching in real time in a fire fight.
They will pick up their cellular telephone.
You will chat with them about your view of how they are conducting their squad operations. . . .
A lot of this sounds far-fetched, but it's not.
This is literally the edge of the future."
This is Newt Gingrich, applying his fascination with technology and futurology to the ancient art of war.
Gingrich believes that a third-wave society, one based largely on information instead of on agriculture or industry (the first and second waves), will have its own distinctive kind of warfare.
Or so he said last month in a speech to the Armed Forces Communications and Electronics Association.


Hey, Big Spenders
THE END OF REFORM New Deal Liberalism in Recession and War.
By Alan Brinkley. 371 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $27.50.


Iowa State Shocks Kansas In Overtime
Big Eight Conference
IOWA STATE 80, KANSAS 72: Hurl Beechum hit a pair of 3-pointers in overtime and finished with 25 points as Iowa State upset second-ranked Kansas, 80-72, yesterday in the Big Eight tournament semifinals at Kansas City, Mo.


The Nation; Hey, Waiter! Now There's a Lawyer in My Soup
HOW about a tort with that torte?
Take the case of the young couple celebrating their honeymoon at The Rainbow Room last year.
Seated near the smoking section, they were, from time to time, subjected to drifting smoke during the evening.
They finished their meal and left without incident.
A few weeks later, they sued the restaurant for $1 million, maintaining that they were so upset by the smoke at dinner that it "upset their expected right to conjugal happiness."


Evoking The Flavor Of East Asia
"An Evening of Elegance in the Far East," a benefit dance at the American Museum of Natural History, March 2.


If Jordan Does Return, It Will Change N.B.A.
We have coped with basketball without Michael Jordan.
We have waited patiently while Jordan experimented with baseball.
Enough is enough.


March 5-11; One High-Tech Racing Yacht, Down Under
It was a shock.
Not only was it the first time in the 144 years of the America's Cup competition that a yacht had sunk during a race, but the speed with which the 75-foot One Australia submerged last week gave one pause.
"The boat was unzipping in front of our eyes," said John Bertrand, the skipper.
It took about three minutes for the $3 million yacht, which had split in half, to disappear in the choppy Pacific Ocean waters off San Diego.
Was weather a factor?
Maybe, but the 20-knot winds, 4-foot seas and rain that prevailed rarely sink boats the size of a commuter jet.
So suspicions focused on either a submerged object or a design flaw.


Hatfield Exemplifies New Kind of Leader
To the Editor:
Senator Mark O. Hatfield of Oregon was courageous in voting against the balanced budget amendment.
His subsequent crisis, however temporary, reflects poorly on the sincerity of many members of Congress (news article, March 9).


What of Cities If the Blueprint Is Republican?
IS ARCHITECTURE LIKELY TO BE affected by the Republican agenda?
How can it not be?
Architecture is a social art.
To a more or less conspicuous degree, every building bears the imprint of the social contract.
And last November's elections expressed a national desire to renegotiate the terms of that contract.
Sooner or later, that desire will express itself in built form.
If things go according to the Contract With America, architects can at least look forward to a brisk trade designing prisons.
A correctional facility may not be every architect's idea of a dream commission, but it could stand as a good symbol for the grim mood in which much of the profession now finds itself.
Thus far, the 90's have not been golden years for architecture.
Many architects were thrown out of work by the recession and remain underemployed, at least by standards of the 1980's.
Some feel cut adrift by the absence of a unifying ideology or style.
Others are feeling displaced by the exaggerated claims for cyberspace and virtual reality: will buildings be reduced to mere pit stops on the information highway?
Above all, perhaps, many feel let down by the Clinton Administration and its failure to bring architects together behind a compelling urban vision.


ANIMAL OF THE WEEK: Move Afoot To Move Willy
Keiko, the 21-foot, 7,000-pound orca who starred in the movie "Free Willy," is himself going to be free.
Sort of.
This fall he'll be leaving his relatively small tank in a Mexico City amusement park for one four times as big at the nonprofit Oregon Coast Aquarium in Newport, Ore.
The plan is to retrain Keiko to catch his own food so that he can be released, eventually, off the coast of Iceland where he was caught at the age of 2, 14 years ago.
The Free Willy/ Keiko Foundation reports that it has raised about half of the $9 million it needs to pay for the new tank, transportation and extras like the use of DNA testing to pursue Keiko's lost relatives for a potential reunion.


The Performance in the Pits
IT may look like an opera in the commodity pits at the World Trade Center, with some people singing and others looking for all the world as if they are trying out to replace the Met's James Levine with a baton.
But no one who has ever stood in the middle of the cacophony would compare the sound to Pavarotti.


Death Penalty Doesn't Allow for Human Error; A Drifter in Florida
To the Editor:
Re "For an Honest Death Penalty"(Op-Ed, March 8): The passing reference to the execution of John Spenkelink may puzzle some readers who do not recall the case.


One-Liner Helps Lift A Sinking Feeling
The dark humor that so often follows misfortune has settled in among America's Cup camps here, including One Australia.
Despite being the butt of the jokes, even the team from Down Under has been able to laugh.
It has been a week since the syndicate's new, $3 million yacht, One Australia, suddenly split apart and sank in 500 feet of water.
The exact cause of the debacle will probably never be determined.
But the humor helps to soothe some of the sting.


Tuning Up to Present Irish Tenor and Harpists
LIFE would be calmer for Eily O'Grady if St.
Patrick's Day came more than once a year.
Then she would not have to arrange to get her husband, the Irish tenor Frank Patterson, from a White House performance at 7 to a concert in upstate New York the same evening.
But a frenetic pace suits Miss O'Grady, who works full time as her husband's accompanist and also teaches harp and Gaelic singing to children of Irish descent several times a week.


Cowboy Art
To the Editor: Timothy Egan's article about the new National Wildlife Art Museum in Jackson Hole, Wyo., ("A Shrine to Western Wildlife," Jan. 29) paid just tribute to a beautiful facility situated in magnificent natural surroundings.


A Brawl, Occasionally Interrupted
A husky man pummels a slighty built younger man, hurling him into a garage door.
A crowd gathers, and soon a patrol car rushes to the scene -- Vandam Street in SoHo.
The police are told that a father and son are having an argument, and intervention is not needed.
But the officers, refusing to leave, begin questioning the combatants.
Eventually, Glenn Wein lets the officers in on the secret: the brawlers are actors, the crowd is composed largely of audience members, and the "fight" is nothing more than a bit of raucous street theater, a scene from "Grandma Sylvia's Funeral" -- a play directed by Mr.
Wein, which opened at the Playhouse on Vandam in October.


Death Row Lessons From New Jersey
Since New Jersey re-enacted its death penalty in 1982, the state's Supreme Court, which weighs in on every case, has reviewed 40 death sentences and reversed 36 of them, an indication of the learning curve for prosecutors and judges in trying those cases and a lesson for New York as it prepares to implement death penalty laws.
In the first 2 of the 40 cases reviewed in New Jersey, the high court upheld the law but threw out the death sentences because of flaws it found in trial procedure or prosecutorial misconduct.
The court handed down more than two dozen more reversals before upholding a death sentence, and it used the opportunity of the review process to instruct judges and prosecutors in how to conduct capital punishment trials.
One common mistake, the Supreme Court said, was that judges often failed to charge the jury correctly.


Manager's Profile
Daniel J. Fuss Fund: Loomis Sayles Bond Fund; $102 million in assets.
Manager since 1991 inception. (Sponsor: Loomis Sayles &amp; Co., Boston).


Corrections
A front-page article last Sunday about the economic effect of Wal-Mart's shutting a store in Nowata, Okla., misidentified the retailer that now occupies a former Wal-Mart store in Pawhuska, Okla.
It is Alco, not Aldo.


March 5-11: Classified Report; C.I.A. Blames Serbs for Almost All Ethnic Cleansing
The Central Intelligence Agency, confirming eyewitnesses' accounts with satellite photographs, has concluded that 90 percent of the acts of "ethnic cleansing" in Bosnia were carried out by Serbs against Muslims -- and that leading Serbian politicians almost certainly played a role in the crimes.
The highly classified C.I.A. report, described to The New York Times by United States officials who have seen it, said the Serbs tried systematically to eliminate all traces of other ethnic groups from their territory in the former Yugoslavia.
Though the report found no conclusive evidence that Serbian leaders were directly involved in planning and executing large-scale ethnic cleansing, it said that "the systematic nature of the Serbian actions strongly suggests" that they "exercised a carefully veiled role in the purposeful destruction and dispersal of nonSerb populations."


Keepers Of The Flame, And Hot
IN THE FIVE YEARS SINCE THE entertainment media began to note the revival of interest in traditional forms of jazz among young musicians, critics and fans have been arguing over the nature, worth and meaning of that revival.
To some, the young musicians have seemed the product of hype, gaining exposure that should have gone to older musicians.
Others see the youngsters' attention to what has been called the jazz canon as an attempt to halt the gears of artistic progress.
To still others, the movement has represented nothing less than a jazz renaissance.
In a sense, what the jazz world has been experiencing -- the controversy over the direction a new generation is taking, the anxiety over what to make of the past, the re-examination of values -- is a collective midlife crisis.
How, the implicit question seems to run, should this art form negotiate the passage, begun in the 1960's around the time that rock-and-roll became a major industry, from being the coolest new kid on the esthetic and commercial block to a role as a mature, though still evolving, music with a body of recognized, classic work behind it?


For Hemlocks, Two-Front War on Insects
HEMLOCK TREES in the Northeast are in serious trouble. The prognosis is not good.
The troubles began several decades ago.
First the trees had to endure infestation by a sneaky insect pest called the elongate hemlock scale, which was devastating whole colonies of trees, whether in the wild or part of landscaping.


Handling Financial Troubles
IT doesn't take much to send a tight household budget into a tailspin.
A job loss or temporary layoff, a sudden rise in real estate taxes or an unexpected medical bill can all quickly trigger a cash crunch for those without a safety net.
Add to that list the adjustable-rate mortgage.


Labor Board's Batting Average Could Favor the Players
Discussing the union's unfair-labor- practice charge against the baseball owners that is pending before the National Labor Relations Board, an owner recently expressed no concern for what the board might do.
"We know the N.L.R.B. will always rule in favor of a union," the owner said.
"Our lawyers let us know the chances of management winning in front of this board are slim. But rulings don't mean beans. It's what happens in court that counts."


The Israeli-Egyptian Cold Peace Once Fostered Medical Ties
To the Editor:
Re your March 7 news article on the bitter debate among Arabs over cultural ties with Israel: It is puzzling to witness the deterioration in attempts at normalization between the Arab countries and Israel.


On the Persistence of War
To the Editor:
Bernard Knox's review of Donald Kagan's "On the Origins of War and the Preservation of Peace" (Jan. 22) ably discusses the strategic and political background of four notable wars, two of them modern.


Chinese Skater Glides to World Title as Bobek Falls to the Bronze
There was more crying than kissing today in that well-lighted shark tank where figure skaters sit and wait for the judges' verdict.
The tears fell for a range of good reasons.
For Nicole Bobek, the reason was disappointment.
For Chen Lu, it was unbridled joy.
For Michelle Kwan, the tears fell simply because her psyche needed some form of release in the wake of a more poised and technically precocious performance than any 14-year-old had a right to expect of herself.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about financing the Broadway revival of "How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying" referred incorrectly to three people involved.
"How to Succeed" has the same director, choreographer and set designer as "Tommy," not the same as the recent revival of "Guys and Dolls."


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: March 12, 1995
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
7
TOM CLANCY'S OP-CENTER, created by Tom Clancy and Steve Pieczenik. (Berkley, $6.99.) The operations of a secret Government agency.
2
4
ACCIDENT, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) A car collision involving four teen-agers tragically alters the lives of five families.
3
2
INCA GOLD, by Clive Cussler. (Pocket, $6.99.) Dirk Pitt contends with a ring of thieves for possession of ancient artifacts in the Andes.
4
7
THE DAY AFTER TOMORROW, by Allan Folsom. (Warner Vision, $6.99.) A doctor stumbles into a tangle of conspiracies.
5
2
NIGHT PREY, by John Sandford. (Berkley, $6.99.) Lucas Davenport investigates a case involving a body found in a wildlife preserve.
6*
6
FAMILY BLESSINGS, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove, $6.50.) A widow's affection for the close friend of her late son creates familial tension.
7
1
LORD OF FALCON RIDGE, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $6.50.) Romance and adventure among vikings living in 10th-century Britain.
8
7
ICEBOUND, by Dean Koontz. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The world's future is threatened by a tidal wave, storms and a psychopathic killer.
9
39
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
10
3
HEARTSTONE, by Phillip Margolin. (Bantam, $6.50.) A New Hampshire detective and district attorney probe a seven-year-old murder.
11
3
THE CAT WHO CAME TO BREAKFAST, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Jove, $5.99.) Jim Qwilleran and his cats investigate catastrophes.
12
2
THE ROBBER BRIDE, by Margaret Atwood. (Bantam, $6.50.) A woman who long manipulated three friends suddenly reappears.
13
4
AMBUSH AT CORELLIA, by Roger MacBride Allen. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The first volume of a new "Star Wars" trilogy.
14
7
FATAL CURE, by Robin Cook. (Berkley, $6.99.) A series of mysterious deaths haunts a couple who practice medicine in a Vermont town.
15
3
THE THRILL OF VICTORY, by Sandra Brown. (MIRA, $4.99.) A reporter's attempt to destroy the reputation of a tennis star leads to romance.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
25
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
7
HOW WE DIE, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Vintage, $13.) A surgeon reflects on "life's final chapter."
3*
61
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
4
24
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) The reminiscences of two black sisters, both of them over 100.
5
592
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
6
12
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $5.99.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of "Seinfeld."
7*
2
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Pocket, $5.99.) An analysis of canine behavior.
8
13
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Love and relationships.
9
20
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $5.50.) Essays on life and death, good and evil.
10*
3
MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Vintage, $12.) The life of a young black man in America: the memoirs of a Washington Post reporter.
11*
28
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.
12*
1
SAVED BY THE LIGHT, by Dannion Brinkley with Paul Perry. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) An account of two near-death experiences by a South Carolina businessman.
13*
106
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
14
34
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) Innovation in business.
15*
9
CONTRACT WITH AMERICA, by Newt Gingrich, Dick Armey, et al. (Times Books/Random House, $10.) The Republican program.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
24
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) Stories meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."
2
202
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
3
4
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY: An Experiential Guide, by James Redfield and Carol Adrienne. (Warner, $8.99.) Ways to apply the inspirational message of the novel "The Celestine Prophecy."
4
5
WHAT TO EXPECT THE TODDLER YEARS, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $15.95.) Counsel.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Feb. 25, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


ACCORD MAY LET U.N. PEACEKEEPERS REMAIN IN CROATIA
Western allies have struck a tentative deal with Croatia to allow a sharply reduced contingent of United Nations peacekeepers to remain in the country, senior Administration officials said today.
Croatia's President, Franjo Tudjman, had threatened to have the 12,000 troops leave after their mandate expired on March 31.
United States and European officials worry that a pullout would require the help of tens of thousands of NATO troops, paralyze peacekeeping in neighboring Bosnia and cause the war to spread to other former Yugoslav republics.


For Hemlocks, Two-Front War on Insects
HEMLOCK TREES in the Northeast are in serious trouble. The prognosis is not good.
The troubles began several decades ago.
First the trees had to endure infestation by a sneaky insect pest called the elongate hemlock scale, which was devastating whole colonies of trees, whether in the wild or part of landscaping.


Access Gets New Meaning In Local Politics
A PUBLIC-SPIRITED citizen no longer has to use paper to post a notice at Town Hall, the library or any other public agency.
That's because, increasingly, the bulletin board is of the electronic variety.
Want to know the date of the next town meeting?
Learn how to compost yard waste?
Obtain some assistance figuring your state taxes?
Research a term paper?
Chat with the mayor?
Look up a bill that's making its way through the legislature?
You can do it all on line through government computer services that are springing up around the state.


A Town's Outpouring on National Stage
THE Bradley rocking chair is still use on the second floor of James Wilson Young Junior High School in Bayport.
Four and a half years ago the walnut-stained rocker with its faded green pad was brought to the school by Tom Bradley, a teacher dying of AIDS.
The chair was a resting oasis for Mr.
Bradley as he tried to continue his work schedule.


Flood Waters Cut a Highway in California


A Stronger Karie Seeks National Schoolboy Track Title
Two years ago, during the civil war in Somalia, Sharif Karie did most of his running while fleeing rebel forces in his home city of Mogadishu.
Once, when he got caught, it almost cost him his life.
"A gunman stopped me and wanted my book bag; he thought I had money," said Karie, now a 17-year-old sophomore at West Springfield High School in Virginia.
"I ran away but he caught me and ordered, 'Give me the bag or I'll kill you.' I gave it to him, pleaded and he let me go."


For Coats This Winter, It's a Wrap
Both men and women have found a quick solution to keeping a coat stylishly closed without the inconveniences of buttons.
The popularity of sash-tied coats is a sign of fashion's new focus on function.
The wearer's personal taste comes out in the flair he or she brings to tying the belt of a tailored wrap coat -- whether it is wool, camel'shair or an all-weather fabric.


Move by Rams To Be Debated
Will the Los Angeles Rams be allowed to move to St.
Louis?
Will the National Football League owners grant their approval on a done deal?
What implications might such a move have on future realignment?
And how would it affect the N.F.L. in the nation's No. 2 television market?


Corrections
A letter to the editor on Feb. 19 about the cold war crossing point between East and West Berlin known as Checkpoint Charlie misstated its site.
It was on the Friedrichstrasse, not Unter den Linden.


Caramoor Prepares To Mark 50th Year


Ralph Ellison's Politics
To the Editor:
In his review of Jerry Gafio Watts's book, "Heroism and the Black Intellectual: Ralph Ellison, Politics, and Afro-American Intellectual Life" (Feb. 5), Charles Johnson criticizes Mr.
Watts for "ignoring Ellison's art and focusing exclusively on his sporadic, unsystematic political remarks." Yet in his effort to distinguish Ellison's artistic achievements from his political pronouncements, Mr.
Johnson dismisses the relevance of a political analysis of Ellison's work altogether.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
CENTRAL PARK  Seeking the First Of the Songbirds
In the last few years, March has seen both foot-deep snowfalls and 70-degree days.
"The fuel of the weather machine is the sun," explained Paul Knight, a meteorologist at Pennsylvania State University.
"The Northern Hemisphere is getting more fuel than in any of the other winter months, yet the oceans are near their coldest temperatures." It is this contrast that produces the month's changeable weather.


Read My Lipograms
A VOID By Georges Perec.
Translated by Gilbert Adair. 285 pp.
New York: Harvill/HarperCollins Publishers. $24.


A Call to Arms


Lawyers Scrambling to Prepare for Capital Cases
Thirteen years ago, when Dale E. Jones went to a training session to prepare for the start of New Jersey's death penalty law, he considered himself a seasoned defense lawyer.
He still remembers his shock at hearing the first rule of the new world order:
"Forget what you learned about determining guilt or innocence," the instructor told him.
"Your goal is to save your client's life."


Reconstructing a Spanish Ghost Ship and a Tale of Slavery
WELL into the last century, piracy was still a matter of great concern, and several sightings of a mystery ship off the Atlantic coast in the summer of 1839 both fascinated and bothered sailors and newspaper readers alike.
The ship, described as a "long, low, black schooner," would be seen and then disappear, only to reappear a bit further north.
It was like a ghost ship, zigzagging aimlessly and seemingly lost.
Then, in late August, the mystery ended when the ship was confiscated off Montauk Point by a naval brig doing surveys in the area.


The Legman for Limbaugh: At 27, a Force in the Capital
To hear about "scandal lurking" in the White House, the "environmentalist wackos" in Congress and the "self-important media elite" who report on both, millions of Americans turn to Rush Limbaugh.
And for his own political material, the wizard of conservative call-in radio turns to a 27-year-old who looks young enough to pass for a Congressional page.


Heavy Rains Roll Their Destructive Way Down California Coast
A string of drenching, blustery storms continued to inundate California today, sending rivers surging over their banks, closing highways, delaying travelers and making life a muddy, miserable mess.
The authorities searched today for six people whose cars were swept away on Friday night, when a sizable chunk of a twin-span concrete bridge on Interstate 5 near Coalinga broke away in raging water.
Paramedics pulled one man out of the water as he clung to a tree.
One body was spotted before the search was abandoned because of threatening weather.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Tues.
Retail sales, Feb., pct. chg.
0.2
0.2
Wed.
Producer prices, Feb., pct. chg.
0.3
0.3
Business inventories, Jan., pct. chg.
0.2
0.6
Industrial production, Feb., pct. chg.
0.4
0.4
Thur.
Consumer prices, Feb., pct. chg.
0.3
0.3
Housing starts, Feb., mils., ann. rate
1.38
1.36
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
336
335
This Week's Developments
Mon.
Group of Seven deputies to meet in Paris
*4*Alan Greenspan to testify on consumer price index
Tues.
Atlanta Fed February business outlook survey
Wed.
Fed to release beige book


An Absent Jordan Is Still Talk Of Chicago
B. J. Armstrong said he felt a buzz in the air before the game.
"You could sense the excitement in the crowd," the Chicago Bulls starting guard said after the game against the Cleveland Cavaliers on Friday night.
"Like this was a special night."


The Nation; To Vermont's Voters, What's Out Is In
AS as Maine goes, so goes the nation, it was said. But what about Burlington, Vt.?
On town meeting day last Tuesday, Burlington voters threw out their Republican Mayor and restored a Progressive.
Last fall, Vermont bucked a national conservative tide by re-electing Representative Bernard Sanders, the only self-described democratic socialist in Congress.


At I.S. 125, Asbestos And Chaos
Most of the 1,700 students at a Woodside intermediate school have been dispersed to five nearby schools while awaiting repairs on their building, which was abruptly shut down last week because of high readings of asbestos.
Tests showing dangerous levels of asbestos at I.S. 125 were not completed until 3 A.M.
Wednesday, leaving school officials with no opportunity to notify parents before ordering the school closed.
The sudden decision resulted in considerable confusion at the school that day.


Incivility: To Act or Not to Act?
To the Editor:
While reading the paper in an almost empty subway car, a six-foot-tall strapping black subway policeman approached me and asked, "What is your name?"


A Child of the 60's
WHAT IT'S LIKE TO LIVE NOW By Meredith Maran. 338 pp. New York: Bantam Books. $21.95.


QUESTIONS FOR: Kadeem Hardison
Q: What did you know about the Black Panthers?
A: I didn't know much.
They were almost like the Robin Hoods -- you know, the good guys -- without the good image.
All I knew about them was they had guns.
Q: What would you have done then if you were an adult?
A: I would have been dead.
Or crazy.
I don't know if I would have been organized like they were.
But that's what I can say now.
As a kid growing up in Brooklyn I was sheltered from all that.
If I was there, maybe it would be different.
I don't know.
Q: Do you see organizing going on now in your community?
A: No. My community is different though. I live in Beverly Hills. You know what I mean?


Canada and Spain Face Off Over Fishing Zone
Canada, acting unilaterally to protect depleted fishing stocks, has seized a Spanish trawler just outside Canadian territorial waters, in a confrontation with the European Union over North Atlantic fishing rights.
"You have chosen a government in Ottawa that will stand for Canadians," Prime Minister Jean Chretien told a cheering meeting of his Liberal Party in Winnipeg on Friday, a day after the trawler was seized off Newfoundland.
"We have shown our determination. The rest we'll see."


The World; Are Finders Keepers?
IT is hardly coincidence that the museums of the most powerful nations have the best collections of international art.
Enriched by the spoils of war, colonial occupations and freelance plundering, these collections are, to put it bluntly, monuments to the maxim that might is right.
But all this grabbing took place generations, even centuries, ago.
So is it still relevant how these collections were formed?
Even before the Romans took their pick of Greek statues, art was treated as war booty.
Throughout Europe's turbulent history, art works regularly changed hands through armed conflict or political domination.
And from the 19th century, the Europeans began bringing Asian, African and Latin American treasures into their museums -- to save them, it was claimed, from destruction.


Argentina, a Victim of Mexico's Fall, Tries to Recover
ARGENTINA isn't Mexico.
But Domingo Cavallo, Argentina's finance minister, has had a hard time trying to convince investors and creditors that his nation is really different.
Since Mexico surprised the financial markets in December by devaluing the peso, the ripple effect has been felt throughout Latin America -- and nowhere more so than in Argentina.
The country's once-vibrant economy is threatened by recession as credit dries up, foreign investors take flight and Argentines pull their money out of banks.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
ON-THE-WALL ART
Three exhibitions may be seen at the Aldrich Museum of Contemporary Art in Ridgefield, and in connection with one of them a workshop for adults will be held Wednesday at 10 A.M.
It will satisfy that universal urge that began with ancient cave dwellers and continues in subways and on city streets -- to draw on a wall.
The exhibition that inspired the workshop is called "Drawn on the Museum," a collection of works drawn directly on the building's interior walls by 15 artists, including Sol LeWitt, Karen Finley, Vincent Desiderio, Nancy Spero and Peter Waite.
The works will remain on view through May 7.


Japanese Life as Seen Through Dolls
FOR CENTURIES, JAPANESE dolls have served as sculpture, talismans, learning tools, souvenirs and palace gifts -- but almost never as playthings.
These figures, called ningyo (pronounced NING-GYO), were atypical in other respects: they were made as much for boys as for girls and were collected more by men than by women.
The 100 dolls in "Ningyo: The Art of the Human Figurine" at Japan Society Gallery, on East 47th Street between First and Second Avenues in Manhattan, through April 2, represent a comprehensive assortment of those produced since the 17th century.
Roughly 90 were collected by Michael Ayervais, a Manhattan hair stylist; the rest were lent by the Museum of the City of New York, the Newark Museum and the Peabody Essex Museum of Salem, Mass.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  Inside the Mensa Society, where socializing is the main order of business.
Good puns count, too.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  The faces of the commodity pits, where throats and palms signal the sound of money.


In Music, Dark Tones and Bright
FIVE decades after the fact, World War II still casts a heavy shadow over Europe.
Music, ordinarily resilient to historical turmoil, bears deep and lasting scars.
Half a century ago, Anton Webern was shot outside his Austrian home by an American soldier; the Czech composers Viktor Ullmann, Pavel Haas and Gideon Klein were killed at Auschwitz; and Bela Bartok died in New York, an impoverished exile.
This year also happens to be the centenary of the German composer Carl Orff, whose music has been seriously compromised by Nazi associations.
Haunted by these intrusions of reality into utopian musical life, the European music festivals this summer take on a darkly reflective tone.
The most ambitious of the war remembrances takes place in Dresden, a city that has not yet recovered fully from the Allied firebombing campaign of February 1945.
Its offerings include Benjamin Britten's noble "War Requiem"; Bernd Alois Zimmermann's opera "Die Soldaten," a scalding vision of the horror of war; and Richard Strauss's "Friedenstag," a more ambiguous and dubious plea for peace first heard under Nazi auspices in 1938.
The theme at Matthias Bamert's Lucerne Festival is "Misunderstood Music," missing pieces of 20th-century musical history.
Two potential highlights are a program of music by Ber thold Goldschmidt, a composer who fell into obscurity with the onset of the Nazi regime but continued to write music in England (Aug. 19); and a concert by the Czech Philharmonic in honor of Viktor Ullmann, who led a Jewish musical community at the Theresienstadt concentration camp (Sept. 2).


Q. &amp; A.
Obtaining Permit for Renovation  Q Can you explain what type of construction work needs to be filed with the New York City Department of Buildings?
I am planning on opening a retail store.
I have noticed many stores currently being renovated without work permits.
When is a work permit required and how do I get one? . . .
Frank Johnson, New York City.


THE POET KINGS AND THE VERSIFYING RABBLE
I was disappointed by Dinitia Smith's survey of the American poetry scene ("The Poet Kings and the Versifying Rabble," Feb. 19).
I have found, in my professional dealings with a number of the people you identify as members of the "establishment," a remarkable broadmindedness and generosity that was not reflected in the piece.
The American poetry establishment isn't a monolith but a congeries of people with both consonant and conflicting interests, some of whom have ideas about art and society which are just as radical as those of the most avant-garde or marginalized group.
Moreover, the Academy of American Poets, as any examination of its programming over the past decade would reveal, has tried to include as much of the enormous American poetic landscape as it possibly can.


FOUND ART HISTORY: Splendor in the Grass
All art has conventions.
In painting, saints are portrayed with halos and aristocrats pose with their hounds.
In commemorative statuary, generals and conquerors sit astride horses.
In family snapshots, the loved one reclines on the lawn.


A Writer's Torrential Rush
AND the patron saint of the Connecticut theater spoke: "Let there be a man of the moment and of many offerings," he or she said, "and he shall be named Tony Kushner."
Thus, Mr.
Kushner, the director, took charge of a play in progress, "In the Heart of America" by Naomi Wallace, a playwright from Kentucky.
It had workshop performances in New Haven at Long Wharf Theater Stage II in November and in December.


Brownstone Is Shaken By Gunfire
For 20 years, Anthony Cardulis, 35, lived quietly with his mother on the fifth floor of a brownstone at 210 West 88th Street.
Neighbors say he kept to himself and gave them no reason to complain.
Now, they wonder if they will ever feel safe again.
On Feb. 24 at 2:52 A.M., the police say, Mr.
Cardulis lined up three rifles, a shotgun and a handgun, a large cache of ammunition and a collection of books on Nazis in the narrow hallway outside his apartment, opened the hall window, and fired seven rounds of bullets into the air with one of the rifles.


March 5-11: Risks for Peace; An I.R.A. Figure Makes the Guest List At the White House
The spectacle of Gerry Adams, the political leader of the Irish Republican Army, making the rounds of Irish-American clubs in the United States has slowly become familiar.
But Mr.
Adams's next tour will be something altogether different.
After a generation in which the United States branded the I.R.A. a terrorist group and a transitional year in which Mr.
Adams has been kept at arm's length while peace efforts in Northern Ireland proceeded, the Sinn Fein leader is to attend a St.
Patrick's Day reception at the White House this week; the host will be President Clinton himself.
And for the first time, Mr.
Adams will be permitted to tour the United States to raise money for Sinn Fein, the I.R.A.'s political wing.


A High School Scorecard
The Schoold Chancellor, Ramon C. Cortines, hopes that the new report cards grading city high schools, sent home with students this month, will help parents and students assess how specific schools are doing in areas like teacher retention, dropout and graduation rates, and standardized test scores.
Chancellor Cortines stressed that he did not intend for parents to use the data, from the 1993-94 school year, to compare one school to another, although it is obvious that some schools are doing better than others.
Rather, the reports are intended as a base point from which to begin to chart how a school performs from year to year.
These are some indicators included in the Annual School Report: STUDENTS: Number of students registered as of October 1993.
TYPE: (A) Alternative, (C) Academic or Comprehensive, (V) Vocational, (S) Specialized.
GRADUATING: Percentage of the Class of 1994 graduating on time.
READING: Percentage of the Class of 1994 meeting minimum New York State reading requirements for graduation.
MATH: Percentage of the Class of 1994 meeting minimum New York State math requirements for graduation.
ATTENDANCE: Average daily attendance.
SUSPENSIONS: Per 100 students.
STAFF RATIO: Number of students for every administrator, teach and other professional staff member.
TEACHER EXPERIENCE: Percentage of teachers teaching five years or less.
SAT VERBAL: Average score for students in the school who took the test.
SAT MATH: Average score for students in the school who took the test.
NOTES: Schools with no senior class in 1994 were excluded from the analysis; Graduation rate calculations were changed this year from previous years to exclude students who transfrred to non-New York City high schools or equivalency programs, some of whom later dropped out.


Leased-Employee Concept Rides Again
WHEN it comes to "leased employees," Pinkerton started the practice more than 100 years ago with guards that protected Pony Express riders.
Yet, it was only recently when the costs of employee benefits and personnel administration skyrocketed, that the Pinkerton man was transformed into an industry called out-sourcing.
"What we mean by out-sourcing is that we take over all the functions of a company's human resource department," said Steven Tessler, head of an employee management concern called Corporate Management Group.
"What we do is contract with companies to provide them with such things as health insurance, pension plans, payroll processing: all the administrative responsibilities that were formerly handled by a company's human resource staff or its people in the comptroller's department."


The World; Cambodia Can't Shake The Legacy of Madness
WHAT passes for an insane asylum in the desolate Cambodian village of Banteay Desk is one more squalid bit of evidence of this nation's agony.
The village clinic has set aside a small wooden shed with a dirt floor and three urine-stained mattresses to house the mentally ill until they get better -- or until it is clear that they will never get better.
Saung Bunly had to be chained to his bed for several weeks last year after he kept trying to hurt himself, usually by slamming his head into the wall.
"They took the chains off because I am not violent anymore, but I am still crazy," said the 35-year-old patient, who was perched on the edge of his cot, rocking frantically back and forth, his eyes ablaze.
"And I am crazy because of the Khmer Rouge." In this rare lucid moment, he recalled that "sometimes the Khmer Rouge would hurt me, hit me again and again. There was no food. I still have nightmares that Pol Pot will return."


The Man Who Tortures the Stars
Charles Grodin likes to sum up the last days of his 30-year film career with the line "Get that dog off the bed!" After playing straight man to a St.
Bernard in two family comedies, "Beethoven" and "Beethoven's 2d," he is exiting from the movies -- and, it appears, from stage acting, directing, writing plays and writing books, to name some of his other pursuits.
Enter Charles Grodin, cable talk-show star.
"The Charles Grodin Show" began broadcasting from the CNBC studios in Fort Lee, N.J., on Jan. 9.
So far it has about 200,000 viewers -- a healthy rating by CNBC standards.
It may also have the potential for a cult following.


Death Penalty Doesn't Allow for Human Error; Zero Tolerance
To the Editor:
Re "Deterrence Fails" (letter, March 3): David C. Leven of Prisoners' Legal Services of New York makes the usual "it's not a deterrent" argument against the death penalty I have been hearing for 30 years.
These arguments are informative as far as they go, but never discuss the following questions:


'Rock Is A Part of Me'
To the Editor:
Although I generally agree with Alex Ross's essay "A Requiem for Amadeus?"  [ Feb. 19 ] , in which he discusses current techniques in marketing classical music, I take issue with one point.
His dismissal of the musical elements of both rock and avant-garde works overlooks a body of composers who do not deny the influence of the culture in which they were reared.


Channel Train
To the Editor: On Nov. 23 I telephoned Britrail's 800 number for second-class 14-day advance purchase -- nonrefundable -- tickets on the Eurostar train through the Channel Tunnel for Dec. 4.
My credit card was immediately billed although I was told that my reservation could not be confirmed because of the limited seating at this price, and I was told I should phone on Dec. 2 to learn if I was confirmed.
On Dec. 2 and again on Dec. 5, I was told by Britrail representatives that they had no response and could not tell me when there would be one.
An hour later, on Dec. 5, I called a travel agent in Washington who made confirmed reservations and printed the tickets within 10 minutes at a price of $75 a person each way, compared with Britrail's $80.
On the afternoon of Dec. 5, when I phoned Britrail to cancel my request for a reservation, I was told it was too late because the tickets had already been sent to me by Federal Express.


At Work; A 'Married, With Children' Bias?
IN lots of ways, Rebecca Mark and Jeffrey Lockman are not a typical American family.
They aren't married, they don't live together and both are gay.
They do, however, share responsibility for what most people would consider the defining aspect of family: a child.
Together with Mr.
Lockman's partner of 11 years, a physician who asked not to be named, they are raising Benjamin, now seven months old.
Ms.
Mark, an English professor at Tulane University in New Orleans, and Mr.
Lockman, a Tulane psychology professor, live near each other, to make those sanity-saving baby handoffs easier; they own a house together, where Ms.
Mark lives with Benjamin; they spend much of their free time in each other's company, and have a joint checking account.
Ms.
Mark and Mr.
Lockman's partner are the baby's genetic mother and father, but the three adults have a legal agreement that they should all be considered parents.
Imagine Murphy Brown forgoing single parenthood for a child-rearing arrangement with long-time companions Ward Cleaver and Mike Brady and you have their family configuration.


Upbeat Dining: The Flatiron District
AJA ** (212) 473-8388; 937 Broadway, at 22d Street; $$$; American Express, Mastercard, Visa
Do not be fooled by the cacophony of styles characterizing Aja's decor.
The real focus is the beguiling, inventive Asian-accented cooking with spices and flavors borrowed from China, Japan, Thailand and India.
Provocative starters include spicy tuna tartar nestled in crispy rice cakes with avocado and daikon and blended with sesame oil, cilantro and lime juice; grilled squab coated with a Chinese anise-flavored five-spice powder, then drizzled with chili sauce and balanced by the sweetness of caramelized mangoes, and seared scallops with chili oil, jicama and tangerine sections on a bed of fried noodles.
For main courses the steamed lobster over basmati rice wrapped in roasted eggplant comes in a spicy Penang curry; giant prawns and clams are served in a coconut-based Thai curry over jasmine rice, and grilled lamb is flavored with cumin and coriander and accompanied by a zesty chili-and-potato samosa. (Review: 1/13/95)


Affirmative Action Isn't Like Nepotism
To the Editor:
"My Equal Opportunity, Your Free Lunch" (Week in Review, March 5) mixes apples and oranges by equating the nepotism of immigrants in their respective guilds or professions with governmentally administered affirmative action.


Hawaii Hiking
To the Editor: M. McPhee Svenvold's essay "Taking the Lava Trail Up Kilauea" (Jan. 22) conjured our awe in November 1992, when, en route to a conference on Oahu, we detoured to witness the event occurring at Volcanoes National Park.
By helicopter and on foot, we tracked the fiery flow of Kilauea as it snaked its way to a showdown with the sea.
Two fierce and defiant forces of nature -- unyielding, unrelenting.
Steaming surf flung clumps of still-spitting lava ashore yet failed to douse the river of fire spewing molten lava into the rolling Pacific.
Barefoot and riveted on a black sand beach that night, we could not take our eyes from the display.


Fashion Foreplay
A friend in Paris called at what was the middle of the night there to impart a discovery that couldn't wait until morning.
He was seated in front of his Minitel, the computer terminal furnished by the French phone company, and had just spent a few idle hours browsing the listings of the on-line dating services.
"Where else but in France," he marveled, "would people describe themselves to potential partners in terms of their clothes?" There were entries for a guy who characterized himself as preppy, in search of a young woman wearing a miniskirt; for men in cowboy boots; for brand-loyal lovers of sneakers ("I adore Nike, Reebok, Adidas!" one lonely heart exclaimed).
Even the pseudonyms people used to log on betrayed an interest in sartorial trappings: "Fashion," "Pearl," "Silk Necktie," "Hermes Scarf." My friend typed in a message.
"Why do you call yourself 'Hermes Scarf'?" he asked.
"Because I like luxury," Hermes Scarf replied.
Street fashion and flea-market chic prevailed over designer labels.
On one of the electronic bulletin boards for gay men, someone who went by the name "Couture" struck up a conversation with my friend.
"What are you wearing?" he wanted to know.
Jeans, my friend replied.
"What kind of jeans?" Couture persisted.
Button-fly Levis.
And you?
"White Levis 501's," Couture answered, drawing things abruptly to a close.
"Ugh," my friend confided.
"What a turnoff."


Hawaii Hiking
To the Editor: I enjoyed "Essence of Old Maui: Quiet Upcountry" (Oct. 30).
I would like to add a sightseeing destination for animal lovers that was not mentioned: the East Maui Animal Refuge.
Nestled in lush Hawaiian rain forest, the refuge provides safe haven to Maui's injured and orphaned wildlife, from birds injured in traffic to orphaned wild baby goats.


FINE ARTS: Filming The Twinkie
Twinkies are no stranger to the spotlight.
The spongy snacks have been featured in movies ("Parenthood" and "Die Hard") and served as essential props in slapstick performance art -- Blue Man Group's long-running Manhattan show, "Tubes."
But they hadn't starred until now.
For the Twinkie's 65th anniversary, the Continental Baking Company invited film students at schools across the country to submit short scripts for Twinkie tributes.


Plan to Move Hamilton Grange Is Headed for Congress
The two-year-old debate over the National Park Service's plan to move Hamilton Grange -- the last home of Alexander Hamilton -- from 287 Convent Avenue to St.
Nicholas Park has taken place locally so far, pitting West Harlem neighbors against one another.
But the next chapter in the landmark's drawn-out history will take place in the United States Congress.
The crumbling house, built in 1802 and moved to its present site in 1889, was closed two years ago for safety reasons.
Rather than repairing the Federal-style building where it is now, the Park Service suggested moving it across 141st Street to St.
Nicholas Park -- a setting more closely resembling Mr.
Hamilton's rural neighborhood -- and reinforcing it in its new location.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LIFE ON THE COLOR LINE  The True Story of a White Boy  Who Discovered He Was Black.
By Gregory Howard Williams.
Dutton, $22.95.


The Prom's Co-Queen Finally Gets Her Revenge
WHEN CONSIDERING Halle Berry, it is almost impossible not to focus on her beauty: the exquisite cheekbones, the flawless cafe au lait skin, the eyes like two huge dark caramels and the wrists so narrow they look as if they could almost fit through the hole of a doughnut.
Her hair is shorn to her skull and slicked back in a style that only supermodels can carry off.
Twinkling in her ear lobes are large diamond studs, an anniversary gift from her husband, the Atlanta Braves outfielder David Justice.


Sandra Milberg, David H. Shapiro
Sandra Lauren Milberg, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Milberg of Rye, N.Y., was married last evening to David Hirsh Shapiro, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Samuel Shapiro of Norfolk, Va.
Rabbi Richard Chapin performed the ceremony at the Century Association in New York.
Mrs.
Shapiro is a fashion assistant at Marie Claire magazine in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Princeton University, he cum laude.
Her father is the chairman of Milberg Factors, a finance company in New York.


Hawaii Hiking
To the Editor: I enjoyed reading Susan F. Yim's article "Hiking in the Mists of Kauai" (Jan. 22).
On my trip I also visited Kokee Park and was amazed by its beauty.
There is another trail worth mentioning.
The stunning Kalaulau Trail starts at Kee Beach on the north side of the island, rising several hundred feet above the Na Pali coast.
The length is 12 miles, but the walk to Hanakapiai Beach is only four miles round trip and provides a good sense of the trail.
The trail gains 300 vertical feet initially, then levels off, providing splendid views of the ocean and the serrated pinnacles of Na Pali.
The trail can be muddy in spots, but is well maintained.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York House
1.
Lawsuits: Vote on passage of a bill that seeks to encourage parties to settle disputes before going to trial in personal injury cases.
Approved 232 to 193, March 7.


Wall Street; A Small-Stock Edge, Devoured
ANYBODY who has ever chatted with a stockbroker or scanned an investment magazine probably "knows" that you can make more money investing in small companies than in big ones, as long as you buy a variety of stocks and hang on to them for a very long time.
This widespread belief is backed by plenty of academic studies and investment reports.
Recently, Wilshire Associates Inc. in Santa Monica, Calif., published a study for institutional investors showing that over the past 21 years the very smallest of 2,500 United States stocks it tracks returned an average of 17 percent a year, while the very largest stocks in this universe returned an average of 11.5 percent a year. (The stocks are ranked in size based on market capitalization, which is the price of the stock multiplied by the number of shares outstanding.)


Through a Parkway, Darkly


NASA Turns to Industry for Next Generation of Launchers
The space agency has begun a competition within the aerospace industry to design and build a new family of reusable rockets that would eventually replace the space shuttle and other satellite launchers.
In a move that could fundamentally change the way the nation puts payloads into space, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration last week selected four companies to propose new launch systems that would not only greatly reduce the costs of space flight but also take NASA out of the business of building and operating its own fleet of rockets.


Bookshelf
SHADOW OF A HERO.
By Peter Dickinson.
Delacorte. $15.95. (Ages 12 and up) Although Varina, a small country in Eastern Europe with powerful neighbors, is imaginary, the themes of danger and possibility in the post-Communist era developed in this novel are realistic.
The heroine, Letta, is the British-born granddaughter of an exiled leader.


Return to Saigon, Tet 1995
On the night of Jan. 31, 1968, a young Vietnamese peasant named Nguyen Van Sau sat with about 20 companions in a garage not far from the center of Saigon.
It was the first night after Tet, the lunar new year, and although Communist attacks the night before had caused the official annual Tet cease-fire to be canceled, the city was full of visitors celebrating the holiday.
Like the rest, Sau and his friends had come to town by bus or on foot, carrying holiday packages.
But Nguyen Van Sau and the others were not in Saigon to celebrate.
They were members of Sapper Battalion C-10 of the Vietcong and their packages were weapons.
Sau had grown up illiterate in Cu Chi Province, just outside the capital.
In the National Liberation Front, he had learned to read and write, and had been instructed in the front's version of exalted patriotism.
As a special honor, he was invited to join the Communist Party.
And now he had been singled out again.
The men and women of Sapper Battalion C-10 were going to attack the United States Embassy.
At around 2:45 A.M., their little convoy set out.
It consisted of two vehicles: an old Peugeot van and a taxi of the same make, both familiar vehicles on Saigon streets.
The embassy was a fortress, nearly new, a $2.5 million complex that fairly dominated downtown Saigon.
Its key buildings featured shatterproof plexiglass, and the entire compound was surrounded by an eight-foot wall.
Shortly before 3 A.M., the guerrillas in the taxi opened fire on the military police post at the main entrance.
The M.P.'s returned fire and slammed shut and padlocked the steel gate.
The Vietcong in the van, which stopped around the corner, used an antitank explosive to breach the wall.
In seconds a commando squad of about two dozen was pouring through it.
The two M.P.'s turned to face them.
The first American to die was Specialist 4 Charles L. Daniel of Durham, N.C.
He and his partner, Pfc.
William Sebast of Albany, fell defending their positions, and their refusal to yield or withdraw probably spoiled the attack.
U.S. reinforcements were soon brought to bear, and the battle for the embassy grounds went on through the night.
By around 9 A.M., all of the attackers had been killed or captured.
The American dead consisted of the two M.P.'s and one marine.
The Communists had failed to gain entrance to a single building.
Up until that point in the war, nearly 20,000 Americans had died along with hundreds of thousands of Vietnamese.
More than 58,000 Americans and an estimated four million Vietnamese -- soldiers and civilians -- would die before it was over.
During the early hours of Jan. 31, 1968, there was fierce fighting in Saigon and all over Vietnam.
But the attack on the embassy, in its quixotic effrontery, was perhaps the engagement that most fascinated the world.
In January, I spent a few days in Saigon, which is now called Ho Chi Minh City, just as Sixth Avenue in New York is formally called the Avenue of the Americas.
It was coming up on Tet and everyone was buying presents; people were carrying little potted tangerine trees and apricot flowers, and visitors from up north were carrying peach boughs and blossoms, which don't grow in the southern part of the country.
The town was booming as never before.
Foreign businessmen, including plenty of Americans, were everywhere.
On the roof of the Rex, the hotel that once was the American bachelor officers' quarters, tourists and local plutocrats were dining on frogs' legs.
The old gourmet restaurants are gone, but new ones seem to be opening every day.
On what was the Rue Catinat before it was Tu Do Street, before it was Dong Khoi Street, antique porcelain and jewelry are for sale to prosperous buyers.
Visitors can buy silk dresses, made to measure by shops whose employees will gladly stitch through the night to have the garments ready first thing in the morning.
Diners at the Rex can watch the streets below illuminated by Toshiba and Sony neon signs that turn night into day.
A few old billboards enjoin Marxist morality -- one condemns bootlegging -- but the touts and the girls and the transvestites are all back in the same old places.
What would it be like to take a walk around town with Specialist Daniel, Private Sebast and Nguyen Van Sau and his comrades of C-10 one of these lovely holiday evenings, 27 years after the attack that killed them?
Would they guess who had won the war in which they died?
Surely the Americans would have thought it was their side.
And Sau might be amazed at the fruits of the Communists' victory.
Vietnamese Communism was not going to threaten Durham, N.C., as the men who recruited young Daniel doubtless assured him it was.
It was not even going to trouble Saigon all that long.
Nor was the earth about to rise on new foundations for Sau, although he might take some comfort in the new name for the G.I.s' old haunt, Tu Do Street.
Dong Khoi, formerly Tu Do, the street where you get the antique jewelry and porcelain, means Spontaneous Uprising -- presumably the one Sau and his friends waited all night in vain for in 1968.
Although the uprising never came, they changed the street name anyhow.
That's how politicians are.
Today, many a deal is in the making.
In Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City, new factories will soon make Wisk liquid soap and Sunlight detergent for the Vietnamese kitchen.
And before long, there will be a new U.S. embassy in Hanoi.
How ironic it all is.
Perhaps such a squandering of young lives ought to be consigned to the realm of private grief, reflecting more shame than glory on the causes served.
Yet we find ourselves moved and inspired by the heroism of young people who do their duty, who serve with all the vigor of their youth, strength and courage.
The political futility of their sacrifice gives it a poignancy that is somehow ennobling.
Even the Hemingway of "A Farewell to Arms," professing revulsion at the rhetoric of heroism, movingly employed it and became the high priest of martial virtue.
After a period of denial and ambiguity, the United States began erecting fitting monuments to the Americans who died in our futile war.
Somehow we can't keep ourselves from honoring those who give their lives in the wars to which our shortsightedness and folly consign them.
Yet we know that in every war lives are lost, meaninglessly, and that the cause behind their sacrifice is soon rendered irrelevant.
We have never succeeded in replacing proper conduct on the field of battle as the ultimate measure of courage and loyalty.
We have not developed that "moral equivalent of war" that William James so wisely and impossibly called for.
Knowing not a whit more than the ancient Greeks, we console ourselves as they did in catharsis, in stoic acceptance and tragic ritual.
Our celebration of death in battle is, from a certain perspective, utterly irrational.
Yet it is our only means of imposing some degree of meaning on war's meaningless destruction, the only way we have of facing the eternal ironies of history.


A Bronx Miracle
The Bronx may well be the nation's most nfamous symbol of urban blight.
Battered by highway construction begun in the 1950's, abandoned by the middle class in the 60's, torched by arsonists through the 70's, the South Bronx in particular became a bombed-out relic and a synonym for hopelessness and decay.
But that image is no longer accurate.
Take a Sunday drive and you will be surprised to see that the burned-out Bronx is largely gone.
The dispiriting stretches of ghost buildings that once loomed along the Cross Bronx Expressway have either been reclaimed as cooperative apartments or cleared to make way for hundreds of new town houses.


BENEFITS
Peter Yarrow in Concert  TODAY -- The singer and songwriter Peter Yarrow is to perform at 2 P.M. at Congregation Emunath Israel, 236 West 23d Street.
The program, benefiting a food and counseling program for elderly New Yorkers who are homeless, is sponsored by the Educational Alliance, a settlement house.
A cocktail reception with Mr.
Yarrow is to follow.
Tickets, $50, or $25 and $15 for the concert alone, at the door.
Information: (212) 475-6200, extension 415.
Starlight at the Marriott  MONDAY -- The Starlight Foundation, which provides entertainment in hospitals' pediatric wards and seeks to grant the wishes of seriously ill children, will celebrate its 10th year with a dinner at the Marriott Marquis.
The event will begin with cocktails at 6.
Emma Samms, an actress who founded the organization, will be the master of ceremonies.
Chubby Checker and the Wildcats are to perform.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 354-2878. 'From Danger to Dignity'  MONDAY -- The Planned Parenthood Federation of America will benefit from the premiere of "From Danger to Dignity," a documentary film on the history of the movement to legalize abortion in the United States.
The event will begin at 5 P.M. with a cocktail reception at the Century Cafe, 132 West 43d Street.
The screening, at Town Hall, will begin at 7.
Afterward, the film's producer, Dorothy Fadiman, will lead a discussion on abortion rights with Gloria Steinem, Anna Quindlen, Maureen McGovern, Bella Abzug, Kathleen Turner and others.
Tickets, $100, or $35 for the screening alone, from (212) 261-4659.
Screening tickets will also available at the door.
Preserving Film History  MONDAY -- Anthology Film Archives, a preservation and research organization, will open what it calls Preservation Week 1995 with a dinner at Tavern on the Green.
The evening will begin with cocktails at 6:30, followed by dinner and a speech by Schuyler Chapin, New York City's Commissioner of Cultural Affairs.
Preservation Week will continue with screenings from Tuesday through next Sunday at the organization's headquarters, at 32 Second Avenue (Second Street).
Tickets to the Tavern on the Green party, $250, from (212) 505-5181.
Screening tickets are $7.
Marvelettes at the Hilton  TUESDAY -- The Marvelettes are to perform at the New York Hilton at a fund-raiser for the National Jewish Center for Immunology and Respiratory Medicine.
Drinks at 5:30 P.M. will be followed by dinner and dancing.
Donald J. Gibson, a vice president of the Chase Manhattan Bank, will be honored.
Tickets, $400, from (212) 382-0711.
The 'Brooklyn 100'  TUESDAY -- A preview and sale of works from "Brooklyn 100," an exhibition of 100 contemporary artworks donated by New York artists, will begin at 6 P.M. at the Rotunda Gallery, 33 Clinton Street (Pierrepont Street) in Brooklyn Heights.
Beneficiaries will be the art programs in Brooklyn public schools and homeless shelters sponsored by the Rotunda, a nonprofit gallery.
Cocktails and hors d'oeuvres will be served, and among the artworks offered in a silent auction will be those by Richard Artschwager, Judy Pfaff and Dale Chihuly.
Tickets, $100, from (718) 855-7882, extension 19.
For the Wiesenthal Center  TUESDAY -- The New York chapter of the Leadership Society of the Simon Wiesenthal Center, an international human-rights group, is sponsoring a talk at 7 P.M. by Yaron Svoray, who will recount his experiences in infiltrating neo-Nazi groups in present-day Germany.
Mr.
Svoray is the author of a book, "In Hitler's Shadow." The event, which will conclude with a cocktail reception, will be held at the Museum of Television and Radio, 25 West 52d Street, and will benefit the Wiesenthal Center's educational programs in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.
Tickets, $40, from (212) 370-0320.
Walt Frazier, Auctioneer  WEDNESDAY -- Walt Frazier, the former New York Knicks guard, will conduct an auction of sports memorabilia to raise money for the after-school and summer basketball programs run by Student Athletes Inc.
The event, at the Vista Hotel at the World Trade Center, will begin with cocktails at 6 P.M., followed by a buffet dinner.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 938-2535.
Sushi, Sake and 'Kokora'  WEDNESDAY -- A benefit preview of "Kokoro" ("True Heart") is to aid Playwrights' Preview Productions, the sponsoring theater company that also takes free productions to libraries and schools in the metropolitan area.
Sushi and sake will be served at 7 P.M., with the performance at 7:30 and an Asian buffet at 9:15.
Tickets, $60, from (212) 996-7287.
For Medical and Social Services  WEDNESDAY -- A fund-raiser for the medical and social services provided by the Foundation for Research on Sexually Transmitted Diseases will be held from 6:30 to 8:30 P.M. at its headquarters at 369 Eighth Avenue (29th Street).
A reception and buffet will be followed by a reading and a book signing by Dr.
Regina P. Krummel, the author of "From Liquor to Casket." Tickets, $10, from (212) 924-3733.
Honor for Pavarotti  THURSDAY -- The Richard Tucker Music Foundation, which provides grants to young American opera singers, will give a benefit dinner at the Plaza Hotel.
Luciano Pavarotti will be among those honored at the black-tie event, which will begin with cocktails at 6:30 P.M.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 627-1000.
A Diabetes Dinner-Dance  THURSDAY -- The New York Downstate Chapter of the American Diabetes Association will benefit from a black-tie dinner-dance at the Pierre.
Edward C. Bessey, the vice chairman of Pfizer Pharmaceuticals Inc., will be honored.
The event will begin with cocktails at 6.
Tickets, $500, from (800) 342-2383.
A Purim Carnival  THURSDAY -- The UJA-Federation of New York will be the host for a carnival celebrating Purim, the Jewish holiday, at the organization's Manhattan headquarters, 130 East 59th Street.
The event, which begins at 6:30 P.M. with a light buffet, will feature clowns, jugglers, a wine tasting and a raffle.
Tickets, $72, from (212) 836-1189.
Old Bottles and New Wine  THURSDAY -- Historic Hudson Valley, the preservation organization that maintains five Hudson River mansions, will be the beneficiary of a party from 7 to 10 P.M. at the Westchester, a new shopping mall in White Plains that is to open on Friday.
A buffet dinner will be served, and the Westchester Philharmonic and the Pipes and Drums of the Police Emerald Society of Westchester will perform.
The mall is on Bloomingdale Road at Westchester Avenue.
Tickets, $75, from (914) 631-8200, extension 613.
A St.
Patrick's Day Salute  FRIDAY -- The Soldiers', Sailors' and Airmen's Club, a 75-year-old institution that provides low-cost lodging for current and former military personnel visiting New York from this country and abroad, will benefit from a St.
Patrick's Day party from 5:30 to 11 P.M.
The festivities will include cocktails, hors d'oeuvres, a buffet dinner and entertainment by Lennie Metcalfe, a pianist.
Tickets, $40, or $30 for guests who are 29 and younger, from (212) 683-4353.
A 'Perform-a-Thon'  SATURDAY -- New Georges, a theater company that produces and develops new plays by women, will hold a benefit "Perform-a-Thon," 12 continuous hours of theater works by women and about women, from noon to midnight at the company's performance space, Room 701 at 27 West 20th Street.
Beer, wine and hors d'oeuvres will be served at 9 P.M.
Admission: $10 at the door; information: (212) 620-0113.
Larry Rivers's Musical Side  SATURDAY -- Earth Celebrations, a group that is trying preserve more than 50 community gardens on the Lower East Side, will benefit from musical and dance performances beginning at 8 P.M. at the Stella Adler Conservatory of Acting, 419 Lafayette Street, near Astor Place.
Among those scheduled to perform are the artist Larry Rivers and his band.
Gwynne Rivers, the artist's daughter, will be the band's featured vocalist.
Dancing will follow at 10.
Tickets, $35, or $20 for the dancing alone, from (212) 727-8283.
For the Zoot Sims Scholarship  NEXT SUNDAY -- A party and jam session at the Century Cafe, 132 West 43d Street, will raise money for the Zoot Sims scholarship for students attending the jazz program at the New School for Social Research.
The award is named for the late saxophonist.
A 6:30 P.M. cocktail reception and buffet dinner will precede the jam, which will feature Buddy Tate on saxophone, Junior Mance on piano and others.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 673-5316.
Treasures From the Urban Attic  NEXT SUNDAY -- A party at Chanterelle, 2 Harrison Street (Hudson Street), will raise money to support enrichment programs of the Early Childhood Center, a public school at 334 Greenwich Street in TriBeCa.
After drinks and hors d'oeuvres at 7, there will be an auction of vintage clothing, artwork, jewelry, weekend trips, restaurant meals and other items.
A friendship quilt, assembled by parents of the school's students, will be offered in a raffle.
Tickets, $25, from (212) 732-4392.
For AIDS Care  NEXT SUNDAY -- Magic Johnson will be the master of ceremonies for an AIDS fund-raiser from 4 to 7 P.M. at the Sheraton New York.
Proceeds will benefit the AIDS care, education and prevention programs for young adults that are being financed by the Magic Johnson Foundation and by the Robin Hood Foundation.
Patrick Ewing and Pat Riley of the New York Knicks will be among sports figures who will run carnival booths and coach guests in a number of sports activities.
A family-style dinner will be served.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 245-6570.
Hockey in Harlem  MARCH 20 -- A youth organization, Ice Hockey in Harlem, will hold an auction of sports memorabilia, including a boxing glove signed by Muhammad Ali.
The auction, which will help support the group's after-school programs for children in Harlem, is scheduled from 6 to 9 P.M. at Tatou, 151 East 50th Street.
Alexei Kovalev and other members of the New York Rangers are scheduled to sign autographs.
Cocktails and hors d'oeuvres will be served. .
Tickets, $100, from (212) 722-5127.


Curtain Going Up on Another British Invasion
IF A DIRECTOR IS CALLED PETER, he's sure to be English.
If a director is English, he's sure to be called Peter.
That was the refrain heard 25 years ago when Messrs.
Hall, Brook and Wood were riding high, along with Coe, Dews, Cotes and other less well-remembered Peters.
It was a joke in New York but not altogether a joke in Britain.
Where was the next generation of directors coming from?
Why, we would even have allowed them to be called Cliff or Kevin, Tracy or Doreen, if they knew how to interpret a text, get a good performance from an actor and fill a stage with excitement.
You have only to look at the New York theater season as it unfolds in 1995 to see how much has changed.
True, the posse of English directors riding into the city this year includes one campaign-scarred Peter: Peter Brook, now at the Brooklyn Academy of Music with "The Man Who." But men with names like Trevor, Jonathan and Howard are also approaching American territory.
And a little-known 37-year-old, Sean Mathias, comes with two major best-director awards for his 1994 National Theater production of "Les Parents Terribles" (retitled "Indiscretions" for Broadway).


Incivility: To Act or Not to Act?
To the Editor:
Your article reminded me of one of my students who is 9.
Last October she met a woman on the subway who was smoking.
Irene told her, "Please don't smoke. It's bad for your health and ours. You can't smoke here; read that sign." The woman continued smoking.
Irene approached her again, saying, "Please don't pollute our planet earth."


Dining in Paris, Youngsters on the Road
Restaurants of Paris  440 pages. Knopf.


Decision Near in Dispute Over Slovakia's Planned Nuclear Plant
An increasingly bitter dispute between Austria and neighboring Slovakia over Slovakia's plans to complete a Soviet-designed nuclear power plant is approaching a climax.
On March 21, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development is scheduled to decide whether to approve a $280 million loan that would allow Slovakia to complete the plant, which has been under construction since 1983.
Environmentalists and Austrian officials are urging directors of the bank, which helps former Communist countries move to market economies, to vote against the loan.


Fleet Street Is Once Again On Barricades
After reading reviews of his performance, a comic actor and writer developed such a paralyzing case of stage fright that he walked out of the West End play and boarded a ferry for the Continent.
An octogenarian politician who is one of the country's best-known figures was accused by a newspaper of being a tool of the K.G.B.
He decided that enough was enough and sued the paper for libel for "calling me a traitor to my country."


Incivility: To Act or Not to Act?
To the Editor:
The Feb. 26 article "Rebels Against the Rude" about how New Yorkers react to bad behavior and petty crime in public reminded me of my own "rebellion."


Sampras Wins to Keep His Top Ranking, for Now
Pete Sampras provided his No. 1 ranking with two more weeks of protection from that bearded, balding, bandannaed marauder, Andre Agassi, today by subduing eighth-seeded Todd Martin, 6-3, 6-4, in a quarterfinal of the Newsweek Champions Cup.
The 47-minute match was not picturesque by Sampras's exacting standards -- the two players treated the stadium court more like a tick-tack-toe board than a canvas -- but it delivered him into the semifinal round with economy and avenged last month's loss to Martin in Memphis.
Sampras, who has become a little more of a fatalist since he's had to come to grips with the serious illness of his coach, Tim Gullikson, said he can't be worried about the prospect of losing his ranking to Agassi -- here or anywhere.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
90.90
94.10
105.06
per Dollar
German Mark
1.4120
1.4244
1.6831
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.4073
1.4065
1.3628
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5740
1.5303
1.5001
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$389.90
$376.50
$385.20
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Tamra A. Wachs And Spike Seldin
Tamra Ann Wachs, a marketing manager in film licensing for the Walt Disney Company, was married last evening to Michael Scott Seldin, the vice president of production at Morgan Creek Productions, a movie company.
The couple work in Burbank, Calif.
Rabbi David Posner performed the ceremony at the Pierre in New York.
Mrs.
Seldin, 25, graduated cum laude from Tufts University and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Michael Wachs of Highland Beach, Fla., and the late Linda Fink Wachs.


James Luther, 67, Sterling Executive
James H. Luther Jr., a former senior vice president and general counsel for Sterling Drug Inc. and the former head of a trade organization for manufacturers of over-the-counter drugs, died Thursday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
He was 67 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was a type of cancer known as small-cell lymphoma, his family said.


Versatile Watercress Works Year Round
WATERCRESS costs half what you pay for fancy salad greens.
But its tart, peppery taste is good in salads year round.
Watercress also makes an attractive garnish for lamb chops, steaks and roast chicken, and it adds something to the balance of a dish, especially when it is served with a mound of french fries.


Now, Voyagers
DEBATABLE LAND By Candia McWilliam. 284 pp. New York: Nan A. Talese/Doubleday. $23.50.


The Ballerina In Leslie Caron The Actress
READ THE USUAL biographical account of how Leslie Caron made the leap from French baby ballerina to Hollywood star, and it begins as follows: Gene Kelly is in the audience in Paris when Ms.
Caron, 16, becomes an overnight sensation in the 1948 premiere of "La Rencontre" ("The Encounter"), David Lichine's experimental, and acrobatic, ballet about Oedipus and the Sphinx.
Two years later, Mr.
Kelly chooses Ms.
Caron as his partner for the film musical "An American in Paris." But the fact is that he had been unable to meet her backstage after "La Rencontre." The young dancer had fled because she was overcome by shyness.
A different story, with a darker twist of backstage intrigue, surfaces when retold recently by Ms.
Caron in a recent conversation about her ballet background.
That aspect, rather than her more frequent work in dramatic films, will be highlighted this week in the dance series "Capturing Choreography: Masters of Dance and Film," presented by the Film Society of Lincoln Center.
Ms.
Caron will be on hand to comment on the clips from her musicals (including the 1980 French film "Tous Vedettes") that will be shown Wednesday and Thursday nights at 8 at the Walter Reade Theater.


Fancy Night For Kitchen
A benefit performance at the Hudson Theater, March 5.


Business Diary: March 5-10
Americans Can Still Get 100 Pennies for a Dollar  The plunging dollar and peso have, it seems, matched headline for headline lately, which could lead a casual observer to think this country's woes match Mexico's.
That's silly, of course.
For starters, while Mexico's currency has lost half its value in a few months, the dollar, after falling for a decade, has lost far less.
But the bigger point is that America is big enough, ultimately, not to care that much.
We buy 90 percent of our stuff right here, and that spending won't be seriously affected by what happens across the ocean.
So while Alan Greenspan hinted at raising rates again, which arrested a dollar slide last week, some economists say it would be foolish to go through such hoops that it lands us in recession.
Look at it this way: it's not that the dollar is low, said Paul Krugman, a Stanford economist, but that "the yen and the mark are getting ridiculously high."


Zurich's Open Drug Policy Goes Into Withdrawal
By long tradition, this lakeside city of banks and big money flourished as an emblem of the Swiss order that made trains and watches and people all run on time.
Yet for the second time in three years, Zurich's sense of discretion and decorum was upset by an underclass of drug addicts and dealers who transformed one of Europe's wealthiest financial centers into an open market for hard drugs.


Q and A
Climbing Kilimanjaro
Q.
I am thinking of traveling next winter to climb Mount Kilimanjaro in Tanzania.
I would appreciate any information about groups that organize climbs. -- John W. Bennett, New York, N.Y.


Some Dizzying Possibilities for Emblems
FOR most people the term emblem is interchangeable with symbol or flag or coat-of-arms, anything that proclaims its identity by means of imagery rather than words.
But such was not always the case.
This, if little else, is made clear by the show on view at the Yale University Art Gallery through March 26: "Reinventing the Emblem: Contemporary Artists Recreate a Renaissance Idea" enchants the eye but leaves the mind rattled.


Incivility: To Act or Not to Act?
To the Editor:
A friend from out of town recently encountered two teen-age women smoking in his subway car.
When he informed them that smoking was prohibited, they defiantly told him to mind his own business.
He then pulled the emergency cord.


A Critic's Dozen to Catch at the Biennial
THE WHITNEY BIENNIAL IS AN extended ritual, and its essentials rarely change.
The roster gets leaked months ahead.
Opinions start circulating.
The verdict is always mixed.
"Too much of this, not enough of that. Where's so-and-so, and why are they bringing back you-know-who?" This is, after all, the show the art world loves to hate.
Witness the highly political 1993 version, a critical washout that left people in an unforgiving, enough-already mood.
But maybe things will be different this time (it will have a staggered opening -- one floor on Wednesday, another on Saturday, the third on March 23 -- and run through June 4).
Compared with those of 1993, the 89 artists in this year's show are a more circumspect lot.
And with metaphor as its stated theme and beauty as its big idea, this biennial, organized by Klaus Kertess, the Whitney's adjunct curator of drawings (with John G. Hanhardt assisting in the film and video selection), may make a lot of friends.


Grover Cleveland's Gold Strategy
To the Editor:
Your profile of Robert Rubin ("The Education of Robert Rubin," Feb. 5) garbles the historical comparison of present day Mexico with Grover Cleveland's Administration.
President Cleveland, a "gold Democrat" and an unflinching defender of the gold standard, did not seek to repeal gold backing for Government bonds.
Rather, by convening an extraordinary session of Congress at the height of the financial panic in the summer of 1893, he sought the repeal of the Sherman Silver Purchase Act of 1890.
The Sherman Act, an unholy compromise between Western silver-mining interests and eastern Republican protectionists, had authorized monthly Government purchases of silver, thus adding millions of silver certificates to the nation's money supply.
The increase in the money supply undermined the credibility of our commitment to the gold standard in the eyes of our European creditors.
Thus, it was the prospect of an inflationary shift to the silver standard, and not the President's actions, that precipitated the European capital flight that had paralyzed the nation's money markets.


When Small Schools Ruled Women's Game
When the 64 teams are announced today for the National Collegiate Athletic Association women's basketball tournament, the big names will include Connecticut, Tennessee, Colorado and Stanford.
You will not see Immaculata College in Pennsylvania or Queens College in New York City or Wayland Baptist University in Texas or Delta State University in Mississippi.
In the 1970's, when women's basketball started fielding five players to a side rather than the archaic six, those four colleges were the best.
Now Queens and Delta State compete in N.C.A.A.
Division II and Immaculata in Division III.
Wayland Baptist plays in the lesser world of the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics.


Is There an Art to a Well-Placed Chair?
GREAT CONTEMPORARY HOUSES ARE seldom designed from the inside out.
They ask first to be looked at, not lived in.
Even when the interior spaces created by architects are luminous and delightful, they still can fail as memorable rooms, as living spaces.
Just as there is a difference between a house designed by, say, Frank Gehry, and a home built by a developer, there are rooms that are much more than mere containers for a random collection of chairs, tables and lamps -- rooms that hold a powerful magnifying glass, if not a mirror, up to a particular moment in time.
How does it happen?
The ultimate answer would have to speak to such intangibles as taste and sensibility, the stuff of all great art.
That interiors even try to have an overall esthetic dimension is only a 20th-century phenomenon.
And those that succeed as art often sacrifice their livability.
Far more interesting are the rooms that transcend the ordinary to become spaces that resonate with emotional as well as esthetic power.


Corrections
Two picture captions in the Long Island Weekly today with the "About Long Island Column" are reversed.
The photograph on page 14 is a composite of John Lithgow in his roles as the Bradley brothers in "My Brother's Keeper." Tom Bradley is shown in a computer laboratory on page 20.


March 5-11; Wheels and Holey Shoes, and Golf Takes Off
PUT the kids in the Land Rover, Buffy, and head for the hills.
The heathens are coming, and they're carrying clubs.
Golf, long considered the sport of a badly dressed elite -- or at least the comfortable, plaid-clad upper-middle class -- is changing.
More and more, golfers come from blue-collar suburbs and the backwoods, from pipefitters unions and the Taco Bell.
Even liberals do it.


12th Avenue, Megastore Frontier
To the delight of local real estate agents, megastore chains are scouting Twelfth Avenue, a faded industrial area that offers the possibility of larger floorspace, lower rents and more parking than can be had in more congested retail centers.
"This is next natural frontier -- the last frontier, really," said Ernest Blum, managing director of Williams Real Estate, who has been showing Twelfth Avenue sites to some of the chain stores.
"It's going to be exactly what happened with Ladies Mile on Sixth Avenue in the 20's. Bed and Bath came in and showed the way, and suddenly all the giants followed."


If You're Thinking of Living In/White Plains; Balancing Tranquillity With Tax Benefits
SHOPPERS headed for The Westchester, the new luxury mall scheduled to open in White Plains next Friday, will use routes bypassing the city's 13 residential neighborhoods.
That will please the city's nearly 50,000 inhabitants who are as determined to protect the residential tranquillity of their tree-lined streets as they are eager to enjoy the property tax benefits a varied economic base provides.


65 Cents an Hour -- A special report.; Week in Sweatshop Reveals Grim Conspiracy of the Poor
"Earnestly, urgently looking for workers," said a small red sign in Chinese posted outside a garment factory in Sunset Park, Brooklyn.
"Please inquire within."
The steel doors opened into a dim, dusty warehouse.
Red and blue rags covered the four windows, shutting out all natural light.
Bundles of cut cloth sat piled in haphazard mounds, some stacked taller than a worker.
Under fluorescent lights swinging from chains, rows of middle-aged Chinese women hunched over sewing machines, squinting and silent.


Wall Street; Looking at U.S. Markets Through Japanese Wallets
THE American stock market hit a four-year low last week, more than 20 percent below the record set way back in June of 1990, before the last recession.
If that doesn't sound like what you thought you read in the papers, its because you measure stock prices in dollars.
In dollars, the market hit a record high on Friday.
But for a Japanese investor, one who measures profits and losses in yen, the statement is true.
On Tuesday, the S.&amp; P. 500 was at its lowest level, in yen, since Jan. 22, 1991.


Knicks Fall And Ewing Is Injured
The panache of Gary Payton, the power of Shawn Kemp.
The poise of the Seattle SuperSonics.
They were stylish and they were strong, and they beat the Knicks thoroughly last night in a game that could only be overshadowed by one thing: The pain of Patrick Ewing.
The Knicks' All-Star center left the game in the fourth quarter with a sprain of the left ankle.
It silenced Madison Square Garden during the Sonics' 96-84 victory and was the topic of discussion afterward.


Ideas &amp; Trends: The Rise of Incentive Trusts; Six Feet Under and Overbearing
Sometimes, life imitates bad art.
B-movies, to be exact -- like "Easy Money," "Brewster's Millions" and "Billy Madison" -- where the willful old millionaire forces his profligate heirs to shape up before they can cash out his fortune.


TOURIST TERRITORY?


Absolutely Genius
LIKE clothing, vogue words in the fashion industry go quickly in and out of style, although they may enjoy a significant post-fashion life after trickling into mainstream use.
Such was the case with the no longer absolutely fabulous "fabulous," and so, too, may be the case with "genius," which has been the word of choice for those wishing to praise anything from a fabric swatch to the latest Prada handbag.


Hello, Central
IF YOU WANT TO GET with it in terms of nomenclature," Richard Holbrooke, Assistant Secretary of State for European and Canadian Affairs, told me a few months ago, "you're going to have to stop referring to the nations of Eastern Europe as being in Eastern Europe.
They think of themselves as being Central Europeans."
Was I being subtly manipulated in some sort of bureaucratic power play?
Rather than rushing out to the cutting edge of current diplomatic usage -- possibly contributing unwittingly to the perpetration of a policy nuance -- I waited for this major geo-semantic shift to work its way upward.


The Safety Zone; Coast Guard Tries to Rid Waters of Deficient Foreign Ships
The aging Russian freighter did not seem menacing, just another maritime pack animal hauling scrap metal or waste paper or some other bulk leftover.
But when it crept into New York Harbor the other day, it became an outlaw.
The United States Coast Guard moved in.
The vessel was impounded.
Its crew was interrogated.
Its records were checked.
Its holds were searched.
It was not that the freighter, the Favorit, was smuggling drugs or illegal immigrants.
Its sin was its condition: its hull was pocked with leaks, and its decks had rusted to a crumbly orange.
It was in danger of causing an accident that might disable shipping lanes that are as finely calibrated as the runways of a busy airport.


Streetscapes/Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis's Grandfather; Quality Developer With a Legacy of Fine Buildings
FEW people know it, but James T. Lee, the grandfather of the late Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, was a prolific developer who built an unusual string of important New York City buildings, including 740 Park Avenue, which became her childhood home.
Born in 1877, Lee graduated from City College in 1896 and Columbia Law School in 1899 and set up his own practice.
He began working for real estate developers and by 1908 entered the field himself with a partner, Charles R. Fleischmann, building the 12-story Peter Stuyvesant apartments at the south corner of 98th and Riverside Drive, designed by William L. Rouse.


Uneasily, Ivory Coast Heads for Election
When this country's governing party recently introduced strict nationality requirements aimed at blocking an expected candidate for president, opposition newspapers swiftly replied with "investigative reports" saying the incumbent himself is not a "pure Ivorian."
Now, after several weeks of controversy over national origins, if one believes the freewheeling press here, at least two women have been identified as the mother of the President, Henri Konan Bedie, and one of them was born in Ghana, thus disqualifying him for office.


Arkansas and Kentucky to Play for Title
ARKANSAS 69, ALABAMA 58: Coach Nolan Richardson finally got what he wanted yesterday -- a berth in the Southeastern Conference tournament championship game.
It was the only thing that had escaped him since Arkansas joined the S.E.C. four years ago.
His Razorbacks won two regular-season titles the first three years and captured the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament championship last season.
The fifth-ranked Razorbacks used a stifling defense that produced a 69-58 victory over No. 20 Alabama at Atlanta.
Arkansas will play third-ranked Kentucky, the S.E.C. regular-season champion, this afternoon for the tournament title.


Thanks Be to Cruelty and Willful Neglect
MURDERERS AND OTHER FRIENDS Another Part of Life.
By John Mortimer.
Illustrated. 260 pp.
New York: Viking. $23.95.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
FACES OF WOMEN
Some of the faces will be familiar -- Queen Elizabeth II, Dionne Warwick, Joan Crawford.
Others will be vaguely familiar as half-forgotten movie or television stars, but most of the women in more than 200 photographs in an exhibition called "The Women Series: 1992-1994" will be totally anonymous.
The rephotographed women's faces, worked over from originals that were shot anytime from the late 19th century to the present, will be on view at the Hudson River Museum in Yonkers through Aug. 27 in recognition of Women's History Month.


B.C.C.I.'s Second Scandal
To the Editor:
Daniel S. Levin should have asked Robb Evans about his compensation arrangement for handling the B.C.C.I. liquidation ("B.C.C.I. Mop-Up: It's Easier Without a U.S.-Issue Mop," Feb. 26).
That might have explained Mr.
Evans's motivation for dragging on the liquidation process.


Noise Trouble, Part 2: The Confrontation
VINNY, Tony, Billy and I have all been sticking close to home these last few Saturday nights, which is my problem.
They do not live in my neighborhood, but their bar, the Pit, has a music schedule that is in conflict with my sleep schedule.
"We got to survive," explained Vinny, after he bought me a beer one recent Friday evening.
Like his partners, he refused to disclose his last name; I didn't press or investigate, because for now I want to resolve this in a neighborly way.
In the spirit of getting in touch with my pain, I've been dropping in on the Pit, which is on East 15th Street, and has two distinct, even conflicting, personalities.
Most of the time it is a neighborhood bar with a lively happy-hour crowd decompressing between jobs nearby and their homes, which are usually a subway or train ride away.


Dressed to Thrill; Inside the Closet of the Knicks' Charles Oakley
I was inside Charles Oakley's cramped walk-in closet, a place I never imagined I would see.
For part of my visit, Oakley let me rummage alone, as he ate a late lunch downstairs in his town house in White Plains.
Why would I, a man with two good suits and three decent blazers, be taking fashion notes about the clothes of the New York Knicks' ferocious power forward, a tenacious, dirty-work warrior known for strong-arming opponents out of his way, slugging a few rivals now and then, flexing his muscles for 10 rebounds a game and risking his body to scramble after errant basketballs?
Despite the blue-collar work ethic and his playing style of near-constant body contact, the off-the-court Oakley is not a man of sweat suits and sneakers.
He is a lavishly dressed peacock of a Knick, a standout in the National Basketball Association, which boasts perhaps the best-dressed athletes in sports, including such past and present stars as Julius Erving, Isiah Thomas, Magic Johnson, Mark Jackson and Hakeem Olajuwon.


Mentionings
EVIDENCE MOUNTS that the Great Mentioner is dead.
Discovered by Russell Baker and cherished by the media, Mentioner long served as the principal arbiter of politicians worth "being mentioned" as potential candidates for President.
The Great Mentioner obviously possessed detailed knowledge of governors, legislators and chicken-dinner orators and always kept the roster of the mentioned short enough to fit into a single newspaper paragraph or TV graphic.
They would then appear on lists that pollsters presented to likely voters, to learn how well they were "recognized" and whether recognition evoked a positive or negative feeling.
The surviving Mentionees could then go on to run in selected primaries and try to generate what the media would call Momentum for winning other primaries and, eventually, a majority of convention delegates.


POSTINGS: $40 Million Construction Contract Is Signed; Colorful Renovation for Union Sq. Station
The incredible maze and seedy ambiance that subway riders know as the Union Square subway station will be replaced by a spiffier, more organized system of terminals and tunnels as part of a complete rehabilitation set to begin this spring.
A $40 million construction contract was signed last month for a 16-phase, four-year overhaul of the station at 14th Street, where three train lines -- the Canarsie (L) line, the Broadway (N and R) line and the Lexington (4, 5 and 6) line -- converge in New York City's third largest subway station, after Times Square and Grand Central.


Miracles in Miniature
THE PAINTED PAGE Italian Renaissance Book Illumination, 1450-1550.
Edited by Jonathan J. G. Alexander.
Illustrated. 274 pp.
New York: Prestel-Verlag. $75.


Sports of The Times; Jordan's Best Move: Outtahere
IN locker rooms all over Florida and Arizona, the ersatz baseball players are snarfing up the free food as if there were no tomorrow.
Somebody better tell them they're supposed to tip the clubhouse man.
This is the grubby spectacle Michael Jordan left behind.
There will be a dignified pause before he resumes his basketball career, but basically he looked around at Selig's Army and said in his basso profundo voice, "I am outtahere."


Clueless in Gotham
COCK-A-DOODLE-DOO  By Philip Weiss. 295 pp.
New York:  Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $21.


The Extremity of Evil
To the Editor:
I was dismayed to encounter this thought in Paul Johnson's review of "Franco: A Biography," by Paul Preston (Feb. 19): "The process of undemonizing Hitler, I suspect, cannot take place until the experience of the Holocaust passes out of living memory and it becomes just historical fact." For Mr.
Johnson, the author of the wonderfully readable and empathetic "History of the Jews," to believe that Hitler can or should be un demonized is curious, but to imagine a day when the Holocaust "becomes just historical fact" is downright distressing.


Since '81, Experts Warned of Problem In Ice Flight Rules
Weeks before an ATR-72 flew into freezing drizzle and crashed near Roselawn, Ind., the nation's top aviation safety official seemingly put to rest a decade-long debate, declaring there was no need to require that planes be better equipped for such weather.
David R. Hinson, the Federal Aviation Administrator, wrote in a letter to the National Transportation Safety Board in September 1994 that his agency had underwritten more than 10 years of research on the subject.
"None of this work has established the foundation or justification," he said, to change the existing standards, which require manufacturers to design planes that can fly through small water droplets, not the larger droplets of freezing drizzle or freezing rain.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


In the Region/Westchester; An Old Moviehouse Is to Become a Retail Center
EARLY next year work is to begin on the transformation of a turn-of-the-century building in the heart of this city's downtown that most recently housed a multiplex cinema in a converted RKO movie theater.
The building, which once housed a vaudeville theater, is to become a 90,000-square-foot retail center that its developer hopes will attract nationally known tenants.


For Hemlocks, Two-Front War on Insects
HEMLOCK TREES in the Northeast are in serious trouble. The prognosis is not good.
The troubles began several decades ago.
First the trees had to endure infestation by a sneaky insect pest called the elongate hemlock scale, which was devastating whole colonies of trees, whether in the wild or part of landscaping.


43 Stories Tall, but It Came In Just Under the Wire
FOR more than a year, new zoning rules on the Upper East Side have prohibited the construction of skyscrapers rising 40 or more stories from plazas that generate a development bonus.
Yet it looks as if the next big project in the area will be a slender 43-story tower at First Avenue and 84th Street that is to get a 20 percent bonus for providing a plaza.
Is this legal?
Yes, said the New York City Board of Standards and Appeals.
Yes, said the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court.


All-Weather Fun, Indoors
OUTSIDE, it was a cold, blustery winter afternoon, but inside Discovery Zone, a huge indoor play area here, things were cooking.
Matthew Russell, 5, emerged from a pit of hundreds of colorful plastic balls, paused briefly, pulled up his socks and announced, "I feel great here 'cause I can run around." He then took off into a giant yellow plastic tunnel.
His 9-year-old brother, Raymond, climbed in after him, yelling over his shoulder, "And Mom would kill us if we jumped around like this at home." Travis, 4, said: "Yeah! Hey -- wait for me," and piled in after his older brothers.


A Vow of Poverty for Doctors?
To the Editor:
Regarding "A Hospital Copes With a New Order" (Jan. 29), a major point is consistently overlooked in the discussion about health care costs is the salaries and fees we pay to the professionals.
Physicians face some profound moral difficulties in their inability to address this issue themselves.
Dr.
Amy N. Bossen (Letters, Feb. 26) talks about "two horribly difficult decisions" in attending patients.
What about the decision to become a doctor and part of a system that pays inordinately high salaries?


Blues Belong to Us All
To the Editor:
Re "Down at the Crossroads, There's a Devil of a Debate (Week in Review, March 5): There can be no denying that blues was invented by African-Americans in the first half of this century and the latter part of the previous one. Combined with ancestral African music and the folk musics that surrounded them, it was born of the pain and suffering they experienced. For example, Hawaiian music, introduced to America in the 1890's, influenced the mournful slide guitar heard so often in blues.


HOW POT HAS GROWN
Michael Pollan's article, though set in Amsterdam, focused mostly on Americans and the way the drug war has stimulated high-tech growing techniques.
The author, however, missed the opportunity to note the results of marijuana decriminalization in the only country in the world where marijuana is openly sold.


Shush! Musician Speaking
To the Editor:
Alex Ross fails to mention the most critical "marketing" debasement of all: the lecturing conductor and performer.


IDEAS &amp; TRENDS: Peekaboo; Somewhere in the Picture There Is a President
HE still has the planes, helicopters, codes, and enormous powers of life and death.
His merest word can still move markets, if not mountains, and lately he has even begun to pick some fights.
But in the wintry weeks since the Republicans took control of Congress, Bill Clinton has also been struggling to master a new national role: President as goalie, parrying the pucks that come skittling down Pennsylvania Avenue from Newt Gingrich.


Insurance as an Investment
To the Editor:
"Weighing a Life Insurance Strategy" (Your Own Account, Feb. 19) was misleading, and because I was quoted in that column, I think it necessary to respond.


John F. Gerry, 69, Chief Judge Of Federal Court in New Jersey
John Francis Gerry, the chief United States district judge in New Jersey for seven years and a former top official of the policy-making arm of the Federal bench, died on Friday at his home in Moorestown, N.J.
He was 69.
The cause was liver cancer, said his wife, Jean G. Gerry.


With Deliberate Speed And Other Oxymorons
UPTOWN -- After three of his minimalist pieces were presented at a benefit on March 5 for the Kitchen, the downtown center for experimental art, Robert Wilson was heading from the Hudson Theater at the Macklowe Hotel to a reception upstairs.
"Mr. Wilson, would you mind signing this for me?" asked a fan who handed him a book by Annie Leibovitz.


Toys 'R' Us Work Gets Under Way
Construction crews have started transforming an old warehouse on Third Avenue at 80th Street into a Toys 'R' Us store and 130 luxury apartments, despite a city zoning review prompted by local opponents.
"A lot of banging has been going on, men in hard hats are going in, trucks are inside the loading docks and a huge hose has water running out," said Teri Slater, a member of a local coalition against the store called Neighbors 'R' Us.


As World Leaders Confer on Poverty, Mitterrand Urges New Tax
The largest gathering of world leaders ever assembled began a two-day marathon of speeches today on improving the lives of the world's 1.3 billion most destitute people.
Many promises were made, but few new high-level commitments or concrete proposals.
President Francois Mitterrand of France, making his last appearance before a large international audience before elections in France next month, was an exception.
He supported a proposal to tax speculative international currency transactions as way of raising money for development.
The suggested levy was proposed by James Tobin, an American who was awarded the 1981 Nobel Prize for economics.


Heart Attacks May Have Tie To Drug Type
A new study suggests that people who take one type of high blood pressure medication may be more likely to have heart attacks.
The drugs, known as calcium channel blockers, may increase the risk of a heart attack by 60 percent compared with other types of medication, the researchers found.
But heart disease experts cautioned that the study did not prove an effect and some questioned the findings.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
PLAYING IT BY EAR  Literary Essays and Reviews.
By William H. Pritchard.
University of Massachusetts, cloth, $45; paper, $16.95.


THE COUNTER COUNTERCULTURE
William Kristol's exasperation with what he calls "the typical New York Jewish view of the world, that people who weren't from New York and Jewish were unfortunate: they ate Wonder Bread and mayonnaise and had boring existences" indicates that he, himself, is a Wonder-Bread-wannabe ("The Counter Counterculture," by James Atlas, Feb. 12).


The Lone Wolf Faces a Match Point
He was the lone wolf of tennis. And in a way he still is.
In the years before the best tournaments were opened, in 1968, to the best pros, Richard (Pancho) Gonzalez was the best tennis player on what was known as the "pro tour," opposing Rod Laver, Lew Hoad or Ken Rosewall in Madison Square Garden occasionally but more often appearing in one-night stands in dimly lighted arenas and armories all over America.


Bhutto Vows to Strike Back at Gunmen
Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, her Government shaken by the killing of two United States Consulate officials here on Wednesday and a deadly mosque bombing on Friday, visited Karachi today and vowed to adopt tougher tactics, including "ruthlessness when required" toward gunmen who have fostered near-anarchy in Pakistan's biggest city.
As Ms.
Bhutto spoke, the coffins of the two slain Americans were draped in American flags and driven to Karachi airport for a sunset ceremony on the airport tarmac that was attended by weeping family members and staff from the United States Consulate.
After farewell speeches and a recorded playing of "The Star-Spangled Banner," a Marine guard carried the coffins aboard a United States military transport plane for the flight to Washington.


Newtie's Greatest Hits
QUOTATIONS FROM SPEAKER NEWT  The Little Red, White and Blue Book of the Republican Revolution.
Edited by Amy D. Bernstein and Peter W. Bernstein. 186 pp.
New York: Workman Publishing.
Paper, $5.95.
NEWTWIT!
Compiled by Tom Connor &amp; Associates. 95 pp.
New York: Main Street Books/Doubleday.
Paper, $4.99.
NEWTISMS  The Wit and Wisdom of Newt Gingrich.
Compiled by Geoff Rodkey. 94 pp.
New York: Pocket Books.
Paper, $5.


Big Six: Friend or Fox in the Co-op?
Ask people about Richard M. Stone, the man accused in a Federal lawsuit last week of defrauding the residents of a Queens cooperative of more than $10 million, and an array of contradictions emerges.
Depending on who is talking, he is either a pioneer in property management or a schemer out for personal profit.
He has been called a man with expensive tastes, driving a Mercedes and registering addresses in the Hamptons and on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, and a man who lived modestly, wearing threadbare suits, driving a rattletrap car and sleeping many nights last year on a mattress in his office at the Big Six Towers, the Woodside co-op he managed until he was dismissed in November.


Do-Good Recycler's Neighbors Urge Move
For its innovative use of recycling to aid the poor, the We Can agency has drawn international attention as an organization that benefits both the environment and the homeless.
It has redeemed 250 million bottles and cans, funneling $16 million to the people who collected and sorted them and diverting 22,000 tons of waste from city garbage trucks and landfills.
But many neighbors of its operations center in Clinton say We Can has worn out its welcome.
Community leaders, who five years ago welcomed its move to a warehouse at the corner of 11th Avenue and 52d Street, now say that We Can has proved to be a bad neighbor.
They say that the can collectors disrupt the neighborhood at all hours and that they use the streets as toilets.
They are demanding its removal from the site, which the city owns.


Mexicans Ask How Far Social Fabric Can Stretch
Mexican officials are bracing for several months of rising social tensions and fierce political struggles as people throughout the nation react angrily to the severe economic shock treatment that the Government hopes will pull Mexico out of its worst crisis in a decade.
Tough new measures imposed by the Government on Thursday will mean that at least 500,000 people will lose their jobs over the next two months, officials say, on top of 250,000 who have already been let go in the first two months of this difficult year.


Agents Set Fees After Pay Is Cut
THE classic assertion that it costs nothing to use a travel agent is being turned on its head.
Travelers may already be paying extra to buy an airline ticket from a travel agent and may soon pay a fee for the agent's other services as well.
In all likelihood, travelers who have used their agents for some time will not be hit with a ticket fee, but the situation is changing fast.
"The free lunch is gone," said John Williams, senior vice president of the American Express travel network.


Girl, 12, Is Killed By Driver in Queens
A 12-year-old girl was killed yesterday in Flushing, Queens when a man driving a sports car hit her and a friend as they were crossing at an intersection, and then sped off, the police said.
The man, who the police said may have been intoxicated, managed to drive only a block before smashing into a van, slightly injuring the driver and two children inside.


'Morphing' Into The Toy World's Top Ranks
AT the New York toy fair in February 1993, a Japanese company with limited name recognition in the United States displayed a new line of action figures in a small showroom and struggled to get toy buyers to look.
"We had to go out in the hall and drag some of them in," recalled Trish Stewart, marketing director for the company's American subsidiary.
The action figures, the Mighty Morphin Power Rangers, went on to become one of the greatest hits in American toy history.
At last month's toy fair, the manufacturer, the Bandai Company, couldn't keep the crowds out of a showroom that was four times as large as the old one.


In Gambling Debate, Foes Await Bridgeport Casino Vote
The political and business leadership of this city is determined to show state legislators that Bridgeport voters want a casino so much that they will vote overwhelmingly for it in a referendum on March 28.
In a fiercely waged contest, the Bridgeport Regional Business Council expects to spend $190,000 campaigning for a casino, which it says is the key to transforming the struggling city's port into a tourist attraction like the Inner Harbor in Baltimore.


F.Y.I.
Better Than Repo Park
Q.  How did Rego Park, Queens, get its name? Who was Rego?


O'Meara Survives Elements For Lead
March Madness came to the PGA Tour today in the third round of the Honda Classic.
It had it all: Charging, choking, balls bouncing crazily, spinning out and spinning in.
By the time the last ripple had died on the lakes that surround the finishing holes at Weston Hills Country Club -- the holes dubbed "The Final Four" by the golf course architect Robert Trent Jones Jr. -- the golfers were looking for some way to take a T.O., baby.
Mark O'Meara finally staggered in with the lead after a round of even-par 71.
He played the Final Four in 3 over par, and instead of a comfortable six-stroke lead over Nick Faldo, he held a three-stroke lead going into the final round of the Honda Classic.


Corrections
A map on Feb. 26 with an article headlined "Two Towns, Well Aged, in Greece," located the ancient town of Epidaurus incorrectly.
It is on the Saronic Gulf; the southeast Peloponnesus is the site of a town of the same name.


Topiaries And Teapots, And a Tide Of Visitors
Building from a steady trickle to a mid-day stream to an afternoon raging river, New Yorkers yesterday descended on their newest commercial bauble, Crate and Barrel, a furniture and housewares superstore at Madison Avenue and 59th Street.
There were out-of-town visitors, couples studiously filling bridal registries, tourists from Europe and Asia, neighborhood folks taking their babies for a stroll, a couple buying all the furnishings for a six-room ski chalet in Vermont, people who usually drive to New Jersey furniture outlets and a woman clutching a $50 gift certificate she had been waiting five months to use.


Versatile Watercress Works Year Round
WATERCRESS costs half what you pay for fancy salad greens.
But its tart, peppery taste is good in salads year round.
Watercress also makes an attractive garnish for lamb chops, steaks and roast chicken, and it adds something to the balance of a dish, especially when it is served with a mound of french fries.


An Obstacle to Good Contracts
To the Editor:
I applaud the article urging a transactional approach to teaching contracts ("To Aid Business, Change Law School," Viewpoints, March 5).
Courses of this kind can supplement traditional courses that teach the law of contracts.
Though some law schools offer this type of course, there must be more progress.
One impediment is the law schools themselves.
A 1992 American Bar Association study reported the "traditional" responses to the criticism that law school graduates cannot draft a contract: We teach them how to think; we're not trade schools; practice is best taught by practitioners.
Well, the traditional responses are beams on which the termites have been dining too long.
PETER SIVIGLIA  Manhattan, March 6  The writer is a lawyer and author of "Commercial Agreements: A Lawyer's Guide to Drafting and Negotiating."


Monsanto Has Its Wonder Hormone. Can It Sell It?
THIS is the ultimate test for Monsanto.
It was no mean feat to genetically alter bacteria so that they produce a cow hormone that increases milk output.
And in the face of fierce objections from opponents of biotechnology, it took nearly a decade to win Food and Drug Administration approval to market the hormone.
But a year after Monsanto began selling the hormone, it is clear that the biggest challenge of all will be recouping the hundreds of millions of dollars it has invested.
The stakes go far beyond the Monsanto Company and the dairy industry.
The hormone -- which is known formally as bovine somatotropin, or BST, and goes by the brand name Posilac -- is the first genetically engineered product to be used to increase food production.
And the consensus is that if a deep-pocketed giant like Monsanto cannot make a go of it, Wall Street will shy away from investments in food-industry biotechnology for years to come.


Sharing the Stage, a Recluse and His Double
IT IS A TESTAMENT TO THE artistry of the Russian pianist Sviatoslav Richter that Philips Classics has titled a new 21-CD set "Richter: The Authorized Recordings." The title automatically invokes all the unauthorized recordings Mr.
Richter has inspired: disks on obscure labels that often sound as if they had been made using microphones concealed in overcoats, perhaps by the devoted fans who have tracked this eccentric, reclusive artist from obscure hall to obscure hall.
For despite the fact that Mr.
Richter, at 80, could instantly sell out any concert hall in the world, he tends to avoid the major stops.
He has performed in a 700-year-old granary near Tours, France, where he has been associated with the Touraine Festival, and in monastery libraries in Bavaria.
And in the Communist Soviet Union, he once played a three-month tour of Siberia.


She's Talkin' 'Bout Our Generations
ONE AND A HALF YEARS, TWO MILLION albums sold and, as of March 1, three Grammy Awards for 1994, including best new artist and record of the year.
Since her album "Tuesday Night Music Club" was released in August 1993, that has been Sheryl Crow's payoff for perseverance in the music-business jungles of Los Angeles and, even more, for shrewdly navigating one of pop's new mainstreams.
To the legions of rockers who demand noise and aggression, she may barely register.
But "Tuesday Night Music Club" settles into the zone where rock's younger and older audiences intersect.
Its folk-rock-country-pop arrangements are crisp but familiar, sauntering right down the middle, nice and friendly.
When Crow talks her verses instead of singing them, as she does in her Grammy-winning "All I Wanna Do," she seems to be a folk-rocker for the age of hip-hop.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
William Morris Office: New! Hot! Exciting!
The William Morris agency, which has been trying to rejuvenate its image, moved its New York office last week to more glamorous headquarters at 1325 Avenue of the Americas, at 53d Street.


INSIDE
Angry Words in China
Minutes after signing a new trade pact with Beijing, the United States said China was not living up to an earlier agreement.
Page 21.
Fallen Firefighter Mourned
At a Long Island church, thousands of firefighters stood to salute Lieut.
Raymond Schiebel, fatally injured after a Brooklyn blaze.
Page 37.
Dispute Over Nomination
President Clinton says his C.I.A. nomination fell to poisonous politics, but Republicans say the cause was White House bungling.
Page 28.
New Law Stops Gun Sales
Surveys show that the Brady law passed last year has stopped as many as 45,000 convicted criminals from buying handguns.
Page 23.


BEST SELLERS: March 12, 1995
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
54
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
2
2
3
BORDER MUSIC, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A Texas rancher, trying to erase his Vietnam trauma, takes to the road with an exotic dancer.
3
3
38
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
4
4
5
ORIGINAL SIN, by P.D.
James. (Knopf, $24.) Adam Dalgliesh probes a case involving intrigue, malice and murder in a prestigious London publishing house.
5
7
4
DAISY-HEAD MAYZIE, by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $15.) A girl's head unexpectedly sprouts a daisy.
6
5
8
KISS THE GIRLS, by James Patterson. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) A police detective pursues a serial killer.
7
6
5
HOME SONG, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $23.95.) The appearance of his unknown biological son threatens the serenity of a man's family life.
8
8
135
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
9
12
5
ALWAYS A RECKONING, by Jimmy Carter. (Times Books/Random House, $18.) A collection of poems.
10
16
2
THE CUNNING MAN, by Robertson Davies. (Viking, $23.95.) A doctor uses shamanism and Platonism as well as scientific medicine in his practice.
11
22
MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins, $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about aboriginal philosophy.
12*
10
3
THE CAT WHO BLEW THE WHISTLE, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Putnam, $21.95.) Aided by his two cats, Jim Qwilleran investigates embezzlement and a murder.
13*
9
2
THE JUROR, by George Dawes Green. (Warner, $21.95.) A woman's life takes a fearful turn when she is chosen as a juror for a mob trial.
14
1
THE GLASS LAKE, by Maeve Binchy. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The unspoken ties that bind a woman and her mother in a small Irish town.
15
13
8
EYES OF A CHILD, by Richard North Patterson. (Knopf, $24.) The apparent suicide of a San Francisco man leads to courtroom encounters.
16*
11
7
ACCEPTABLE RISK, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $23.95.) A researcher's quest has devastating results.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
5
I WANT TO TELL YOU, by O.J.
Simpson. (Little, Brown, $17.95.) The former football star, now on trial for murder, responds to letters he has received.
2
2
11
SISTERS, by Carol Saline.
Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of sisters, reported in words and pictures.
3
3
22
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
4
6
4
THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House, $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the lives of all Americans.
5
4
5
RAGING HEART, by Sheila Weller. (Pocket, $18.) An account of the marriage of O.J. and Nicole Brown Simpson.
6
8
3
THE DISCIPLINE OF MARKET LEADERS, by Michael Treacy and Fred Wiersema. (Addison-Wesley, $25.) A discussion of marketing techniques.
7
9
7
INSIDE THE WHITE HOUSE, by Ronald Kessler. (Pocket, $23.) Anecdotes about events at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue during the past 30 years.
8
12
15
THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY, by Robert G. Hagstrom Jr. (Wiley, $24.95.) An account of the career of the man said to be the world's most successful investor.
9
10
53
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
10
5
27
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up comedian.
11
15
64
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
12
7
23
DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion, $19.95.) Meditations on life by the star of "Home Improvement."
13*
23
JAMES HERRIOT'S CAT STORIES, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $16.95.) A collection of tales by the late Yorkshire veterinarian.
14
11
7
ALL MY CHILDREN, by Gary Warner. (General Publishing, $25.) A scrapbook of photographs and mementos about the long-running television show.
15
13
11
NICOLE BROWN SIMPSON, by Faye D. Resnick with Mike Walker. (Dove Books, $14.95.) The former wife of O.J.
Simpson as remembered by a friend.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
2
94
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
2
3
4
THE BEARDSTOWN LADIES' COMMON-SENSE INVESTMENT GUIDE. (Godin/Hyperion, $19.95.) Tips for successful investing from 16 Illinois women.
3
1
46
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
4
4
8
FOOD, by Susan Powter. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) Information about recipes, nutritional menus and diets.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Feb. 25, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) ANAIS NIN: A Biography, by Deirdre Bair. (Putnam, $39.95.) An engaging account that presents the diarist as even more self-absorbed than her work suggests.
BETRAYALS, by Charles Palliser. (Ballantine, $23.) This clever novel spins out a set of variations on the double-cross and such related themes as infidelity, treason and revenge.
THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL: The Definitive Edition, by Anne Frank.
Edited by Otto H. Frank and Mirjam Pressler. (Doubleday, $25.) An expanded version, restoring entries from the original diary, gives more texture and nuance to this renowned personal account of the Holocaust.
A DIVING ROCK ON THE HUDSON: Volume 2 of "Mercy of a Rude Stream," by Henry Roth. (St. Martin's, $23.95.) When it rains it pours: 60 years after "Call It Sleep," Mr.
Roth, back at the keyboard, plunges on with a purposely garrulous narration whose hero looks much like himself and whose life story centers on a spectacular sin.
DREAMING: Hard Luck and Good Times in America, by Carolyn See. (Random House, $23.) The novelist's memoir of her family revels in a woman's point of view as it paints a portrait of drugs, drink and zany freedom set in California.
FRANCO: A Biography, by Paul Preston. (Basic Books, $37.50.) A huge, all-inclusive life of the outright winner of Spain's civil war, the shrewd, lucky dictator of his country for almost 40 years.
IN LOVE WITH DAYLIGHT: A Memoir of Recovery, by Wilfrid Sheed. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The writer's account of his battles with alcohol, drugs and cancer is grim, but it's told with whimsical wisdom and good-natured resolve.
THE LIFE OF GRAHAM GREENE.
Volume 2: 1939-1955, by Norman Sherry. (Viking, $34.95.) Mr.
Sherry brings to the grotesquely complicated life of Greene a relentless passion for detail, resulting in a compulsively readable account.
MOVING HOUSE: Stories, by Pawel Huelle. (Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace, $18.95.) These tales by a Polish writer, which turn on the longings and workings of memory, are rooted in the highly idiosyncratic history of Gdansk.
TERRIBLE HONESTY: Mongrel Manhattan in the 1920s, by Ann Douglas. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $25.) The great big city in the great good time, analyzed with broad scope and minute complexity as the locus of the national psyche when Americans attacked the conditioned responses of the pre-1914 world.
TOMORROW IS ANOTHER COUNTRY: The Inside Story of South Africa's Road to Change, by Allister Sparks. (Hill &amp; Wang, $22.) A South African journalist's fast-paced, gripping account of the long, slow and often clandestine process that led to the end of apartheid.
THE TUNNEL, by William H. Gass. (Knopf, $30.) This sprawling novel (652 pages) by an American master comes out of the head of its monstrous protagonist, a language-driven professor of fascist views who is as dreadful as he is plausible.


POSTINGS: 7,400 Square Feet on Two Levels; Ikea Chooses Site At 57th and Lexington
The casual turn of retailing along 57th Street is nowhere better illustrated than at 135 East 57th Street, at the northwest corner of Lexington Avenue.
First came Daffy's, the discount apparel store that took over the Place des Antiquaires.
Now Ikea, the Swedish do-it-yourself, low-cost furniture store normally found in sprawling suburban warehouses, has signed a lease for a mere 7,400-square-foot site on two levels in the spot formerly occupied by the haughty haberdashery Louis, Boston, which closed four years ago.


Easter, Bach to Vaughan Williams
FOR two decades, Richard Donohue, the director of music for South Congregational Church in Hartford, has been fashioning imaginative programs designed to celebrate Lent and the Easter season.
This, his 21st year, is no exception.
This afternoon at 4 the South Church Choir and soloists will take listeners on what Mr.
Donohue calls "a musical journey from the Passion to the Resurrection" at the Church of the Incarnation in Wethersfield.
The presentation will be repeated next Sunday at St.
Francis of Assisi Church in Torrington, and on March 26 at South Congregational Church in Hartford, again at 4 P.M.
Included are excerpts from choral works of Palestrina, Bach, Handel, Haydn and three 20th-century composers: Fenno Heath, Alan Rideout and Ralph Vaughan Williams.
For more details, call 529-2533 (Wethersfield), 482-5571 (Torrington) or 249-6807 (Hartford).


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
IT'S PERFECTLY NORMAL A Book About Changing Bodies, Growing Up, Sex, and Sexual Health.
By Robie H. Harris.
Illustrated by Michael Emberley. 89 pp.
Cambridge, Mass: Candlewick Press. $19.95. (Ages 10 to 14)  HEARTBREAK AND ROSES  Real Life Stories of Troubled Love.
By Janet Bode and Stan Mack. 158 pp.
New York: Delacorte Press. $15.95. (Ages 12 and up)  CHANGES IN YOU AND ME  A Book About Puberty, Mostly for Girls.
By Paulette Bourgeois and Martin Wolfish.
Illustrated by Louise Phillips and Kam Yu. 64 pp.
Kansas City, Mo.: Somerville House/Andrews &amp; McMeel. $14.95. (Ages 10 and up)


GADGETS: Saving Frogs And Pools
One hazard of the modern world, for frogs, is the swimming pool.
One hazard of the natural world, for pool owners, is the frog.
Frogs jump into pools and can't get out.
They swim until they tire and drown.
Pool owners then find the dead frogs floating or clogging the filtering equipment.


Why the U.N. Became the World's Fair
THEY turned on the lights at the Tivoli Gardens last week and it wasn't even spring.
Copenhagen wanted the 20,000 people attending the first World Summit for Social Development to get a glimpse of its most famous park, even if that meant bundling up against the cold.
Tivoli's 100,000 twinkling colored lights added the right carnival atmosphere to the traveling United Nations global road show -- fresh from appearances in Cairo, Vienna and Rio.
Barely six months from now, the caravan moves on to Beijing for the fourth international conference on women.
Then it's Istanbul and Habitat II in 1996.
In its 50th anniversary year, the United Nations and its Secretary General seem to be spending a lot of time and money away from home.
The basic work product is the same: incremental agreements, offering something more than platitudes but something less than action.
But amid the pomp and comedy of the traveling show something happens that is rare at the home office: national leaders get involved, if briefly, with the gritty details of economic, environmental and personal misery.


Dining in Paris, Youngsters on the Road
Children's Travel Journal  By Ann Banks. 44 pages.
Available from the publisher, The Little Bookroom, 5 St.
Luke's Place, New York, N.Y. 10014; fax, (212) 333-5374.


Mutual Funds; Looking Back at the Overlooked
WITH all the attention paid to mutual funds these days, some good ones still slip by.
Maybe it's because more than 5,000 funds are vying for attention.
Or maybe it's a matter of marketing.
Or just bad luck.


Hot Line
the Number for Spring: 1-800-C-O-L-O-R


The Nation; In Court, a Child Isn't Worth Much
In the weeks after her unborn baby died in the delivery room, Vilma Martinez decided that she wanted to hold someone accountable.
It was an understandable reaction, given the exceptional circumstances of her case.
She had begged for a doctor, but none came to her aid.
She and her boyfriend, the baby's father, had waited helplessly as the baby's heartbeat slowed, then stopped.
The baby, a 6-pound, 13-ounce boy, was born dead.


A Contrast Between 19th- and Early 20th-Century Paintings
AT Nardin Galleries here, it is the late 19th century versus the early 20th century by way of adjoining shows titled, respectively, "Still Life and Landscape Painting" and "Salute to Edith Halpert." The bout ends in a draw; the Modernists paying tribute to the dealer who championed them have larger reputations than their Victorian counterparts, but most are represented by minor works.
Still, the juxtaposition of lesser-knowns who have become grist for the Revisionist mill with Modernists now in the blue-chip category is nothing if not instructive.
After all, when Mrs.
Halpert founded her Downtown Gallery in 1926, American artists, to quote Stuart Davis, "had a strictly Class B rating on the international board, regardless of merit." The situation did not change materially until well after World War II.


Snow Report Via Fax
Objective, timely news on ski resorts and snow conditions often can seem as hard to find as deep powder in July.
Two self-proclaimed avid skiers, Kelly Hayes and Gerald Sindell, now offer a weekly three-page fax report on conditions at 55 resorts worldwide for $95 annually.


Habitats/Madison, Conn.; A 10-Room Beach House on the Sound
CRAIG THOMPSON grew up spending the summers on Pot Island, one of the nearby Thimble Islands, and although he loves living on an island, he says it's the small things that get to you: "electricity by generator, priming the pump, free-flowing septic systems and the ordeal entailed in shopping for groceries."
So when Deborah and Craig Thompson turned 40 and, as they say, "completed" their family of four children -- three girls and a boy -- they decided to find the closest practical thing to an island.


Villanova Dominates Outside And Inside
Villanova may have the Big East player of the year, but the Wildcats are hardly a one-man team.
The Wildcats' balanced combination of inside power and outside finesse, along with a tenacious defense and patient offense, will earn it a high placement when the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament brackets are penciled in today.
Before that, however, the Wildcats will try to do something they have never done before: win the Big East tournament.
Second-seeded Villanova will face top-seeded Connecticut at 2 P.M. today for the tournament championship after eliminating Providence by 90-75 in yesterday's semifinals at Madison Square Garden.


Foreign Affairs; Smoking Mountain
Of the many jokes making the rounds about Mexico's President, Ernesto Zedillo, maybe the most appropriate one is this: Mr.
Zedillo is in a rowboat with the Pope and a big wind blows the Pontiff's miter off his head.
Mr.
Zedillo climbs out of the boat, walks on water and retrieves the Pope's cap.
The next day's headlines in the Mexican newspapers read: "Zedillo Can't Swim."
Since taking office Dec. 1, Mr.
Zedillo has been overwhelmed by Mexico's economic crisis, which erupted 19 days after he was sworn in.
This has left the impression that his Cabinet is the gang that couldn't shoot straight.
His aides openly concede that they were not prepared to deal with the economic situation, largely because they thought they were going to inherit a Rolls-Royce economy and when they discovered they had the keys to a jalopy about to be repossessed they weren't sure what to do.
It has taken them two months to come up with a real rescue plan.


In a Tense Zone in Croatia, Respect Wanes Along With U.N.'s Mandate
Told that Croatian troops were massing in a demilitarized zone, the Czech commander of United Nations troops around this separatist Serb city jumped into a four-wheel-drive vehicle the other day and rode out to protest.
But when the commander got there, United Nations officials said, the Croatian Government troops in the so-called zone of separation bluntly told him he had no business interfering.
One Croatian officer even warned that he might be "declared persona non grata" if he sought to enforce his mandate to keep combatants out of the area.


Hip Shoe Lands in America
I'm the best-known shoe designer in England," Patrick Cox boasts. "I am for England what Clergerie is for France.
Manolo is known only by a certain set, and he's doing a different price range.
Everyone knows me." And Patrick Cox is hoping to spread his fame even further. He opened his first American boutique on March 4 at 702 Madison Avenue, between 62d and 63d streets.
Mr.
Cox, who will turn 32 this week, is perhaps best known for his lower-price Wannabe line, which consists entirely of loafers ($125 to $175) for both men and women.
The most popular model comes with a chunky heel in materials ranging from patent leather to a leopard print.


Clinton and G.O.P. Spar Over Nominee
President Clinton said today that the nomination of Michael P. C. Carns as Director of Central Intelligence was another victim of a poisonous political process, but the Republicans charged that the abrupt collapse was a result of White House bungling.
As partisan accusations began to fly over the episode, the Republican chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee said the failure by the White House to uncover embarrassing details sooner about Mr.
Carns, a retired Air Force general, had undermined American credibility in the world.


March 5-11: The Body Knows Best; The Catch-22 Rule Of Losing Weight
Anyone who has dieted knows how hard it is to keep the weight off.
Now scientists at Rockefeller University know why.
In a decade-long study of 41 volunteers, obese and lean, they discovered that the body changes its metabolism to foil attempts to lose -- or gain -- weight.
The subjects lived in a hospital for weeks while they were studied at their normal weights, at weights 10 percent above normal, and at weights 10 percent below normal.
As they lived on liquid formulas, their body composition and metabolic rates were carefully measured.


Pipes and Drums Replace Golden Oldies as Firefighter Is Mourned
After years of picnics and parties, confirmations and baptisms, Raymond F. Schiebel's colleagues gathered around him today for one last ceremony, his funeral.
Lieutenant Schiebel, a man who loved classic cars, golden oldies and, above all, his friends and family, died on Tuesday, the victim of an accident two days earlier.
He collapsed fighting a blaze in Brooklyn Sunday night, then was deprived of oxygen for crucial minutes when an oxygen tube was improperly inserted by an ambulance crew, fire officials said.


2 Years After Blast, Hotel Awaits Security Devices
After a terrorist bomb opened a smoking crater under the New York Vista Hotel at the World Trade Center in 1993, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, the hotel's owner, adopted plans to protect it with video cameras, motion sensors and other electronic security devices.
Two years later, and four months after the 820-room hotel reopened, it does not have the devices, despite what some experts say is the possibility of a repeat attack.
Port Authority officials say that they will be installed by the end of May, and that, for now, a large corps of guards is providing more than enough security.


THE COUNTER COUNTERCULTURE
James Atlas's piece on the young conservative establishment confirms every nasty suspicion young conservatives have about The New York Times establishment.
First of all, it is plain from the ghouls gallery photographs illustrating the piece that the instruction the photographer must have been given was to make the subjects look like pallid androids from the set of a bad Arnold Schwarzenegger movie.


HOW POT HAS GROWN
Michael Pollan's article "How Pot Has Grown," was brilliantly written and egregiously irresponsible (Feb. 19).
Focusing on the "gourmet" attributes of pot and the horticultural triumphs of underground cultivation, while slyly mocking drug law enforcement, the article enhances the notion of marijuana as a benign substance.


Early Check-In
To the Editor: I was amused by Susan Spano's experience trying to get a decent room at 9:30 A.M. in Brussels ("Fantasy Weekend, Real Life Price," Jan. 29).
I have had a problem several times with an early check-in.
My last experience involved a hotel in Paris.
This time I arrived at 11:30 A.M. from Germany.
I was told that there was a problem with my room.
The person in the room was sick and every other room was already taken.


Michelle Mittin, Steven Garfinkel
Michelle Lynne Mittin, the daughter of Evette Mittin of Haverford, Pa., and the late Leonard Mittin, was married yesterday evening to Steven Garfinkel, a son of Doralee and Lawrence Garfinkel of Summit, N.J.
Rabbi Gerald I. Wolpe, performed the ceremony at the Rittenhouse Hotel in Philadelphia.
Mrs.
Garfinkel, 29, is an account executive for Malden Mills Industries, manufacturers of upholstery and apparel fabrics in New York.
She is a graduate of the Philadelphia College of Textiles and Science.
Her father was a partner in Mittin Brothers, a lumber business formerly in Philadelphia.


Key Tests Shoulder And Then Waits
Jimmy Key has that baseball feeling permeating throughout his body again.
The sweat is gathering on his forehead, his fingers are searching for the seams and his serious eyes are gazing at a catcher's target.
It is spring.
He is pitching again.
If he dreams, Key can imagine himself being at Yankee Stadium instead of at the minor league complex in Tampa, Fla., rehabilitating from arthroscopic shoulder surgery.
Key pitched last Wednesday and five days before that so he is on the typical rotation.
General Manager Gene Michael is closely observing him, and the ace has discussed his performances with Manager Buck Showalter.


Stepping Through a Computer Screen, Disabled Veterans Savor Freedom
The other day, Angelo Degree single-handedly lifted a couch and effortlessly hauled it into another room.
He moved around a lamp, a crate.
He snatched hold of a man and ran outside with him.
Ever since he was shot in the head and spine while being robbed in 1981, Mr.
Degree has been a paraplegic.
His legs are a wheelchair.
One day he is hoping to play football.
Tackle.
The man who plans to suit him up is William Meredith, who is not a doctor with a miracle cure but a recording engineer with a black bag flush with interactive computer technology.
His subjects are the paraplegics and quadriplegics in the spinal cord injury ward at the Bronx Veterans Affairs Medical Center.


In 'Opal,' Reality and Fantasy With Song
OPAL" is at once an appealing and problematic fusion of the provably real and improbably fanciful. The source of the musical, which the George Street Playhouse is calling a fantasia, is a 7-year-old French orphan's reconstructed diary, published in 1920. That's the real part.
The diary is said to have been written in crayon on scraps of paper bags, a nicely conceptualized aspect of Michael R. Smith's design in the George Street production, which is set in lumber camps in Oregon.
Those are the unlikely scenes of Opal's upbringing and of her odd ways with the English language.


The Mayor's Grab Bag of Urban Facts
Even as they gripe that the government does too much, most New Yorkers go through their days blithely unaware of the myriad city services going on all around them - for better or worse.
Likewise, it is almost impossible for average taxpayers to decide for themselves whether the "quality of life" inNew YOrk has really improved or in fact worsened - not to mention how well their tax dollars are spent.
For those who ponder such questions, there is the Mayor's Management Report, the city's twice yearly report card on itself.
The latest report - 583 pages in all - offers a statistical portrait of the city, what it dies and, in some cases, how well it does.
In unveiling it, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said the report proved that services were improving under his watch, despite the first round of $ 2 billion in spending cuts and the reduction of 14,000 of the city's 216,000 workers.
But the report also showed that the cuts had begun to strain some services.


Michigan State Keeps Title Hopes Alive
MICHIGAN STATE 97, WISCONSIN 72: Shawn Respert scored 31 points to lead ninth-ranked Michigan State to a 97-72 rout of Wisconsin yesterday in the Big Ten.
Michigan State (22-5, 14-4) kept alive its hopes of tying for the conference championship, although No. 14 Purdue (23-6, 14-3) can clinch the crown with a victory this afternoon at home in the regular-season finale against Michigan (17-12, 11-6).
The Big Ten, which does not have a post-season tournament, gets an automatic bid to the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament for the conference's regular-season champion.
Many Big Ten teams expect to land in the 64-team N.C.A.A. field, which will be finalized tonight.


Hit the Poor. Reward the Rich.
The stark unfairness of the House Republicans' legislative agenda was on display last week when committees approved three bills that would drive millions of poor people off welfare in order to finance tax cuts that have been made even more favorable to the rich.
The G.O.P. is careering in a destructive direction.
By cutting perhaps $70 billion, or 15 percent, out of poverty programs over five years, the G.O.P. would drive hordes of the poor off welfare without any help in finding jobs.
This assault on the indigent cannot be explained away as a necessary belt-tightening to reach a lofty purpose, like cutting the Federal deficit.
The Republicans need these cuts now to offset their first round of tax cuts, even before they get down to deficit reduction.


The Masterpieces They Call Home
WHEN I FIRST SAW the model in the architect's ffice, long before construction began, it struck me as a case of overbearing architectural hubris.
The arrogance of it all -- those huge logs, fastened together with steel, serving as columns to support this vast gable confronting the snow-capped peaks.
Who needed such monumentality?
Weren't the mountains monumental enough?
What kind of people would build such a house?
Then I went west to see it.
The house, by Cesar Pelli, architect of notable skyscrapers like the World Financial Center in New York but of few private dwellings, turned out to be -- well, surely no modest cottage in the woods (it's 10,000 square feet on 90 acres) but much more than the rich person's extravagance I had feared.


Lynn E. Berman, Miles H. Grody
Lynn Ellen Berman, a daughter of Sandra Postweiler of Evanston, Ill., and Marvin Berman of Glencoe, Ill., is to be married today on St.
Thomas to Miles Harlan Grody, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Marvin H. Grody of Philadelphia.
Rabbi Brad Boxman is to officiate at the Hebrew Congregation of St.
Thomas, the United States Virgin Islands.
The bride, 32, graduated from the University of Illinois.
She is the manager of the Chicago office of Jetset Tours, a travel agency.
Her father is a partner in Kiesler &amp; Berman, a Chicago law firm.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Ray Postweiler and Betty Berman.


Markets Rise and Fall, but He's Always Looking Up
TO the Manhattan financial astrologer Arch Crawford, 1995 is slated to be a grim untidy year: plenty of earthquakes and a stock market heading south.
"Prices will top the first week in April," he says firmly.
"Then a good summer rally. Mid-November brings a serious, serious correction." He pushes at his wire-rimmed glasses, concentrating.


Young Thespians Get Their Big Break
IT was the first day of that mixed blessing school winter vacation -- and more than 300 children had caught the acting bug.
With starlight in their eyes, they descended on the Emelin Theater here, which promised five days of stage fun preparing for an original production of "Alice in Wonderland." Only a three-hour audition stood between the children and roles like the Mad Hatter, the March Hare and Alice herself.


To Key West By Boat
Visitors bound for Key West from Naples, on the west coast of Florida, can take to the water instead of the road.
Friendship IV, a 92-foot high-speed catamaran, leaves Naples each morning at about 8, depending on tides, with scheduled arrival four hours later at the A andB Marina on Front Street, two blocks from Duval Street.
Return trips depart at least four hours after arrival.
Rates are $59 one way, $79 for same-day round trip and $118 for a round trip with a return on a later day; children 5 to 14, $49 round trip, under 5 free; 60 and older, $74 round trip.
Reservations and information: Key West Excursions at (813) 263-3900.
JOSEPH SIANO


March 5-11; Castro Puts the Bicycle on a Pedestal


Marni Kleinman And Kevin Fried
Marni Anne Kleinman, a daughter of Elsa and Ira Kleinman of Ardsley, N.Y., was married last evening to Kevin Jon Fried, a son of Elissa and Edmund Fried of Oceanside, L.I.
Rabbi Philmore Berger officiated at Temple Avodah in Oceanside.
Mrs.
Fried, 25, is studying for a master's degree in education at Columbia University.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Rochester.
Her father is an advertising sales executive at WINS-AM in New York.
Her mother is a tutor of English as a second language.


From Tintin To High Seriousness
ONE of the great pleasures of travel is to come upon the unexpected and find, in many cases, that it helps to define an entire national character.
And that is no less true for dance aficionados.
To turn a corner in Barcelona, for example, and be suddenly overwhelmed by the sight of the stately sardana, the Catalan folk dance, performed in an ancient plaza on a sunny Sunday morning.
Or to spot a poster in London advertising an unfamiliar troupe and find one's way into a dark little cubbyhole devoted to the avant-garde in dance and performance art.
Or to end up staying for a night of Danish ballet after a chance inspection of the lovely old opera house in Copenhagen.
But for those who prefer to plan, there are plenty of festivals either devoted to or featuring dance in Europe this spring and summer, as well as interesting seasons by home troupes.
There are a number of intriguing oddities, too.
From seaside fox trots to competitive ballet, it's all there for the finding.


Editorial Notebook; Anarchy in Russia
Through some cruel alchemy of history and culture, anarchy has replaced tyranny in the economic and civic life of Russia.
Four years after the red Soviet banner was unfurled for the last time, Russians are finding the fear of crime is as destructive and dispiriting as the terror of repression.
Fear and frustration recently brought thousands of citizens to the grave site of Vladislav Listyev, a television commentator and executive murdered by criminals apparently infuriated by changes he planned at Russian state television that might have impeded the embezzlement of millions of rubles in advertising revenue.


Celtic Music's 'Extended Family' Keeps Alive Its Proud Tradition
THE TERM WORLD MUSIC invariably conjures up images of exotic locales in the Middle East or the Caribbean, foreign languages like Swahili or Balinese and unusual instruments like pan pipes or steel drums.
Yet perhaps the most flourishing world music at the moment is rooted in Western civilization's own backyard, sung primarily in English and played mainly on familiar instruments.
It is Celtic music, the centuries-old music of Ireland and Scotland, and its growing popularity can be seen in the commercial success of artists ranging from the Chieftains, longtime keepers of the flame of traditional Irish music, to the mystical, Gaelic sounds of the New Age diva Enya Ni Bhraonain.
Or the solid growth of Green Linnet Records, the Connecticut independent label that has over the last decade evolved from a sanctuary into a mission house for traditional Irish music.
And now, just in time for St.
Patrick's Day on Friday, Atlantic Records is inaugurating Celtic Heartbeat, a label devoted exclusively to the music of Ireland.


Lee Northshield and Myles Thompson
People in publishing are clubby.
They are forever falling in love with one another, and when they marry, the weddings can be like splendid book parties with rice.
This was the case with Liana Northshield, 45, and Myles Thompson, 42, colleagues at the publishing house of John Wiley &amp; Sons, who were married on March 4 at St.
James' Episcopal Church in Manhattan.


Fairway Gives Failed Supermarket a Second Chance
When the By Choice market opened in February 1994 in a former meatpacking plant under the West Side Highway at 133d Street, many shoppers were thrilled with what they saw as a a much-needed gift to the neighborhood: a spacious, clean supermarket offering the freshest meats and produce at the lowest prices.
But sluggish sales forced the store to close before the year was out.
Now, however, the concept of a suburban-style discount supermarket in West Harlem is being revived.
The store is planning to reopen within two months under the well-known Upper West Side name of the Fairway Market.
By Choice opened during a blizzard, and during its brief history, it was plagued with parking problems.
Customers also complained that it was inaccessible and lacked staple groceries.
Joseph Fedele, the market's owner, said he spent little money on advertising in order to keep prices close to wholesale.


A Musical Alchemist Conjures Up New Worlds
IT MIGHT SEEM A PECULIAR match: the folkish inflections of a klezmer clarinet line, alternately joyous and weeping, and a contemporary string-quartet texture, with stretches of light dissonance and eerie, atmospheric timbres.
But Osvaldo Golijov, a 34-year-old Argentine composer who studied with George Crumb, Lukas Foss and Oliver Knussen, and who has lately been finding inspiration in Jewish mystical writings and Yiddish novels, is comfortable in both worlds.
He has brought them together in "The Dreams and Prayers of Isaac the Blind," which will be given its American premiere by Giora Feidman and the Cleveland Quartet on Friday evening at Alice Tully Hall under the auspices of the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center.
"This will sound funny," Mr.
Golijov (pronounced GO-lih-hov) said recently, "but I am trying to invent -- or maybe not invent but discover -- what I call a 'galactic folklore.' To give you an idea, the other day I was listening to Ligeti's Violin Concerto, and, especially in its slow movement, there is a weird convergence of the already known and the entirely new. It could have been written three million years ago or three million years from now.


Versatile Watercress Works Year Round
WATERCRESS costs half what you pay for fancy salad greens.
But its tart, peppery taste is good in salads year round.
Watercress also makes an attractive garnish for lamb chops, steaks and roast chicken, and it adds something to the balance of a dish, especially when it is served with a mound of french fries.


Passing the Baton


Parking Boon: Upsized Boot Fits Trucks
The Police Department is betting its boots on a device to curb illegally parked tractor-trailer trucks.
Vexed by truckers who find it cheaper to pay fines for parking on residential streets than pay for parking, a Bronx police sergeant took it upon himself to solve the persistent problem.


Once a Sideshow, Private Organizations Star at U.N. Meetings
It started in Rio de Janeiro, with the 1992 Earth Summit.
Now no big United Nations conference takes place without it.
It is called the NGO Forum, a gathering of private organizations on the edges of the main event.
But dull or powerless it is not.
This week, as delegates to the World Summit for Social Development were bickering over phrases on issues like debt cancellation and whether a statement on workers' rights would be offensive to national sovereignty, the forum, a group of nongovernmental organizations, was generating more headlines, news conferences and controversy as it busied itself lobbying and sometimes attacking the establishment.


On Sunday; Ethnic Cliches Evoke Anger In Irish Eyes
KATE and Martin Somers, striving young Irish immigrants, will be skipping the city's St.
Patrick's Day parade scene Friday.
They do so in the grand spirit of freely loathing green plastic derbies, clay pipes, treacly commercial impulses, intimations of 19th-century ethnic stereotyping (when Irish immigrants were caricatured in the city prints as simian louts), and, of course, the annual threat of drunken poseurs further abusing the reputation of a small country with a greatly misunderstood history.
Instead they'll take in a concert by Black 47.
This is a vibrant rock band of Irish and Irish-Americans whose thumping lyrics speak viscerally to Kate and Martin of what's truly Irish on both sides of the Atlantic.
Black 47 is named in memory of 1847, the peak year of Ireland's mammoth tragedy called the Great Hunger, the national famine in which hundreds of thousands died and millions more took to the seas in most mournful emigration.
"The fog of death deepens and lies upon the land," Black 47 keens in its angry look back.


Celebrating the Big 150
Community Service Society marks an anniversary, March 6.


Shakespeare and Shaw Center Stage in London
THERE are interestingly risky evenings in prospect in the London theater this spring and summer.
What sort of impact will Raquel Welch make as the title character in Shaw's "Millionairess"?
How will Fiona Shaw, as exciting an actress as any in the British theater, cope with the challenge of playing the king in Shakespeare's "Richard II" at the National?
But there are safer options, or at least surer enjoyments, than those.
Seldom before can the Royal Shakespeare Company be transferring to London so well-received a bunch of offerings as it's doing this year.


For Hemlocks, Two-Front War on Insects
HEMLOCK TREES in the Northeast are in serious trouble. The prognosis is not good.
The troubles began several decades ago.
First the trees had to endure infestation by a sneaky insect pest called the elongate hemlock scale, which was devastating whole colonies of trees, whether in the wild or part of landscaping.


Death Penalty Doesn't Allow for Human Error
To the Editor:
Wednesday was a tragic day for New York.
Gov.
George E. Pataki signed New York's death penalty statute in the name of deterring future murders, reinstating the death penalty, which had been off the books for 18 years.
The theory of deterrence, however, is a flawed one.


Word for Word / Pie Fights; Italy Has Pizza Wars Over Crusts. Americans Do It for the Dough.
IF you think pizza cools down when you carry it across the ocean from Italy to America, just try transporting a pizza war.
A few months ago, Romano Fornasari, a Northern Italian pizza instructor from the Associazione Pizzaioli Europei e Sostenitori (the European Pizza Makers Association and Supporters), which represents 173,059 Italian pizza workers, made a terrible faux pas: he gave his students guidelines for what a "true pizza" is, delineating everything from the consistency of the dough to the size and weight of the finished pizza and how it should all sit in the stomach.


Victor Dorman, 80, Who Altered The Packaging of Cheese, Dies
Victor Dorman, who helped change the way Americans buy cheese by putting "the Paper Between the Slices" as chairman of the Dorman Cheese Company, died on March 4 at his home in Delray Beach, Fla.
He was 80.
The cause was heart failure related to muscular dystrophy, his son, Neil, said.


Data Bank/March 12, 1995
Data Bank/March 12, 1995
Consumer Borrowing
Jan.
Dec.
Nov.
Annual rate of change
4.8
8.7
17.7
Wholesale Trade
Monthly percent change
0.3
-1.1
2.4
Productivity
IV Q'94
III Q'94
II Q'94
Percent change
1.7
3.2
-2.1
Employment
Feb.
Jan.
Dec.
In thousands
125,100
124,639
124,600
Unemployment/Rate
In thousands/percent
7,200 (5.4)
7,498 (5.7)
7,200 (5.4)
3-Month Treasury Bills
March 10
March 3
Feb. 24
Rate in percent
5.75
5.70
5.71
6-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
5.91
5.91
5.91
Weekly Jobless Claims
March 3
Feb. 24
Feb. 17
In thousands
336
332
344


Losing Her Religion
To the Editor:
One can see Mary McCarthy raising an eyebrow at Lore Segal's review of "Between Friends: The Correspondence of Hannah Arendt and Mary McCarthy, 1949-1975" (Feb. 19), in which McCarthy is identified as a Roman Catholic in the first and last paragraphs.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
THEY WHISPER By Robert Olen Butler.
Penguin, $10.95.
This novel is a tale of marital hypocrisy in which Ira Holloway, a man of about 35, betrays his wife not only by seducing other women but also by drawing away from her the love of the couple's young son.
Presented as Ira's sexual history, it is "a shape-shifting narrative that lingers in the reader's moral consciousness and memory," Jane Smiley said here last year.


Woman Shot by Attacker Who Flees in Her Car
An elderly woman was ambushed in the driveway of her home on Friday night in West Caldwell, N.J., by a teen-ager who shot her in the face without saying a word and then fled in her car, leading to a wild chase through quiet suburban streets that ended in the capture of two suspects, the authorities said.
The carjacking left the woman, Sheila Gillespie, 65, with a serious head wound and shook up neighborhoods in West Caldwell and Montclair, two suburbs of Newark that are not accustomed to violent crime.


The 'Sacred Sites' That Make a Neighborhood Work
HANDSOME, richly colored and meticulously researched, "New York, a City of Neighborhoods" is a mind-stretching map.
Its publication by the Department of City Planning marks the first time in the three and a half centuries of New York's history that something like a high-school class portrait of the full range of New York neighborhoods has ever been attempted (and aren't a few missing from the picture, perhaps for illness, like the South Bronx -- which, long, long ago was simply the name for a small area in one corner of Mott Haven?).


Haiti Makes Effort To Revive Tourism
HOPING to overcome nearly a decade of neglect and the impact of three years of political turmoil and economic sanctions, Haiti's recently restored democratic government has begun an effort to revive tourism in a nation that has been almost entirely bypassed by the Caribbean vacation trade.
President Jean-Bertrand Aristide has appointed a cabinet-level Secretary of State for Tourism, and the country has initiated contacts with leading international cruise lines, hotel chains, tour operators, airlines and trade groups.
The campaign has been undertaken with the full realization that Haiti, the poorest nation in the Western Hemisphere, must improve both its image and its infrastructure if it is to attract foreign visitors.
"It is no secret that Haiti is far behind our Caribbean neighbors in development, especially in the tourism area," Maryse Penette, a former diplomat and restaurateur who heads the new tourism secretariat, acknowledged in an interview.
"We do not intend to delve into the market of mass tourism, for we realize that would be unrealistic." Nevertheless, she added, the Aristide administration believes that tourism, if developed properly, can become "our No. 1 source of foreign exchange in the future."


4 Years in the Face of Corruption
Citing a long history of mob corruption at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, Gov.
George E. Pataki last week demanded the resignation of the center's 13-member board of directors and threatened to temporarily close the center.
At the same time, Ron Carey, president of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, seized control of Local 807, which operates at the Javits Center, and the State Senate majority leader, Joseph L. Bruno, said he would begin an investigation into corruption at the nine-year-old center, on the West Side of Manhattan.
From 1991 until this January, Fabian G. Palomino was the center's president and chief executive.
Mr.
Palomino, 70, was appointed to the position by his longtime friend and associate, former Governor Mario M. Cuomo, and resigned after Mr.
Cuomo's defeat.
During a two-hour interview on Friday with Brett Pulley, a reporter for The New York Times, he was asked why corruption seemed so intractable at the Javits Center.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
GREENWICH VILLAGE  $650,000
26 East 10th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,400-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; mannned-elevator, dining area, fireplace, balcony, h/w floors, 3 exposures; maintenance $1,440, 35% tax-deductible, listed at $655,000, 2 weeks on market (Brokers: Jane Gersten; Bascom &amp; Sears)


Handgun Law Deters Felons, Studies Show
Three surveys show that a year after the Brady law took effect a significant number of criminals has been stopped from buying handguns by the required background checks.
The surveys found that up to 45,000 convicted felons, or 2 to 3.5 percent of all applicants for handguns, were turned down after the reviews.


New Dispute Imperils Trade With Chinese
With one trade dispute over copyright piracy just settled, the United States and China each warned today of a new confrontation over opening China to a broad array of American products.
The sudden threat of a new rupture in trade relations between Washington and Beijing was unexpected, and came as the United States trade representative, Mickey Kantor, arrived here for what had been billed as a conciliatory visit after weeks of brinkmanship over a threatened trade war to end copyright piracy.


Forget Service Cuts, It's Subway Maintenance That Will Suffer, Former Transit Officials Say
When the New York City Transit Authority announced several measures last month to cut hundreds of millions of dollars in its budget, most of the attention and public criticism focused on proposals for reducing or eliminating service on subway and bus lines.
But several transportation experts say the heaviest blow of the cuts may be to the maintenance of the system, things like cleaning, painting and repairing equipment, which have helped distinguish the current transit system from the dilapidated one of the early 1980's.


The Ball Stops Here: UConn Press Proves Decisive
If there was a sequence that could symbolize the righting of the Connecticut Huskies, this was it, with more than four minutes to play in a Big East tournament semifinal game against Georgetown that had been reduced to a noisy, desperate tug of war.
"The team that wanted to play defense and get the stop was going to win," said Donny Marshall, the Connecticut senior forward.


Science Fiction
Only readers familiar with Neal Stephenson's previous novel, the turbocharged "Snowcrash," will appreciate the relative restraint of THE DIAMOND AGE (Spectra/Bantam, $22.95).
"Snowcrash" drew its manic energy from the cyber punkish conceit that anything is possible in virtual reality; in "The Diamond Age" the wonders of cyberspace pale before the even more dazzling powers of nanotechnology.
Nanotechnology, which is still only a gleam in the eye of science, rearranges molecules the way a riverboat gambler shuffles a deck of cards.
With sufficient energy and an ample supply of raw material, nanotechnology can convert any kind of matter into any other kind.
Instead of letting this potent tool run away with his narrative, Mr.
Stephenson wisely focuses on the social implications of a new materialism that is beyond the dreams of any previous Gilded Age.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the way the diver Greg Louganis disclosed that he had AIDS misstated the cause of death of his therapist.
The psychologist, Dr.
Stan Ziegler, died of complications from Crohn's disease, not AIDS.


Big East Must Make A Bigger Contribution
The Big East tournament has the Garden rocking.
On Friday, Pittsburgh pushed top-seeded Connecticut to the limit before losing; in the nightcap, Providence fulfilled the promise of an upset by undoing Syracuse.
A day later, Connecticut barely held off Georgetown in a furious helter-skelter game, while Villanova cruised past weary Providence.
Great basketball, great scene, great electricity.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Lakers Topple Bulls  Michael Jordan did not play for the Chicago Bulls, who could have used him last night in a 108-105 loss to the Lakers.
Los Angeles rallied from a 14-point fourth-quarter deficit, sparked by Sedale Threatt's 10 points in the period, to end Chicago's 7-game home winning streak. (AP) ROCKETS 109, MAVERICKS 102: Clyde Drexler picked up slow-starting Houston with 36 points and the Rockets hit all 18 of their free throws to defeat visiting Dallas and snap a five-game losing streak.
The Mavericks lost their fourth straight. (AP)


LEONARDO DICAPRIO: FRESH BLOOD
There was an inaccuracy in Jesse Green's article on Leonardo DiCaprio ("Leonardo DiCaprio: Fresh Blood," Feb. 12).


THE COUNTER COUNTERCULTURE
The band of neoconservative scions of the monied class featured in "The Counter Counterculture" brings to mind a previous generation of laissez-faire capitalists with no sense of the obligations attendant to all citizens of a democracy.


Maureen Feeney, Kevin Flanagan
Maureen Jane Feeney, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Feeney of Sarasota, Fla., was married yesterday to Kevin George Flanagan, a son of Mrs.
John J. Flanagan of Gloucester, Mass., and the late Mr.
Flanagan.
The Rev.
Rebecca Anderson performed the ceremony at St.
Barnabas's Episcopal Church in Warwick, R.I.
The bride is a production and delivery manager at the Cranston Print Works, a textile company in Cranston, R.I.
She graduated from the State University College at Oneonta, N.Y.
Her parents are retired from the public schools in Uniondale, L.I., where her father was a guidance counselor and her mother taught kindergarten.


[ APPEARANCES ] ; Outsider Nails
Among the myriad, subtle, often unspoken and unwritten grooming rules you live by is the one that says fingernails shall be short, neat and neutral of color.
Unwritten?
No longer.
Across your desk comes a book called "Chic Simple Body" by a consortium of experts -- Kim Johnson Gross, Jeff Stone, Judith Newman -- prescribing nails "groomed to a modest half-inch long (or less), with slightly rounded tips, and polished, if at all, with pale or clear lacquer."
For as long as you can remember (or at least since junior high), friends have been keeping their manicures as modest and chaste as novitiates at a convent.
But sometimes there flashes across your vision a hand with nails the color of cinnabar, nails gleaming with gold, sparkling with stones, soaring way beyond the fingertips.
Like a bright bird from a tropical paradise, it flutters through the gritty landscape of the concrete jungle, leaving you transfixed, dreaming of parties where the music plays all night and the food is redolent of spice.


Trip Worth It For Stevens
When the jockey Gary Stevens accepted an offer last month to ride in Hong Kong, he received assurances that he would be able to make four trips to the United States before his contract expired in June.
Stevens came back to California for the first time for today's $1 million Santa Anita Handicap, and guided the Irish import Urgent Request to a front-running victory over Best Pal.
Urgent Request's 14 previous starts were on turf yet he was sent off at 3-1 because his owner, Stewart Aitken, reportedly bet $120,000 on his horse.


Bailey's Day: 7 Winners, But a Loss in Biggest Race
Jerry Bailey rode seven winners today at Gulfstream Park but missed the big one by a nose when Suave Prospect lost a photo finish to Thunder Gulch and Mike Smith in the 44th Florida Derby.
In a driving duel between the two top horses and jockeys at the track, Thunder Gulch made it two straight in the "Florida triple" series.
Only three weeks ago he had been flown from California by D. Wayne Lukas and won the Fountain of Youth Stakes by a neck over Suave Prospect, who is trained by Nick Zito.
And the two colts now seem locked in a rivalry that may continue until the Kentucky Derby on May 6, when they will be joined by a delegation from the West.


Fashion Foreplay
A friend in Paris called at what was the middle of the night there to impart a discovery that couldn't wait until morning.
He was seated in front of his Minitel, the computer terminal furnished by the French phone company, and had just spent a few idle hours browsing the listings of the on-line dating services.
"Where else but in France," he marveled, "would people describe themselves to potential partners in terms of their clothes?" There were entries for a guy who characterized himself as preppy, in search of a young woman wearing a miniskirt; for men in cowboy boots; for brand-loyal lovers of sneakers ("I adore Nike, Reebok, Adidas!" one lonely heart exclaimed).
Even the pseudonyms people used to log on betrayed an interest in sartorial trappings: "Fashion," "Pearl," "Silk Necktie," "Hermes Scarf." My friend typed in a message.
"Why do you call yourself 'Hermes Scarf'?" he asked.
"Because I like luxury," Hermes Scarf replied.
Street fashion and flea-market chic prevailed over designer labels.
On one of the electronic bulletin boards for gay men, someone who went by the name "Couture" struck up a conversation with my friend.
"What are you wearing?" he wanted to know.
Jeans, my friend replied.
"What kind of jeans?" Couture persisted.
Button-fly Levis.
And you?
"White Levis 501's," Couture answered, drawing things abruptly to a close.
"Ugh," my friend confided.
"What a turnoff."


At Bolshoi, the Show Won't Go On, Adding Drama to Dispute
In an escalating drama at Russia's Bolshoi Theater, the director today suspended 15 performers of the Bolshoi Ballet company who refused to perform Friday night in a strike that infuriated the public.
The dancers struck over the resignation on Thursday of the ballet company's long-time artistic director, Yuri Grigorovich, 68, forcing the cancellation of Friday evening's performance of "Romeo and Juliet," which Mr.
Grigorovich had choreographed to Tchaikovsky.


A Balkan Gyre of War, Spinning Onto Film
THE GOWNS SHIMMER.
THE STRAUSS WALTZ begins.
The figures sweep across the dance floor.
The music suggests a world of heedless frivolity.
But then the camera closes in.
The faces of the dancers are swollen, gashed, suppurating, bloody.
The thin smiles of the women dissolve into scars; the music dissolves into discord.
"Everything spins in a circle," says the Croatian director Lordan Zafranovic, who narrates this troubling scene from "Decline of the Century," his epic 1993 documentary on Balkan bloodshed.
"The sky, the earth, the sun and moon, people, and the waltz. So do sickness and humanity, interweaving."


Turnpike and Parkway: 2 Different Stories
I enjoyed Glenn Collins's Mr.
Toll in "A Sense of Place" (Feb. 26) and the answers to questions on the future of our highways, but every time we hear about toll highways in New Jersey, we find the New Jersey Turnpike and the Garden State Parkway paired together.
The truth is that they are totally different in design and purpose.
Unlike the turnpike, which was engineered with entrance and exit toll areas as a commercial venture, the parkway was engineered to provide an express road for passenger cars to have access to the Jersey Shore beaches.
The addition of several "barrier" toll locations was a temporary measure to pay off the debt, and they were to be in place for 20 years.


Luxury a Short Hop From Rome's Airport
"I SUPPOSE we'll need a hotel at the airport," I said to the travel agent as we planned our April trip to Italy last year.
We had a late-morning flight home from Rome and wanted a convenient place to spend the night after traveling in southern Tuscany.
"Are you prepared to splurge for one night?" the travel agent asked.
You could call it the ultimate in airport hotels.
La Posta Vecchia, a palatial seaside villa in the hamlet of Palo Laziale, is an easy 20-minute drive from Leonardo da Vinci airport in Fiumicino.
Built in 1654 as a guest house for the castle next door, it came to be used as a traveler's hostel -- the name means "the old post house" -- and continued as such until about 1918, when the villa ceased being an inn and fell into disrepair.
Today, after years of painstaking renovation, La Posta Vecchia again welcomes travelers, coddling them in a luxurious, historic setting.


My Daughter, Myself
YOU WILL LEARN TO LOVE ME By Susan Chace. 189 pp. New York:  Random House. $18.


Violence Affects Algeria-France Ties
In the last century and a half, Algeria has been a French colony and then an independent country that retained the language and imprint of France.
But since the rise of Islamic revolutionaries in Algeria, France is facing the possibility of an abrupt rupture with its neighbor across the Mediterranean.
Islamic militants who have fought since 1992 to overthrow the Government vow every day to eradicate all vestiges of France, and they often choose their targets from among the tens of thousands of men and women -- from intellectuals to factory workers -- who were educated on the French model.


Law vs. Reality: Brothel Proves Difficult to Evict
The residents of 323 East 85th Street were puzzled last spring by a small parade of male visitors in and out of the basement apartment at all hours of the day and night.
Then someone posted a clipping on the bulletin board with a notation: "This is in our building!" It was an ad for a massage parlor at that address.
The mystery was solved -- but not the problem.
That worsened as residents of the five-story walk-up complained of disturbances, which led to police raids for prostitution.
But the brothel continued operating, under the names Asian Crystal and Fuji East.
Getting it closed proved much harder than the residents expected.


Glad-Handling Her Way Through the World
SELECTED POEMS 1965-1990.
By Marilyn Hacker. 250 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $22.
WINTER NUMBERS  Poems.
By Marilyn Hacker. 95 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $17.95.


Air on the G String (and Others)


BEHIND THE WHEEL/Lamborghini Diablo VT; 'Do You Know, Mr. Vader, How Fast You Were Going?'
IF Darth Vader agreed to do another "Star Wars" sequel and rented a weekend place in Malibu, what would he drive?
Corvettes and Vipers have the muscle, but lack the finesse.
Ferraris have finesse to spare, but look too much like Japanese knock-offs of Ferraris to make the proper impression in Tinseltown.


Why Can't SoHo Have Trees?
To the Editor:
As a SoHo resident for nearly 20 years I'm tired of people who don't live here, like Margot Gayle  [ Letters, Jan. 8 ]  and the whole Landmarks gang telling us we can't have trees.
It shows a small, bureaucratic mind-set.
Whether trees existed here 150 years ago is beside the point.
SoHo is a living, breathing part of this city.
It's not a museum.
And its many sightseers, workers and residents deserve the beauty, shade, warmth and, yes, oxygen that trees provide.


Melani Rosenkrantz, Andrew Weitz
Melani D. Rosenkrantz, a daughter of Judy and Marshall Rosenkrantz of Baldwin Harbor, L.I., is to be married today to Andrew Lawrence Weitz, a son of Tanya and Harvey Weitz of New York.
Rabbi Philmore Berger is to officiate at the Shelter Rock Jewish Center in Roslyn, L.I.
The bride, 28, graduated from Syracuse University.
She received a master's degree in education from the University of Connecticut, where she is a Ph.D. candidate in sport psychology.
She is also the head women's tennis coach at St.
John's University in Jamaica, Queens.


Now Batting


Is WFMU Cursed? Or Just Unlucky?
WHEN Ken Freedman became station manager at WFMU, the oldest freeform radio station in the country, lightning struck -- literally -- and the station was off the air for 10 days.
That was followed by a series of lawsuits by competitors, troubles with the Federal Communications Commission and the destruction of a tower where WFMU had planned to rent space.
"I get really weird questions from listeners," Mr.
Freedman said, "like, 'Does stuff like this happen to other stations? Is FMU cursed?' "


Doing the Best for Russia
To the Editor:
If the recent emigre, Sergei Burkov, and his start-up company, Bilbo Innovations, are representative of the entrepreneurs in Russia, its economy will eventually prosper ("Driving a Computer Like a Car," Technology, Feb. 26).
Though many talented research scientists and software engineers have the desire to start businesses, they lack the basic knowledge of free-market capitalism and start-up capital.
If we are truly interested in a stable Russian economy, it would be more efficient to channel more of our aid and loans to those individuals, instead of to the Russian Government.
DAVID CASCIELLO  The Bronx, March 2


No Headline
"When you have an education and speak the language, you can afford to be choosy. But for people like us, there aren't that many alternatives. We have to compromise. If we don't like what  we do, we stay home and starve." LIN A. QING, a garment worker.  [ 40:1. ]


Cruise to the Civil War And a Trip to the Derby
This spring travelers can combine a cruise with a visit to Civil War sites or a weekend in Louisville to take in the Kentucky Derby.
The battlefield cruise, aboard Clipper Cruise Line's Nantucket Clipper, begins April 22 in Jacksonville, Fla., and ends two weeks later in Washington, after calls at Savannah, Ga., Charleston, S.C., Wilmington and New Bern, N.C., Norfolk and Richmond, Va., and Baltimore.
During the trip, much of it on the Intracoastal Waterway, a historian will give lectures and passengers will have an opportunity to see Fort Pulaski, Fort Sumter, Fort Fisher, Fort Monroe, Gains' Mill, Chickahominy Bluff, Fort Harris, Fort Brady, Gettysburg, Manassas and Antietam.
Fares range from $3,600 to $5,400 a person in double occupancy.


Versatile Watercress Works Year Round
WATERCRESS costs half what you pay for fancy salad greens.
But its tart, peppery taste is good in salads year round.
Watercress also makes an attractive garnish for lamb chops, steaks and roast chicken, and it adds something to the balance of a dish, especially when it is served with a mound of french fries.


Urban Gardeners, Urbane Gardens
MORE than 700 community gardens around the city are stirring, according to Operation Green Thumb, the 15-year-old city organization that helps turn garbage-strewn lots into minifarms.
Katherine McGlynn has documented the gardens and their proud gardeners in a show now at the Museum of the City of New York.
She started photographing the gardeners in 1993, but then felt compelled to expand, shooting panoramas and small details.
"The photographs are not just about flowers but about little things that would show cultural aspects of the people that work in the gardens," she said.


Innovative Plans Fill Pulpits In America's Rural Churches
The Rev.
Eric J. Hulstrand, a slim young man with an engaging manner, figures he will put 20,000 miles on his four-wheel-drive Suzuki Sidekick driving to church this year.
The Lutheran pastor does not travel a simple road between home and pulpit, but a long, looping circuit over a web of rural blacktop that bisects endless miles of farmland in the eastern part of the state.
Mr.
Hulstrand serves eight small congregations in three counties, a duty he shares with one other full-time and equally peripatetic minister and a pair of part-timers, one of them his wife, Pam.


Mensa and the Mating Game
THE topic for this Friday evening's Mensa meeting is "Meet Mr. Molasses." About 20 people are sitting in a nondescript, rented midtown club-room, expectant expressions on their faces.
They have gathered to hear a lecture on the chemical properties, cooking functions and shelf life of molasses, as told by a public relations employee from the Grandma's Molasses company.
The idea is, anything's interesting if you're smart.


Incivility: To Act or Not to Act?
To the Editor:
On Feb. 27, with your article fresh in my mind, I noticed a uniformed New York City police officer smoking in the 42d Street subway station.
I got her attention and said, "Excuse me, you can't smoke in the subway." Her reaction?
An icy stare.


Chicagoans Find Unity In Wishing Upon a Star
The resurrection of Michael Jordan as a professional basketball player is not even official, but sports fans and even non-fans in this usually hard-nosed city are already dreaming of recaptured glory days and victory parades.
The Return has pushed almost everything else in Chicago, including next month's mayoral election, not just to the back burner but nearly off of the stove.
It has brought Chicagoans of all colors and classes closer together -- at least for a little while.


A Distinction To Be Made
To the Editor:
The writers of two letters on the subject of victim art  [ March 5 ]  distort the essence of Bill T. Jones's dance work "Still/Here." Mr.
Jones is not "presenting victims as art," nor has he put "a bunch of sick people" on stage.
Mr.
Jones's message is expressed in the choreography itself of "Still/Here," which is performed by his company of professional dancers, none of whom is sick.


The World; In Russia, Success Isn't Such a Popular Idea
IN the Moscow daily Nezavisimaya Gazeta, there is a list every month of Russia's most influential businessmen and women.
But while American tycoons might kill to be listed in the Forbes 400, many Russian tycoons try to keep their names off the Nezavisimaya list.
They can be killed for being on it.
In the new Russia, success can be not only an ambiguous blessing but an actual danger.


Corrections
A listing last Sunday with an article about people who care for stray animals misstated the role of the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals in the city's animal control policy.
The society asked to be relieved of its responsibility for catching strays in 1993; it was not ordered to do so.


Brunswick Brain Center Open Since 1986
"After Long Wait, Hospitals Open Units to Treat Brain Injuries"  [ Feb. 5 ]  on St.
Charles Hospital's new facility for traumatic brain injury patients may leave the impression that before the opening of that hospital's special unit all traumatic brain injury patients had to leave Long Island for rehabilitation treatment.
This is not so.
In most instances a patient is admitted to a general hospital for stabilization of the medical-neurological condition.
This is followed by admission to an acute rehabilitation facility for a period of four weeks to six months.


Rabin's Main Headache: His Own Party
If the advisers around Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin had to list their toughest assignment this week, their first choice would not have been making peace with the Arabs.
They have been finding it far more difficult to make peace within their boss's own Labor Party, which has all the earmarks of a political organization falling apart at the seams.


Art-Filled Italian Senate Opens for Monthly Tours
The building that houses the Italian Senate, once strictly off limits to the public, has recently opened for monthly tours so that its artistic and historical treasures can be seen.
The Palazzo Madama, the 16th-century Medici palace where the Senate has convened since 1871, is opening its doors from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. on the first Saturday of every month,


An Unequal Partner Raises Its Lovely Voice
OPERA AND film should have been made for each other.
They are enter-tainments on the largest scale, assaulting the senses from all sides, de-manding the work of innumerable hands.
Opera is written, composed, produced, cast, staged, costumed, rehearsed, conducted, played and sung.
Film requires an even more intense division of labor, those endless occupations saluted in the credits.
In the right hands, the chaos of process dissolves into an entrancing whole: the gliding motion of music, the stately rhythm of the camera.
Some grand alliance of film and opera seemed attainable in the first half of the century.
"I have long been absolutely convinced of a great future for the talking film," wrote Alban Berg, the master of modernist music drama.
"Wozzeck" and "Lulu," Berg's masterpieces, employ cinematic crosscutting techniques in their rapid change of scenes and overlapping of styles.
Sergei Eisenstein, from the other side, aimed for a Wagnerian fusion of music and image in his two great collaborations with Sergei Prokofiev, "Alexander Nevsky" and "Ivan the Terrible."


Argentine Field Shapes Up, but St. John's Baseball Team Stumbles
Until 10 days ago, the United States was holding to its threat to withdraw from baseball competition at the Pan American Games.
The problem was not replacement players.
It was a replacement field.
When Joe Russo, the longtime coach at St.
John's University, came to survey Ezeiza National Stadium last September, he found a diamond in the rough.
The very rough.
Apparently no one had played on the field in four or five years.
Grass grew high.
The dugouts were unusable.
There were no lights or basepaths.
Where Russo might have expected to find players chewing tobacco, he found cows chewing weeds.


In the Back Seat For Seven Years
ALMOST every year for seven years, I traveled with my family from our home in New York to some distant state where a university had offered me a job as a visiting writer.
I remember how oddly pleasant it was to be barreling down the highway, on our way to Iowa or Utah or Arizona, after my husband had just navigated some tricky driving challenge: a rough patch of winter weather, a convoy of pushy truckers, a crowded urban interchange.
I'd pour two cups of coffee from the thermos, break open a bag of soggy, delicious convenience-store mini-doughnuts, pass a handful back to our two young sons and tell them that, if they kept the sound low, they could watch a movie.


If These Stocks Soar, the Boss May Regret It
HOW would you like to own stock in a company whose top officer stood to make millions if the company's share price plummeted sometime within the next three years but who would have to pay out millions in cash if the stock price soared?
The idea brings back memories of Albert H. Wiggin, the president of the Chase National Bank back in the 1920's.
Mr.
Wiggins made good money shorting Chase stock during the crash, a fact that so angered Congress that in 1934 it became illegal for a corporate insider to do such a thing.


Japanese Flavor, in the Country Style
FROM the outside, Akasaka (named for a Tokyo district) in New Haven resembles many a roadside restaurant.
Only the faux shoji screen on the brick facade suggests the possibilities.
Once inside, surrounded by dark wood, you feel you have stepped into a restaurant in rural Japan.
A long sushi bar beckons, and was pronounced "reasonably complete" by our sushi fanciers.


Corrections
A chart last Sunday about movie theaters in Brooklyn misstated the number of theaters and the number of residents per theater.
There are 15 theaters, not 14; and the number of residents per theater is 153,378.
The theater that was omitted is the Commodore (2 screens), at 329 Broadway in Ridgewood.
The chart also misstated the number of screens for two other theaters.
Cinema 265 in Cobble Hill has 5, not 6; Plaza Cinema in Park Slope has 2, not 3.


Several Airlines Ditching Life Rafts
Several major airlines have been granted permission by the Federal Aviation Administration to stop carrying life rafts on dozens of routes that take passengers over water as far as 162 miles from shore.
Two other airlines were granted similar exemptions more than 10 years ago.
Airlines say the move, intended to save the cost of maintaining the equipment and the fuel needed to carry it, does not pose any risk to passengers because of improved engine reliability.
The last accident in which a jet ditched in water was in 1970.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Wrenching Contest
BLAME it on the computer age.
Repairing a car has become a major challenge.
For the mechanics.
It has become so complicated, said Steven Shapiro of Huntington and the Greater New York Automobile Dealers' Association, "that we now have a national shortage of well-trained technicians."
"To encourage young people to stay in the field" the association sponsors a high school auto mechanics' competition.
A "Jeopardy!" of jump starters, if you will.
Prizes, Mr.
Shapiro said, include "full uniforms and a tool set with a toolbox." Plus a Mitsubishi car for the national winners, who will be determined next month at the New York Auto Show.
Regional competitions were held this month, including in Huntington.


Season of Wraps -- Off, On and Up
EVERY spring and summer, the most impressive art experience in Europe is inevitably Europe itself.
At the same time there are always special events, and the most eagerly awaited this year include a stunning revelation, a major wrapping up, and the biennial recurrence of one of the art world's most controversial guessing games.
The revelation is the first public showing, at the Hermitage Museum in St.
Petersburg and the Pushkin Museum in Moscow, of an astonishing cache of long-hidden Impressionist, Post-Impressionist and Old Master paintings, on view for the first time in 50 years.
The story of their disappearance at the end of World War II is fascinating, and their "rediscovery" has been meticulously stage-managed for maximum dramatic effect.
But in this case, the art lives up to expectations.


Ilyse Levine, David Weinstein
Ilyse Levine, a daughter of David and Sandra Levine of Glen Cove, L.I., is to be married today to David Weinstein, the son of Irwin and Beverly Weinstein of Fresh Meadows, Queens.
Rabbi Maurice Weisenberg is to officiate at Congregation Beth Sholom in Lawrence, L.I.
The bride, 27, graduated from Cornell University and attends Fordham University Law School.
She is the assistant director in the community services division of the Anti-Defamation League in New York.
Her father retired as a manager of manufacturing of the Unisys Corporation, the computer manufacturer, in Lake Success, L.I.
Her mother teaches in the preschool at Congregation Tifereth Israel in Glen Cove.


Rolling Seas in a Nautical Italian Setting
IL VELIERO is the Jekyll and Hyde of Long Island restaurants.
A recent Saturday night at the newcomer in Glen Cove was a nightmare.
In addition to the usual weekend crush, the restaurant was trying to accommodate a private party of 60 people.
Waiters and busboys had called in sick, and green replacements filled their positions.
One of the two restrooms was out of order, resulting in long lines.
The heating system shot either tropical or frigid blasts.
Customers were alternately fried and frozen.
Had the owners known that there was a restaurant reviewer in the house, they might have rushed for aspirin even faster.
Making matters worse, it was our table that fell through the cracks.
No waiter took the responsibility for us, and all studiously avoided looking our way.
After 40 minutes in the deep freeze, with no drinks, bread or orders taken, we gave up and signaled the hostess.


IN SHORT: FICTION
CLEO  By Jean Brody. Wyatt/St. Martin's, $21.95.


Skitch Henderson's Pops
IT is another busy Sunday with many concerts scheduled.
At 11:15 this morning, Paul Peabody's Old-Fashioned Marionette Theater gives visual impact to music by Haydn, Boccherini, Mozart and Debussy at the Philharmonia Virtuosi's Cushion Concert at the Rippowam Cisqua School in Mount Kisco.
The program will be repeated at 1 this afternoon and also next Sunday at 11:15 A.M. and 1 P.M. at the County Center in White Plains and on March 26 at the Hoff-Barthelson School in Scarsdale.
The number to call for more details is 693-5595.
Another concert for children has a 1:30 P.M. curtain today in Chappaqua.
Playtime Productions' "It's a Magical Musical World," which mixes sights and sounds, can be seen at the Public Library.
The number for information is 674-0906.
Later, Greg Ryan will sing about his Irish childhood, at the Warner Library in Tarrytown.
The performance, which begins at 2:30 P.M., is free.
Mr.
Ryan "is a troubadour of the old school, with the true gift of gab, a strong baritone voice and a deep bag of stories," said Dom Cerulli, coordinator of the program.


Genius in a Snit
To the Editor:
In his amusing dissection of that odd literary ritual, the poetry reading (" 'Are Those Real Poems, or Did You Write Them Yourself?' Adventures on the Reading Circuit," Feb. 12), Robert Phillips notes that "the reading that is too short . . . is a rarity, but it does happen." The sole instance he comes up with was a reading by W. H. Auden at the Guggenheim Museum, when "the great man . . . read 'The Shield of Achilles' and not many more poems."


Ideas &amp; Trends; Back to the Thrilling Trades of Yesteryear
THE laying of the first trans-Atlantic telegraph cable in 1866 did not just allow people to send last-minute birthday greetings or pleas for cash.
The cable let them move money from New York to London and back in a few minutes, instead of waiting for steamships to make the 12-day crossing.


'I Wouldn't Wish My Life on Anyone'
BREAKING THE SURFACE By Greg Louganis with Eric Marcus.
Illustrated. 290 pp.
New York: Random House. $23.


An Edible Complex
Meal after meal, Alfred Portale reinvents himself.
Turn on the stove, and this diminutive, fastidious, self-effacing chef is suddenly King Kong.
He cooks tall, mountainous food that's irrepressibly bold.
Nearly every plate that leaves his kitchen at Gotham Bar and Grill is a composition in perilous peaks.
Consider the tower of wafer-thin potatoes, truffles and sea scallops wobbling on a pond of herb butter sauce.
Or the pillar of roasted vegetables, trembling with anticipation.
A haystack of needle-thin fries is heaped around a perfectly roasted chicken.
It's almost as precarious as the quivering flan flanking a pyramid of lamb chops.


Brownstone Warriors
THE public face of the Brooklyn Heights Association is a squarish, habitually unkemptroom on the second floor of a residence for the elderly on Pierrepont Street.
This in a neighborhood famed for its meticulously preserved brownstones and historic heritage.
Say what you will, the office is classic yech.
Appearances are one thing.
If preservationists, borough and city officials and the occasional member of Congress are to be heeded, the Brooklyn Heights Association is arguably the most powerful community group in the city, a nexus for action.
It gets things done.
Its fingerprints are all over Brooklyn Heights.
Just try to put a new front door on your brownstone and the association will make sure it's historically correct.
Take down that awning!
Fix that stoop!
And while it has suffered thumping defeats, it seems to emerge more tenacious and intent on winning the next fight.


Incivility: To Act or Not to Act?
To the Editor:
The scenarios in your article strike a familiar note here in Hell's Kitchen.
Many in our community mastered not-on-this-street-you-don't techniques to combat a plague of street prostitutes and crack smokers.


Dressing in Shape for the 90's . . . the No-Sweat Decade
THERE are bras that enhance cleavage.
There are petticoats that flatten the tummy and hips.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-21  U.N.
MAY REMAIN IN CROATIA  The West has struck a tentative deal with Croatia that would allow a sharply reduced U.N. contingent to remain in the country, U.S. officials said.
The West fears a pullout might worsen the Balkan war.  1  The 12,000 peacekeepers in Croatia struggle in an uneasy role. 14


March 5-11: Mayhem in Karachi; 2 U.S. Envoys Are Killed As Violence Spirals
In hindsight, the miserable moments that ended the lives of two American consular officials last week did not seem so surprising.
Signs of virulently anti-American feelings had been surfacing on the fundamentalist fringes of Pakistani politics for many months.
And Karachi has long been wracked by a daily round of politically-inspired, drive-by killings.
After the gunmen emptied their magazines into the consulate's minivan, with its yellow consular corps plate and the number 64, denoting the United States, the United States Ambassador, John C. Monjo, said that precautions for consulate staff had been "continually tightened" in response to Karachi's violence.
"With the assistance of police and others, we are taking yet further measures," he said.
But as the consulate's staff handled the grim aftermath of the killings of Jackie Van Landingham, a 33-year-old secretary, and Gary C. Durell, a 45-year-old communications specialist at the consulate, the State Department seemed sure to review policies that have allowed American diplomats to move freely about Karachi and other increasingly violent Pakistani cities.
One option under consideration was to send American diplomatic families home.


Mistake in Own End Costs Islanders Another Game
No controversies tonight. No victories either.
Pierre Turgeon and Steve Thomas were back after their third-period benchings in Pittsburgh on Thursday night.
And Thomas scored the Islanders' only goal and, with Turgeon, had a chance for at least a few more.


Webber and Howard Spoil the Nets' Trip
The Nets were poised to win their fourth straight game and run the table on their three-game trip.
Then the Washington Bullets' tough tandem of Chris Webber and Juwan Howard turned the game around in the third period, washed away a spectacular performance by Kenny Anderson and ended New Jersey's run.
A lot of supporting players did a lot of nice things for both teams, but at its heart, the Bullets' 110-102 victory tonight at USAir Arena was a four-man match with Derrick Coleman and Anderson starring for the Nets, Webber and Howard for Washington.


Journal; A Bigger Splash
This year marks the 10th anniversary of Rock Hudson's death -- a furtive, secluded, humiliating demise played out in Parisian clinics and American tabloids.
The star who personified mainstream Hollywood sexual fantasies in the 1950's had become in the 1980's an untouchable: a gay man ravaged by AIDS.
Has the America that made Hudson feel he must run and hide changed in the decade since?
The Greg Louganis phenomenon makes you wonder.
Not only did Mr.
Louganis discuss his homosexuality and announce that he had AIDS on television, but he has been embraced by multitudes for doing so.


Corrections
Because of a production error, an article continuation on page 16 last Sunday about affirmative action omitted several lines in most editions.
The paragraph that began at the bottom of the first column of the continuation should have read: "If income replaced race entirely as a qualifier for preferences, whites would be the major beneficiaries, and racial integration would probably decline."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  SALINAS SAID TO LEAVE MEXICO
With his elder brother jailed on murder charges and his own reputation in tatters, former President Carlos Salinas de Gortari has left Mexico for the U.S., senior Mexican officials said.
A1  REPORT ON ARGENTINE ATROCITIES
A former Argentine officer told how political prisoners were pushed out of planes flying over the Atlantic Ocean during the right-wing military Government's violent crackdown in the 1970's.
A1  SINN FEIN LEADER VISITS U.S.
Gerry Adams, the leader of Sinn Fein, the political wing of the I.R.A., held the group's first fund-raising event in the U.S., in Queens.
A2  Ireland's angry debate over abortion is heating up again.
A2  A CRACKDOWN IN PAKISTAN
Acting on Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto's pledge to crack down on violent groups that have spread terror in Karachi, heavily-armed police units threw a dragnet over violence-torn areas of the city.
A3  OFFICIAL STEPS BACK ON OIL DEAL
Secretary of State Warren Christopher said he has withdrawn from discussions on an oil deal between Conoco Inc. and Iran because his former law firm is representing the American company.
A6  U.S.
SHIFT ON FOREIGN AID
Vice President Gore told a U.N. conference on poverty that within five years the U.S. plans to channel nearly half its foreign aid through private organizations rather than governments.
A7  SAUDIS COOL TO U.S.
REQUESTS
The King of Saudi Arabia is noncommittal about U.S. requests for him to support a Mideast development bank, provide aid to the Palestinians and back the extension of the nuclear arms treaty.
A7  U.S.
TAKES INITIATIVE ON CROATIA
Croatia agreed to allow the continued presence of U.N. troops within its borders after the U.S. took the initiative from the Europeans who have dominated policy on the region for many months.
A9  Donors have failed to honor pledges to aid the Palestinians.
A6  Morocco's king says chances for a Mideast peace are fading.
A6  African tours by French politicians are vital to campaigning.
A5  Rostock Journal: Finding a mayor isn't proving to be easy.
A4  National A12-17  WHO NEEDS HIGHER RATES?
Despite declines in the dollar and the unemployment rate, senior Federal Reserve officials are expressing little enthusiasm for raising interest rates further.
A1  MIXED REVIEWS ON GAY POLICY
The Clinton Administration's "Don't ask, don't tell" policy regarding homosexuals in the military is receiving mixed reviews and its first court test.
A1  CHILD WELFARE LAW CONSIDERED
The Republican proposal for welfare reform includes large revisions in child welfare law; among them- the reduction of 23 programs for foster care and adoption into one block grant to the states.
A1  JUMPING TO THE AIRWAVES
Last year, radio talk show hosts vied for careers in politics.
This year, politicians are getting their own radio talk shows in what seems an easier career switch.
A1  THE BUSINESS OF HATE
George Burdi, a 24-year-old white supremacist, is marketing his message using the tools of modern technology and in the process has revived what was once a moribund skinhead movement.
A12  BOOM AND BUST AND BOOM
Denver is having a renaissance.
Again.
A new airport and ballpark, a thriving downtown and real estate partly financed by public money are revitalizing the city.
A12  SEGREGATION ADDRESSED
Mississippi officials have no plans to challenge a judge's ruling on segregation in state universities, but the plaintiffs are undecided.
A14  SAVAGE STORMS
The killer rain has temporarily abated in Northern California, but more rain is expected and more people are missing.
A14  A DANGEROUS PORTENT
Virginia Republicans have dissention in the ranks, with moderates and conservatives turning both on each other and themselves.
A15  CULTIVATING BLACK CANDIDATES
A prototypical Republican the party hopes to recruit to run in 1996 and to continue their revolution is something new: black.
A16  FRESHMAN FRUSTRATION
Being a senator is not the plum position Rick Santorum of Pennsylvania had anticipated.
The House is looking good in retrospect.
A17  Metro Digest B1  A PLACE FOR THE RETARDED
The effort to move the mildly and moderately retarded out of state institutions has been widely hailed.
But the question is more complex for the severely retarded, who need costly intensive supervision.
A1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C11-18  Nostalgia for the Cheetah.
C11  Theater: Jerry Lewis in 'Damn Yankees.' C11  Music: Critic's Notebook.
C13  Oasis at the Academy.
C14  Townes Van Zandt.
C16  Dance: Harlem troupe in Balanchine's "Prodigal Son." C11  Books: Best sellers and the French revolution.
C15  Television: PBS tributes to two men of music.
C18  Obituaries B7  John Allen Buggs, community relations expert.
James Luther, former pharmaceuticals executive.
Sports C1-9  Basketball: Villanova wins Big East tournament.
C1  N.C.A.A. selections.
C1  Manhattan a surprise pick.
C4  UConn women, No. 1 seed, are right at home.
C6  Columns: Rhoden on N.C.A.A. underdog.
C4  Football: Jets lose Lageman.
C6  Hockey: Devils lose.
C3  Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19  Editorials  The new submarines can wait.
Line-item veto, right and wrong.
Sinn Fein at the White House.
Merge for emergencies.
Letters  William Safire: Agnew or bust.
Anthony Lewis: Legally blind?
Julie Sandorf: Building homelessness, not housing.
Rich Cohen: The dawn of dumb.
Bridge C18 Chronicle B4 Crossword C15


Christopher Recuses Himself On Conoco's Iranian Oil Deal
Secretary of State Warren Christopher said today that he has withdrawn from policy discussions on a sensitive oil deal between Conoco Inc. and Iran because his former law firm is representing the American company.
Mr.
Christopher told reporters en route to Saudi Arabia that he decided to take "a very conservative position" after the State Department informed him last week that Conoco had retained O'Melveny &amp; Myers, the Los Angeles-based law firm where he had been chairman.


The Soul Of Misery, Laid Bare
It seemed inappropriate to clap after each song in Townes Van Zandt's performance on Friday night at the Bottom Line.
Rustling a tissue, shedding a tear into a beer mug or offering words of consolation would have been more appropriate responses to the dark, depressing songs of Mr.
Van Zandt, an influential Texas singer and guitarist.
In "Marie," from his new album, "No Deeper Blue" (Sugar Hill), the song's unemployed protagonist must leave the housing shelter where he lives when he meets his new wife, Marie.
Living under a bridge together, the two suffer nearly all of life's hardships until one morning she dies, still carrying their unborn child.
The end.
For more than 30 years, Mr.
Van Zandt has been writing songs imbued with a cosmic weariness, one of which, "Poncho and Lefty," went on to become a No. 1 country hit for the duo of Willie Nelson and Merle Haggard.
For roughly the same time, Mr.
Van Zandt has been living his songs of drinking, rambling and despondence.
For this reason, his concerts are extremely inconsistent, ranging from bumbling messes to spellbinding soul-baring.
Friday was a good night for Mr.
Van Zandt, or at least as good as a night can be for a performer who seems to carry all the misery of the world on his shoulders.


Papal Envoy Visits Haiti


Failure by Pledged Donors Drains Gaza-Jericho Fund
An international aid effort for the Palestinian Authority has been thrown into crisis because donors have not honored pledges to support a fund for the fledgling self-rule administration in the Gaza Strip and Jericho.
The fund, administered by the World Bank to help cover the authority's operating expenses, has run out of money, aid officials said.
The donors have failed to honor pledges worth about $36 million out of $60 million made at a meeting in Brussels in November.


Capezio Winner Is Named
The artistic director of the Boston Ballet, Bruce Marks, has been named the 1995 recipient of the Capezio Award, given in recognition of contributions to American dance.
The award, established in 1951, carries a cash prize of $10,000.
Mr.
Marks, a former principal dancer with American Ballet Theater, helped to found the National Choreography Project for the National Endowment for the Arts and the Dance Project for the Sundance Institute.
Last year, he was the jury chairman for the International Ballet Competition in Jackson, Miss.
The award, established by the Capezio-Ballet Makers Dance Foundation, is to be presented to Mr.
Marks in a private ceremony on May 1.


Patents; Entrepreneurs Find Pitfalls When Naming Their Products. The Name May Be Spoken For
ENTREPRENEURS who have flourished by developing multimedia technologies are finding new uses for copyright material.
But some of them who have created computer games, personal software and CD-ROM's for markets that did not exist 10 years ago are also encountering pitfalls in dealing with electronic rights for books, photos, music and titles.
And at least one independent CD-ROM developer is learning the hard way that having an original idea and sewing up the content rights is not enough; you still have to be careful what you call it.
Irving Green runs Scanrom Publications from his house in Cedarhurst, L.I.
The company is tiny, consisting of Mr.
Green, his wife and his son, who wrote the programming for their CD-ROM of Judaica reference materials.
But it has managed to attract the attention of a much larger software company: Microsoft.


Leader of I.R.A. Political Wing in Queens to Raise Funds


Rostock Journal; Wanted: Mayor for 'Very Big' (Read Tough) Job
An unusual want ad appeared in several German newspapers recently.
"In the Hanseatic city of Rostock, the largest city in the state of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, with 237,000 inhabitants, the post of mayor is to be filled before the middle of 1995," the ad announced.
"The ideal candidate would be decisive and responsible, and have considerable experience in the administration of a large municipality."


Y.&amp; R. Gives Up First Nationwide
Young &amp; Rubicam San Francisco has resigned the First Nationwide Bank account, citing a steep decline in advertising spending and demands on the agency's resources from new clients.
Amy Flores, a spokeswoman for Y.&amp; R. San Francisco, said on Friday that when the agency was awarded the account in September 1989, billings were estimated at $18 million, but recent spending has been about $300,000.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; In mounting a campaign against violence, is the cable industry practicing what it preaches?
WHY does Gi in "Captain Planet" use her magic ring to toss a gang leader into the sky on a jet of water, send him careering down an aqueduct and then nearly drown him?
Because, believe it or not, it's anti-violence week on cable television, that's why.
Starting Sunday, 51 cable channels will team up to present seven days of occasional programming with the theme "Voices Against Violence." The week is part of an effort by the cable industry to address mounting criticism of violence on television and to show that the industry can regulate itself without government intervention.


Night Repairs for Outerbridge
Repairs to the Outerbridge Crossing between New Jersey and Staten Island will require overnight lane closings for at least a year beginning tonight, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey has announced.
One lane in each direction will be closed Mondays through Thursdays from 9 P.M. to 5 A.M. and from 11 P.M. on Fridays to 8 A.M. on Saturdays.
The work, which the Port Authority said may be affected by the weather and is subject to rescheduling, involves replacing the roadway deck, median barrier and structural steel.


Sinn Fein at the White House
As soon as Gerry Adams indicated a willingness to discuss decommissioning the weapons of the Irish Republican Army, President Clinton extended him a St.
Patrick's Day invitation to the White House, and permission to raise funds in the United States.
Mr.
Clinton was right to resist British pressure to snub the Sinn Fein leader.
It was silly for the British to argue that Washington deny Mr.
Adams the ability to raise money here, when he is allowed to do so in England.
Mr.
Clinton was sympathetic to the Irish concern that Britain, determined to remain in charge of the timetable for peace talks, was dragging its feet.
The President saw an opportunity to move things along, and he took it.
The Irish Government made it clear that it had no objections to Mr.
Adams being present at the March 17 celebrations at the White House along with the Irish Prime Minister, John Bruton.


A Rest for the Weary: Ranger Schedule Eases
It's the time of year when many students and their chaperons are planning their class trips to Washington.
So why should the Rangers be any different?
They will play there against the Capitals on Saturday night, and they may arrive early for some sightseeing in the nation's capital.
But unlike the senior class at the local high school, the Rangers won't just pass through the Smithsonian and other Government buildings as mere tourists.


CHRONICLE
There may well be an affinity group for every interest in New York.
Women biographers of women, for example, have their own organization, the Women Writing Women's Lives Seminar, which has been meeting for five years.
"We were all members of a coed biography seminar at New York University and realized that there were particular issues having to do with writing about women and the impact of experiences on their lives," said HONOR MOORE, a member.


Surprise!  Manhattan Is Among Select 64
On the seventh floor of the East Hill Dormitory at Manhattan College last night, Coach Fran Fraschilla and his players gathered in front of a large-screen television and watched anxiously as the National Collegiate Athletic Association announced its tournament selections.
After a seemingly endless wait, Manhattan finally made the big screen, and even though its next opponent would be Oklahoma (23-8), the Jaspers leaped off their seats and began hugging one another.
Some players began to cry.
Others just stared at the screen in stunned disbelief.


Connecticut Women Are Right at Home With a Coveted Top Seeding
Of course, Connecticut (29-0) became one of the four regional top-seeded teams yesterday when the National Collegiate Athletic Association announced the draw for its women's basketball tournament.
Of course, Tennessee (29-2) and Colorado (27-2) were seeded first in other regions.
But Vanderbilt (26-6) top-seeded over such teams as Stanford (26-2) and Texas Tech (30-3)?
That was the major surprise among the seedings for the women's first 64-team tournament.
Vanderbilt upset Tennessee, 67-61, last Monday night in the Southeastern Conference tournament final.
The conference is the strongest in the nation, and it placed 7 of its 13 teams in the N.C.A.A. tournament: Tennessee, Vanderbilt, Georgia, Alabama, Florida, Arkansas and Mississippi.


Motorola Unit Picks Anderson &amp; Lembke
The Motorola Information Systems Group, a unit of Motorola Inc. in Mansfield, Mass., has selected Anderson &amp; Lembke in New York to handle advertising for its Motorola modem account, with billings estimated at $4 million to $5 million.
The account was previously divided among Arnold Fortuna Lawner &amp; Cabot in Boston, Dayner/Hall in Winter Park, Fla., and McCann-Erickson Atlanta.
Anderson &amp; Lembke was awarded the account last week after a three-month review that also included the three incumbent shops.


Scores Give Misleading Picture of High Schools
To the Editor:
While the new report cards for New York City high schools are obviously worthwhile tools for parents and schools, your use of them to make comparisons is a classic case of misuse (news article, March 7).


Thompson Units Win New Accounts
Two offices of the J. Walter Thompson Company have been awarded accounts with combined billings estimated at $14 million to $17 million.
The Outboard Marine Corporation in Waukegan, Ill., the maker of products like Johnson and Evinrude engines, named J. Walter Thompson Chicago to handle its account, previously at LKH &amp; S Advertising in Chicago.
The billings were estimated at $7 million to $10 million.
Thompson Chicago was awarded the account on Friday after a two-month review that also included LKH &amp; S and Hal Riney &amp; Partners/Heartland in Chicago.


U.S. Backs G.M. On Pensions
The Department of Labor gave approval yesterday to a plan in which the unfinanced pension liabilities of the General Motors Corporation would be significantly reduced.
The plan will protect the benefits of 600,000 hourly workers and retirees from G.M., the department said.
From an unfinanced pension liability of $12.6 billion at the end of 1994, the auto maker's liability will be reduced to approximately $6 billion should the deal proceed as announced yesterday, according to a G.M. spokeswoman.


Bridge
The top-ranked player in the world for the past decade has been Bob Hamman of Dallas, who in a career of more than 30 years has won 8 world titles and finished second on 10 occasions.
His autobiography, "At the Table, My Life and Times," written with Brent Manley is now available for $17.20, including mailing, from the American Contract Bridge League, (800) 264-2743.
The book is decidedly egocentric but is written in lively style and gives a good picture of bridge at the top.
The account of the Aces team, founded by the multimillionaire businessman Ira Corn, is particularly interesting.
Corn hired a group of brilliant young professionals, including Hamman, and for some 15 years they dominated the American scene.


James H. Luther, 67, A Former Executive In Pharmaceuticals
James H. Luther Jr., a former senior vice president and general counsel for Sterling Drug Inc. and the former head of a trade organization for manufacturers of over-the-counter drugs, died on Thursday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
He was 67 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was a type of cancer known as small-cell lymphoma, his family said.


Don't Blame Midwives in Maternity Care Crisis
To the Editor:
Re "Mismanaged Care: A Health System in Peril" (front page, March 5, 6, 7): I am an American physician, perinatal and reproductive scientist who has worked for 15 years for the World Health Organization, specializing in maternity services in the highly industrialized countries.


TOP FED OFFICIALS NOT ENTHUSIASTIC FOR HIGHER RATES
Senior Federal Reserve officials are expressing little enthusiasm for raising interest rates further despite sharp recent declines in the dollar and in the unemployment rate, which have created some pressure for another increase.
Four of the Federal Reserve Board's seven governors, in interviews on Friday, said they thought the American economy was slowing to a point of steady, sustainable growth with moderate inflation.
At the same time, they discounted the warnings of some economists that the central bank's seven interest rate increases over the last 13 months might brake growth so drastically that the economy would fall into a recession.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A 'Carmen' in Microcosm And in a Manner So Very French  Mannes College of Music
"La Tragedie de Carmen" reduces Bizet's brilliantly lit panorama to a small, intense black-and-white drawing.
In Peter Brook's 1981 reworking, Bizet's opera is shrunk to 80 minutes.
Characters are reassigned roles or disappear altogether.
The ensembles are gone, as well as the rousing overture.
Marius Constant adds music for continuity and reorchestrates the rest for chamber orchestra (introducing the "Habanera," for example, with solo timpani).
With its sprawling, drama-defying dialogue, "Carmen" needs help.
Mr.
Brooks gives it, at a price.


Sinn Fein's Leader Raises Funds in U.S. for First Time
Gerry Adams, the leader of Sinn Fein, the political wing of the Irish Republican Army, held his party's first fund-raising event in the United States yesterday, praising President Clinton for "doing the right thing" in giving the party "equality of treatment."
The event, held in the heart of the working-class Irish immigrant stronghold in the Woodside section of Queens, followed Mr.
Clinton's announcement on Thursday that Sinn Fein would be allowed to raise money in this country for peaceful political purposes and that Mr.
Adams would be invited to the White House on St.
Patrick's Day.


Desperately Seeking Spring


Owners, Players Even Differ On Meeting
On the first day of the eighth month of the baseball strike, the two parties in the labor dispute were confused.
Negotiators for the owners and the players had different understandings today of when they are scheduled to meet this week.
And they're supposed to reach agreement in time for the striking players to be in uniform by the start of the season three weeks from tonight?


Italian State Airline's Unfriendly Sky
Long known for trendy aircraft interiors and flight attendants' uniforms by designers like Giorgio Armani, rather than for service or punctuality, Alitalia has been having a bumpy ride of late.
Italy's national carrier was crippled for two days last month by striking pilots and cabin crews before the Transport Minister, Giovanni Caravale, avoided further disruptions by persuading air traffic controllers not to join the work stoppages.


Two Pedestrians Killed In Hit-and-Run Accidents
Drag racers and other careless drivers have long been a problem along Parsons Boulevard in Whitestone, Queens, residents said yesterday.
At the intersection of Willets Point Boulevard, some would race to beat the light, and sometimes, the speeding would lead to accidents.
On Saturday night, Melissa Tang, an honors student at Junior High School 185 who was preparing to celebrate her 13th birthday the next day, was crossing the intersection when she was killed in a hit-and-run.
The police later charged a man they said was driving while drunk and was speeding at the time of the accident.


Latin Festival Pays Homage to a Legendary Club
The building now houses the nondescript offices of an instrument rental business called S.I.R., but in the late 1960's and early 70's, 310 West 52d Street was the home of the Cheetah, a legendary club that helped set off one of New York's loudest explosions of Afro-Cuban music.
Willie Colon performed there with Hector Lavoe.
Johnny Pacheco and Larry Harlow worked there, as did Ray Baretto and Eddie Palmieri.
The movie "Our Latin Thing," which revolutionized the way Latin music was heard and seen around the world, was filmed there.
Mickey Rourke was a bouncer.
Ralph Mercado, now the Sol Hurok of Latin music in New York, did the booking.
Both socially and musically, it was an experimental scene, a place for liberties.


DANCE
Just Ordinary People Fallen From Grace  Phyllis Lamhut Dance Company Bessie Schonberg Theater
Phyllis Lamhut's new "Deadly Sins" got off to a pungent start on Friday night, as five bodies emerged from a gloomy corner of the darkened stage to move to music with distinctive hints of Kurt Weill.
Ms.
Lamhut's dancers tend to look, refreshingly, like people one might notice on any urban street corner.
Dressed in Lois Bewley's deep-colored, velvety period costumes, they looked here as if that corner had been painted by Reginald Marsh.


Merge for Emergencies
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's proposal to fold New York City's ambulance corps -- the Emergency Medical Service -- into the Fire Department makes good sense.
Their functions fit well together.
Consolidation is more efficient and less costly than separate operation.
Indeed, few big cities have independent municipal ambulance services.
But there are hurdles, starting with state aid.
Albany pays E.M.S. upward of $45 million a year for Medicaid patients, based on the fact that E.M.S. is a unit of the Health and Hospitals Corporation, which operates the city's public hospitals.
City Hall is counting on the state to continue payments to E.M.S.
But this will require artful negotiation.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Mexico's Piano Repertory, With Allusion to Cortes  Max Lifchitz, pianist New York Public Library for the Performing Arts
The United States has synthesized the culture of its unwilling immigrants from Africa into what is perhaps the most powerful musical culture in the world.
Mexico, another object of European colonization, is still looking for a voice of its own.
The work of Carlos Chavez, featured prominently in Max Lifchitz's recital of Mexican piano music in Bruno Walter Auditorium on Saturday afternoon, sought allusions to Mexican music as Cortes might have found it early in the 16th century.
Elsewhere on this program, however, one witnessed a culture bombarded by the best and worst of European style.


Sports of The Times; Haynes of Villanova Is a Microcosm of This Mad March Process
YHE senior point guard perched himself on the rim on the Seventh Avenue side of Madison Square Garden and held up a sign that said, "The Cats Are Back This Season." Jonathan Haynes, a Villanova Wildcat right from the heart of Philadelphia, from Germantown, would later say that he wished he could savor that moment for a long, long time.
"Coach always says to savor your success," Haynes said.


Market Place; The S.E.C. drops a plan to force brokers to disclose a practice.
SOMETIMES you don't know just how complicated -- even bizarre -- a system is until you set out to describe it.
At that point you may wonder whether it is time to make it a whole lot simpler.
That may be what has just happened to the effort by the Securities and Exchange Commission to force brokers to disclose more about the controversial practice known as payment for order flow.


Internet Access Service Is Extending Its Reach
Joining what is sure to be a crowded field of companies offering businesses access to the worldwide computer network known as the Internet, the BBN Internet Services Corporation, a successful regional Internet access provider, is announcing today that it is becoming a national operation and changing its name.
The company, which is taking the name BBN Planet, promises to connect businesses in the United States to the Internet, maintain their link and protect them from being violated by unwanted computer intruders.


N.C.A.A. Again Puts Controversy In the Draw
The successful defense of a national basketball championship at the University of Arkansas may have to come under the most difficult of circumstances.
Just to return to the Final Four, the Razorbacks could face a Midwest Regional championship game against the University of Kansas at Kemper Arena in Kansas City, Mo., a technically neutral but controversial site.
Kansas, Kentucky, Wake Forest and U.C.L.A. were named the top-seeded teams in the 64-team National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament yesterday after a series of narrow conference championship games complicated the process until late in the afternoon.


Two Teen-Agers Charged In Shooting and Carjacking
Two teen-agers with no previous criminal records were charged today in the Friday night carjacking and shooting of a West Caldwell woman who was attacked as she opened her garage.
As the woman, Sheila Gillespie, 65, was in a hospital, neighbors of the two suspects on their quiet Montclair street expressed disbelief that the youths were capable of such a crime.
They described the two as good-natured and polite, portraits that conflicted sharply with investigators' accounts of a cold-blooded attack.


Hate Groups Use Tools Of the Electronic Trade
Until a year ago, George Burdi was a virtual unknown, spreading a message of white separatism and anti-Semitism as the leader of Rahowa, a Canadian white power rock group that played before sparse audiences of skinheads in places like the West Side Club in Detroit.
Last April, though, the 24-year-old Mr.
Burdi and several other young white racists founded Resistance Inc., a Detroit-based company that markets white separatism on its own record label, produces video documentaries, promotes its bands and publications on its own Internet site and publishes Resistance magazine, the slickest periodical in the white supremacy movement.
Mr.
Burdi also edits the magazine.


Gore Says U.S. Will Shift More Foreign Aid to Private Groups
Vice President Al Gore, speaking today at the close of a United Nations conference on poverty, said that within five years the Administration plans to channel nearly half its foreign aid through private organizations rather than governments.
The United States will also increase support to projects that decentralize political power and give more authority to local communities in developing nations, Mr.
Gore said at the World Summit on Social Development, which was attended by more than 120 world leaders.


Days of Liberation Remembered


Near Prize in Virginia, G.O.P. Finds Civil War
While the Republican Revolution rages on in Washington, Virginia Republicans are revolting against one another, and with the 1996 elections still more than 18 months away, it has already turned ugly.
In recent weeks, personal antagonisms have burst into the open, revealing unusually deep rifts between party moderates and conservatives and even among conservatives themselves, engulfing several of the state's most prominent Republicans.
Senator John W. Warner is now regarded by some party leaders as a turncoat, and Gov.
George F. Allen, once viewed as a possible vice presidential candidate, has failed in efforts not only to unify the party but also to get his ambitious agenda through the State Legislature.


Words and Music, as Personified in 2 Careers
It's pledge time again on public television and that means, apart from program interruptions for contribution pitches, lots of specials that have little or no connection with PBS's normal schedules.
Programs on the music of Glenn Miller and Tommy Dorsey are established favorites.
This year they are joined by programs devoted to -- would you believe -- the sounds of Lawrence Welk and John Tesh.
There are, however, classier acts.
Tonight, for instance, lovers of the American musical theater can find "Some Enchanted Evening: Celebrating Oscar Hammerstein 2d," taped in January before an invited audience at City Center in Manhattan.
And on Wednesday, operagoers can settle in comfortably with an "American Masters" presentation, "Placido Domingo: A Musical Life."


METRO DIGEST
A DEBATE ON THE SEVERELY RETARDED
The country's deinstitutionalization movement has been widely hailed as liberating for the mildly and moderately retarded, but the question gets more complex for the most severely retarded still in state institutions like the Southbury Training School in Southbury, Conn.
Justice Department examiners said last year that care at Southbury did not meet modern standards and called it a "very dangerous place."


Enduring Institutions: Care for the Severely Retarded -- A special report.; Plight of Some Retarded Adults Renews Debate on Big Institutions
More than three decades ago, following the advice of doctors, Edward D. Walen moved to Connecticut so he could place his son in what was regarded as one of the finest institutions for the mentally retarded in the world, the Southbury Training School.
Today, Mr.
Walen's son Jimmy, 43, has the I.Q. of a 3-year-old, and a physical impairment precludes him from making noises other than grunts, yelps and a siren-like squeal.
Every morning, he fastidiously sets tables and cleans dishes at the campus cafeteria.
At night, he sleeps in a crowded room with eight other men.


John Allen Buggs, 79, Is Dead; Worked for Civil Rights Panel
John Allen Buggs, an expert in community relations who was the staff director of the United States Civil Rights Commission for much of the 1970's, died on Tuesday at Cedars-Sinai Hospital in Los Angeles.
He was 79.
He had Alzheimer's disease, his family said.


Highway Crash in India Kills at Least 110 People


A Feminist Look at Women in Musical Composition: Beware Complacency
"We are not the first women to feel that we have overcome barriers," the feminist musicologist Susan McClary said during her opening talk at "Reverberations: Women and Music," a sometimes enlightening, sometimes doctrinaire symposium at the New School for Social Research last Thursday and Friday.
"Women of the past -- many of them -- have disappeared from history," Ms.
McClary continued.
"Each felt she was reinventing the wheel."
Ms.
McClary has achieved notoriety in recent years for her attacks on the historical male domination of musical composition.
In theorizing, for example, that the standard rhetoric of 19th-century symphonic music is a thinly disguised representation of male aggression, she has attracted considerable and not unwarranted criticism.
But whether or not one buys her ideas, they have started an extended debate about sexual identity in music, and surely anything that gets people arguing so passionately is a good thing.


Nets Have Bad Habit Of Losing To Bullets
The trip was going according to plan for the Nets.
The first two games had yielded victories -- one in overtime in Philadelphia and the other a blowout in Boston that was their best performance of the season.
All New Jersey needed to complete its road trifecta was a victory Saturday night against Washington, the Eastern Conference's worst team.


Turmoil at Disney: The Sequel
As in one of its blockbuster animated films, the Walt Disney Company has been on an unpredictable high-flying ride in the last six months that leaves its executives, stockholders and even audiences uncertain about the finale.
Late on Friday Michael D. Eisner, the company's chairman, announced yet another high-level management shake-up that sent ripples across the vast studio, once the most stable in town.
Not only did Mr.
Eisner announce the departure of Richard H. Frank, a longtime associate and Disney's top television executive, but he also surprised the studio and most of Hollywood by reaching outside his television staff and naming Dennis F. Hightower, one of the company's top marketing executives in Europe, to replace Mr.
Frank.


Squeezing Oil From Iraqi Children
To the Editor:
Milton Leitenberg dismisses as "nonsense" the suggestion that international sanctions against Iraq have caused horrifying suffering (letter, March 6).
If, he says, Iraq allowed the United Nations to monitor all its imports and exports and allowed the United Nations to decide what Iraq could buy and sell, then surely Iraq would be allowed to have enough funds to buy food and medicine, which could be directed to the suffering children.


Polar Bears, Almost Every One of Them


Attila Never Drew the Hunter's Longbow
To the Editor:
Re "Hunting Meets Future, and It's Too Easy for Some" (news article, March 8): You write that a longbow used by Jerry Simmons, a hunter from Jasper, Ala., "is the same weapon Attila the Hun used to humble the Romans."


U.S., China Will End Trade Rift
Ending months of recrimination, China and the United States agreed today to press jointly for Beijing's entry into the new World Trade Organization on a "flexible, pragmatic and realistic basis."
The accords signed here today seek to put an end to the atmosphere of enmity that has characterized Chinese-American trade negotiations in general, and in particular, the negotiations over China's entry into the world trading system.
And for the first time since December, the Beijing authorities have given a clear signal that they intend to return to the negotiating table after the collapse of China's original bid for membership in the World Trade Organization.


Finally, Jerry Lewis Is on Broadway
Jerry Lewis is legitimate at last.
Sixty-nine years ago this Thursday, Mr.
Lewis was born in Newark to begin what has possibly been the longest, most serpentine out-of-town tryout in the history of the American theater.
He has done amateur theatricals, nightclubs, movies, benefits, personal appearances in movie palaces and television.
He has been a comedy team with Dean Martin.
Later, a sometimes triumphant single act in films, occasionally as his own writer, director and star.
He has already written the obligatory star autobiography, which confesses as it inspires.
And somewhere along the way he was suggested for the Nobel Peace Prize.


CHRONICLE
The travails of a dinner planner at the very highest levels:
JOHN WALLACH , the founder of Seeds of Peace, a summer program that brings young Israelis and Arabs together, thought he had everything set for the organization's awards dinner, planned for March 21 in the Regency Hotel.
QUEEN NOOR of Jordan and REUMA WEIZMAN, wife of President Ezer Weizman of Israel, had agreed to be guests of honor, and the invitations were printed.


No. 3 Kentucky Beats No. 5 Arkansas for S.E.C. Title
Southeastern Conference; KENTUCKY 95, ARKANSAS 93: Third-ranked Kentucky overcame a 6-point deficit in the final 38 seconds of overtime in a 95-93 victory over No. 5 Arkansas in the Southeastern Conference tournament championship game yesterday in Atlanta.
Anthony Epps's 2 free throws with 19.4 seconds remaining gave the Wildcats (25-4) a 94-93 advantage and Tony Delk hit 1 of 2 free throws with six-tenths of a second left.


Essay; Agnew or Bust
I was trying to teach my puppy how to behave on a leash the other night.
He is a Bernese mountain dog, 75 pounds at 6 months old, and yanked himself loose to run up a neighbor's driveway, where he stopped to sniff out a small brick structure on the way to the garage.
I caught him and coaxed and dragged him back into the residential street.
Then it struck me: the tempting brick outpost was once a Secret Service station, built there to protect Vice President Spiro T. Agnew when he lived in that house on Shadow Road. (That was a long generation ago, before V.P.'s lived in a public mansion behind electric fences.)


Corrections
A headline on Friday with the continuation of an article about Gerry Adams, the political leader of the Irish Republican Army, referred incompletely to the purpose of his planned fund-raising in the United States.
Because of an editing error, a related article about Mr.
Adams's agreement to discuss I.R.A. disarmament included the same error in some editions.
Mr.
Adams promised that the money would be used only for peaceful activities of Sinn Fein, the I.R.A.'s political wing.


AMR's President Will Reportedly Give Up Title
Robert L. Crandall, who has held the top three jobs at the AMR Corporation since 1985, is reportedly considering turning over his title of president to one of his chief lieutenants this week, leaving him as chairman and chief executive.
An announcement may come on Wednesday, after a board meeting at AMR, the parent company of American Airlines, according to an article Saturday in The Dallas Morning News.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Marketers Warn Agencies To Prepare Better for Future
Advertising and agency executives have been anxiously waiting for the chairman and chief executive of the world's largest marketer to give them a thumbs up or thumbs down on how they have responded to his urgent call to confront the challenges of the new media.
The verdict, rendered on Friday by Edwin L. Artzt of the Procter &amp; Gamble Company: praise for "getting much better control of the future" but a warning that more must be done "to control our destiny to a greater degree, regardless of what form new media may take."


Bozell Division To Acquire Norton
Stricevic/O'Connell, the food marketing division of Bozell Worldwide in Chicago, has agreed in principle to acquire Norton Associates, a Chicago agency specializing in food service accounts.
The terms were not disclosed.


Go Tune Up That Banjo, the Blue Grass Stakes Is Next
Jerry Bailey won three more races at Gulfstream Park today, supporting the adage that when you're hot, you're hot.
But they weren't nearly as momentous as the seven races he won Saturday -- nor the one he lost aboard Suave Prospect by a nose in the Florida Derby to the team of D. Wayne Lukas, Mike Smith and Thunder Gulch.
On the morning after Florida's grandest day of racing, at least five of the first six finishers in the derby were planning to take the next step toward the Kentucky Derby: the Blue Grass Stakes in Lexington, Ky., in the heart of horse country.
It's there that Thunder Gulch and Suave Prospect will resume their rivalry on April 15.


G.O.P. Courts the Black Candidates
It's 20 months before the next election, but Joseph Rodgers, an aggressive Congressional candidate in Colorado, has assembled his staff and started to lean on contributors.
He is a prototype of the candidate that the Republicans hope will help extend the political revolution that succeeded so well in November: he is young, articulate, energetic and a lifelong party member.
He is also black.
"I represent a new generation of leadership," Mr.
Rodgers, a 30-year-old Denver lawyer who is challenging Representative Patricia Schroeder, said on Friday.
"I bring a whole new set of talent, a whole new set of ideas, philosophy and ideology in order to carry the civil rights movement to its next level."


A Union and Waiters Face Off in Chinatown
Beating drums, displaying a coffin and chanting, "Slavery must go," a group of about 200 labor advocates and restaurant-union members protested outside the Jing Fong restaurant in Chinatown yesterday.
They accused the restaurant's management of violating labor laws by demanding shares of waiters' tips and refusing to pay minimum wage and overtime.
But the protesters faced equally vocal opposition outside the restaurant, on Elizabeth Street, from about 40 Jing Fong waiters and their relatives.
Carrying a large aluminum board to deflect the bad luck brought by the coffin, the workers clanked a wok and serving plates and chanted, "Leave us alone" and "Let us live."


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
ASM Lithography Holdings, the Netherlands, an initial public offering of 11 million shares, 6.6 million in the United States and Canada.
CS First Boston.


An Arab Ally Has Warning For Clinton
Before departing for a trip to the United States, King Hassan of Morocco, a pillar of Middle East peace efforts for decades, warned in an interview that the momentum for peace was receding, pushing Arabs and Israelis into "absolutist" positions.
The King, whose family has long maintained friendly ties with Israel and Jewish populations around the world, said in an interview on Saturday that unless peace efforts move ahead before the American and Israeli election seasons arrive this summer, a wave of instability will sweep the region.


Harlem Troupe Makes Balanchine Its Own
Dance Theater of Harlem, which shot off to an exuberant start with two lively programs over the weekend at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, continues to apply its distinctive touch to even the most familiar repertory.
The latest company premiere is George Balanchine's "Prodigal Son," which on Friday night opened a season that is to run through March 26 at the academy's Opera House (30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene).
As usual, Dance Theater of Harlem's intuitive approach is to cut through layers of esthetic history.
Arthur Mitchell's dancers were more concerned with reaching deep into the emotional core of "Prodigal Son" than with making sense of its 1920's modernism.


Legislators Team for Baby Boom
Four New Jersey Republican lawmakers will hold a news conference today to announce the creation of a new group to raise public-policy issues crucial to the "baby boom" generation.
Appropriately enough, Senator Joseph Kyrillos of Monmouth and Assemblymen Richard H. Bagger of Westfield, Lee A. Solomon of Camden and Christopher Bateman of Branchburg are all first-year legislators.


New York City Stops Foreclosing on Tax-Delinquent Buildings
Overwhelmed by the expensive task of managing thousands of dilapidated apartment buildings that have become the city's property because their owners failed to pay property taxes, New York City has quietly halted the process of foreclosing on any more buildings.
Officials say that the city -- which in the last two decades has become the largest landlord in the five boroughs and a powerful force in maintaining the housing stock in poor neighborhoods -- simply cannot afford to keep playing this role.


Denver Journal; City, Fighting Back, Puts Emphasis Downtown
From the very beginning, when its fortunes depended almost exclusively on gold, silver, oil and real estate, Denver has been a boom-and-bust town, riding a Wild West economic roller coaster, now soaring, now crashing.
Good times and bad, they always seem to hit harder in Denver.


New in Senate and Looking Beyond Status Quo
For many years the closest thing to the promised land for a House Republican was a seat in the Senate.
Seven of them landed there after the 1994 election.
Now, some of them acknowledge, they occasionally find themselves looking longingly at their old berth in the House.
Senator Rick Santorum of Pennsylvania, 36 years old, plopped his feet on the desk of his barely furnished office this week and tried to explain why.
"This body tends to bog down," said the former two-term member of the House, adding that he thought the Senate held the doctrine of stare decisis -- adhering to precedent -- in higher regard than the Supreme Court.
"Things don't change around here and nobody wants them to. Particularly the people who hold power."


Pakistan Police Carry Out Crackdown Pledged by Bhutto
Acting swiftly on Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto's pledge to crack down on violent groups that have spread terror in Karachi, heavily armed police units moved before dawn today to throw a dragnet over violence-torn districts that police commanders had regarded as essentially off limits for months.
The police operation, involving armored combat vehicles and detachments of special commandos, continued throughout the day.
Police officials said tonight that they had rounded up more than 300 suspected militants, many of them members of a group that police have long identified as one of the most dangerous terrorist organizations in Karachi, the Haqiqi faction of the Mohajir National Movement, known here as MQM-Haqiqi.


Mets Are Still Zero for Spring
Break up the Mets. Immediately.
The team that may be the worst of the 27 replacement squads lost again yesterday, this time falling by 9-2 to the Cincinnati Reds in Plant City, Fla.
The defeat dropped the Mets' record to 0-8 and they remain the only club without a victory this spring.


Don't Blame Midwives in Maternity Care Crisis; The Privatizing Error
To the Editor:
As your "Mismanaged Care" series shows, there are enormous maternity care problems in New York City hospitals (front page, March 5, 6, 7).
I know.
I worked for 12 years as a nurse and then as a midwife at Bellevue, Kings County and Lincoln hospitals.
But blame does not lie with midwives, who are struggling to give skilled care with inadequate resources to the poorest women.


Devils Fail To Stop Lindros And Flyers
Philadelphia's top line has been on a tear and the Flyers have been on a roll as well.
Eric Lindros, John LeClair and Mikael Renberg had notched 35 points in the Flyers' previous seven games, and the team had gone 5-1-1 during that span.
Tonight, the linemates were good for 6 more points.
And again their productivity translated into a victory, this one a 4-3 triumph over the Devils at the Spectrum, Philadelphia's fourth consecutive victory.


U.S. to Sell Only Bills
The Treasury's schedule of financing this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
At the close of the New York cash market on Friday the rate was 5.75 percent on the outstanding three-month bill and 5.91 percent on the six-month bill.


The New Submarines Can Wait
As House Republicans slash money for job training, education, homeless youths and dozens of other domestic programs to save $15 billion this year, it would be salutary if someone in the leadership had the gumption to mention the Seawolf submarine.
The Republican Senator John McCain, hardly a dove on defense spending, would save $2.3 billion this year alone by barring construction of one of these new, unnecessary attack submarines.
With or without a balanced budget amendment, Congress is not going to put the Federal ledger in equilibrium by 2002 unless it starts now to make reductions in Pentagon spending, which is $264 billion this year and is projected to total $1.2 trillion over the next five years.
A good place to start is expensive new weapons that are no longer needed, and a good example is new attack submarines.


Accounts
*
Mercedes-Benz of North America, Montvale, N.J., to International Creative Management, Beverly Hills, Calif., to develop film, television and interactive entertainment and multimedia projects.
As part of the assignment, which was expected, the talent agency will work with Mercedes-Benz's advertising agency, Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS, New York.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Retail Sales . . .
Feb.
Wednesday  Producer Prices . . .
Feb.
Industrial Production . . .
Feb.
Capacity Utilization . . .
Feb.
Inventory-Sales Ratio . . .
Jan.
Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Consumer Prices . . .
Feb.
Housing Starts . . .
Feb.
Friday  None


Corrections
An article yesterday about a dispute between dancers and management at the Bolshoi Theater in Russia misidentified the composer for the music in the ballet, "Romeo and Juliet," that was canceled Friday night.
It was Prokofiev, not Tchaikovsky.


How to Create a Stir From a Jail
People get sentimental about the darnedest things.
Depending on the length of their criminal resumes, repeat offenders in Hudson County may soon be able to take comfort from a familiar sight.
When the 75-year-old former county jail in Jersey City is demolished this spring, the arch, pillars and main door will be reassembled at the new jail here.
Built to house 250 inmates, the old jail was housing more than 700 when a judge ordered it closed in 1989.
It had its final lock-down on Dec. 20, 1990.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Magic Defeats Spurs  Shaquille O'Neal struggled in the fourth quarter before delivering a dunk and two free throws in the final minute to help Orlando hold off visiting San Antonio, 110-104, yesterday.
The Spurs were the only team the Magic hadn't beaten since O'Neal entered the league three seasons ago.
David Robinson had 34 points and 12 rebounds to lead the Spurs.
O'Neal had 28 points and 13 rebounds.
Anfernee Hardaway led Orlando with 31 points. (AP) N.H.L.
Vanbiesbrouck Is Sharp  John Vanbiesbrouck continued his stellar play by stopping 24 shots, and the Florida Panthers made two first-period goals stand up in a 4-1 victory over the Whalers in Hartford yesterday.
Vanbiesbrouck shut out Boston by 2-0 on Saturday, and the Panthers have gone 4-1-2 since Feb. 25. (AP) ALPINE SKIING  Schneider Still the Best  Vreni Schneider clinched her sixth world slalom title yesterday in Parpan, Switzerland, where she finished second to Pernilla Wiberg of Sweden in the penultimate World Cup slalom of the season.
Wiberg won her first World Cup slalom this season with an aggregate time of 1 minute 17.31 seconds. (Reuters) YACHT RACING  U.S.
Boat Damaged  The PACT 95 team's America's Cup yacht, Young America, fell off a 10- to 12-foot wave yesterday while being towed out of Mission Bay, its mooring area north of San Diego.
The jolt caused delamination damage in the bow area.
There were no injuries to the crew.
TRACK AND FIELD  Two Quick Studies  Deworski Odom, a senior from Philadelphia, set three national records yesterday in the National Scholastic Indoor Track and Field Championships in Syracuse.
Tamieka Grizzle, a junior at George Washington High School in Manhattan, took home two gold medals.
Odom won the 60-meter dash in 6.62 seconds, the 60-meter hurdles in 7.62 seconds and the 55-meter race in 7.08 seconds.
Grizzle won the girls' 800 meters in 2 minutes 9.75 seconds and anchored the Zodiac Track Club to victory in the distance medley relay.
U.S.
WINS FOUR GOLDS: Hurdler Allen Johnson and distance runner Regina Jacobs led a United States resurgence at the world indoor championships yesterday.
Americans won their first golds on the meet's final day.
Johnson, 24, won the 60-meter hurdles at 7.39 seconds, a championship record.
Jacobs, 31, won the women's 1,500 meters at 4:12.61 and became the first American to win a distance race at this event. (AP) AUTO RACING  Gordon First in Atlanta  Jeff Gordon won the Purolator 500 yesterday at Atlanta Motor Speedway.
Gordon, 23, was in charge virtually from the time he took the lead for the first time on Lap 63.
His Hendrick Motorsports Chevrolet took the checkered flag 0.19 seconds ahead of Bobby Labonte's Chevy. (AP)


How Leo Frank's Death Fueled Fight for Justice
To the Editor:
"The Lynching of Leo Frank," an advertisement for the Teaching Tolerance Project of the Southern Poverty Law Center (Op-Ed page, March 5), needs a postscript.


Villanova Runs Down UConn For Title
There have been many times this season when the Connecticut Huskies have displayed the look of a team destined for the Final Four in Seattle.
When everything is operating in cohesion, when the pressure defense is creating turnovers and the inside-outside game is working in unison, the Huskies are as smooth and impressive as any team in the nation.
But there are times like the first five minutes of the second half of yesterday's Big East tournament championship game when Connecticut looks very average and vulnerable, creating an unsettling feeling for UConn followers who are hoping for something more than unfulfilled expectations from the coming National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.


St. John's, Seton Hall Still Playing
As expected, St.
John's and Seton Hall were selected for the National Invitation Tournament last night, but both will open their post-season shows on the road.
The Red Storm (14-13), which has the fewest victories among the 32 teams in the N.I.T., will play South Florida (16-11) of the Metro Conference in Tampa on Thursday night.
The Pirates (16-13) will travel to Buffalo to play Canisius (18-12), a member of the Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference.


Menendez to Tour Projects
Representative Robert Menendez, Democrat of Union City, will tour three housing projects today to assess how tenants would be affected by a Republican proposal to cut subsidies for housing in the next fiscal year.
The Congressman will visit Booker T. Washington Apartments, the Dwight Street Project and Berry Gardens Senior Citizen Project.


'Line-Item Veto,' Right and Wrong
Of all the pledges in the Republicans' Contract With America, there is just one that President Clinton would be genuinely happy to see enacted -- the line-item veto, technically known as "rescission." The Senate is about to consider two versions.
Both would give him more power to block spending on pork-barrel projects and other special favors that Congress tucks into appropriations bills.
One version would dangerously increase the President's already formidable powers.
The other, sponsored by Senator Pete Domenici, would give the President more power than he has now, counter-balanced by reasonable Congressional checks.
The Senate should go with Mr.
Domenici, chairman of its Budget Committee.


Path to Premiere's Sale: A Cautionary Lesson
If there is a lesson to be learned from the track record of Premiere magazine, the glossy monthly that is now up for sale, it is how difficult it can be to create a profitable consumer magazine.
While Premiere has been a critical success, the magazine, which provides close-ups of Hollywood films and the people behind them, is only marginally profitable after eight years, according to a confidential financial document prepared by the magazine's parent, the K-III Communications Corporation, and K-III's investment banker, Allen &amp; Company.


Ireland's Senate Debates Information on Abortion
The vehement national debate centering on Ireland's constitutional ban on abortion will resume this week as the Senate considers a measure that would guarantee freedom of information for women who want to travel abroad for abortions.
The measure, which establishes the right to information about foreign abortion clinics, was approved by the lower house of Parliament on Friday after a week of angry debate.
Approval by the Senate is expected this week, but the measure faces the prospect of a court challenge.


U.S. Publishers Discover Spanish as a Second Language
Two years ago, a sensuous little book about ill-fated love written by Laura Esquivel began turning publishers' heads like few books do.
Spurred by the success of its movie adaptation, "Like Water for Chocolate" was climbing American best-seller lists, not just in its English translation, but in Ms.
Esquivel's original Spanish version as well.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Little enthusiasm for higher interest rates is being expressed by top Federal Reserve officials, despite recent developments that have put pressure on the Fed to consider further increases.
Four of the Federal Reserve Board's seven governors said they thought the central bank had things just about right with interest rates and economic growth.  [ Page A1. ]


In France, Savvy Candidates for President Take a Trip to Africa
When France's hard-line Interior Minister, Charles Pasqua, made a lightning tour of African countries recently, many foreigners assumed that it was timed to avoid questions about his handling of a dispute with Washington about American spying.
In fact, with the first round of French presidential elections scheduled for next month, Mr.
Pasqua's visit was one of a series of trips to former colonies by leading French politicians that for years have been a significant part of every French electoral campaign.


India's Governing Party Losing Votes in Once-Secure States
Right-wing Hindu parties appeared to be beating the governing Congress Party today in important state legislature elections in two western Indian states that had long been Congress strongholds.
The elections, among six that have taken place in the last month, were considered an important test of Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao and the Congress Party, and the defeats are likely to increase criticism of him within his party.


In East Harlem, 2 Candidates Try to End a Dynasty as a 3d Tries to Uphold It
For two decades, the Del Toro name has been synonymous with politics in East Harlem, with Angelo Del Toro holding a lock on the district's seat in the State Assembly.
With the Assemblyman's death in December, the dynasty was to pass to his brother William.
But seeing an opening, two opponents are running furiously to undo the family's hold on the 68th Assembly District seat in a strange campaign in which the candidate considered the one to beat -- William Del Toro -- has been virtually invisible as Tuesday's special election to fill the seat nears.


The New Rules on Gay Soldiers: A Year Later, No Clear Results
In the year since the military's new rules on homosexuals went into effect, the results have been as ambiguous as the rules themselves, interviews with service members, Pentagon officials and gay-rights advocates indicate.
Some commanders are bending the regulations to protect popular gay service members and others are using their latitude to drum homosexuals out unfairly, gay-rights groups say.


60's Ideas Through A 90's Lens
Oasis didn't waste much energy on showmanship at the Academy on Wednesday night.
Liam Gallagher stared at the crowd as he sang lead vocals, occasionally swinging his arms; between verses he often sat down on Tony McCarroll's drum platform.
Noel Gallagher, the band's lead guitarist and songwriter, looked dutiful as he sang backup vocals and sometimes announced the title of the next song; Paul Arthurs on guitar and Paul McGuigan on bass stood there impassively.
This English band's calculated reserve shifted attention back to the music, which deserved it.
Like a church housing a splinter of the True Cross, Oasis has built its style on a handful of psychedelic-era Beatles songs, among them "Tomorrow Never Knows" and "It's All Too Much." The melodies are concise, often using one repeated line before ascending toward a Beatles-like bridge.
The guitarists, aided by distortion devices and an occasional tape loop, layer on drones until the buzz becomes enveloping, surrounding the songs in an ocean of resonance.


Out of Politics but Still Talking, Radio Style
Last year, nearly a dozen talk-radio hosts from around the country tried to jump from their studios to spots in Congress, most unsuccessfully.
But for former politicians trying to vault to the other side of the microphone, the trip seems to be much easier.
Gary Hart, the former United States Senator from Colorado, has just started "Heartland," a weekly program he describes as "thoughtful" talk radio.
"No screaming and shouting," he says, just serious, in-depth conversations with poets, nonfiction authors, journalists and even an occasional politician.


Corrections
A brief report in Weekend on Friday in the On Stage, and Off, column about photographing the audience at "Silence, Cunning, Exile" at the Joseph Papp Public Theater gave an incorrect brand name, provided by the theater, for the camera in some copies.
It was a Calumet, not a Rollei.


Abroad at Home; Legally Blind?
Harry Truman's rule goes for newspaper columnists as for politicians: If you can't stand the heat, stay out of the kitchen.
Those of us who put our beliefs in print should not complain when others disagree.
That said, here goes with an expression of puzzlement at four critics: the attorneys general of New York, Nevada, Indiana and Washington State.
They wrote a joint letter to the editor of The New York Times criticizing a column of mine about one of the crime bills rushed through the House of Representatives by its new Republican leadership.


Don't Blame Midwives in Maternity Care Crisis; Raise Medicaid Rates
To the Editor:
While the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation is a bureaucratic monstrosity and many of its hospitals are poorly run (front page, March 5, 6, 7), the real culprit in this melodrama is Medicaid.


Sampras and Agassi Win To Deliver a Dream Final
At match point, just after Pete Sampras put his trust in his reactions and nudged one last tricky backhand drop shot over the net, Stefan Edberg set off at a gallop to try to return it but got to the ball a heartbeat too late.
So Edberg simply kept on coming, leaped nimbly over the net and landed on Sampras's side of the sunny stadium court for the congenial handshake that capped off the defending champion's 4-6, 6-3, 6-4 comeback today in an extremely civil if extremely hard-fought semifinal at the Newsweek Champions Cup.


Salinas, at Successor's Request, Leaves for Virtual Exile in U.S.
With his elder brother jailed on murder charges and his once-celebrated reputation in tatters, former President Carlos Salinas de Gortari has left Mexico for virtual exile in the United States, senior Government officials said today.
The officials said that Mr.
Salinas, who ruled until Dec. 1, 1994, and was considered one of the strongest and most innovative Mexican leaders of this century, was asked on Tuesday to leave the country by an emissary of the man he chose to succeed him, President Ernesto Zedillo.


Lageman, White Leave As Free Agents
The Jets lost two starters yesterday to free agency -- Jeff Lageman, a symbol of their defense and their player representative, and Dwayne White, a starter on the offensive line.
Lageman is going to the Jacksonville Jaguars expansion team, which offered him a contract similar to that put forward by the Jets, probably about $5.5 million for three years.


Dividend Meetings


Socialist Freeloaders
To the Editor:
You report that Speaker of the House Newt Gingrich said there were socialists on many newspaper editorial boards (news article, March 9).
Unfortunately for the Socialist Party, Mr.
Gingrich has so far declined to identify those he believes to be socialists.


Still Just Wishing on a Star
The Michael Jordan saga is on hold, for now.
Despite all the rumors, there have been no conversations about a possible return to basketball between Jordan and Jerry Reinsdorf, the Chicago Bulls' owner, or between Jordan and Jerry Krause, the Bulls' general manager, Krause said yesterday.
"I talked with Jerry after our game against the Lakers on Saturday night and he told me that he and Michael had just talked generally about his decision to quit baseball," said Krause.
Meanwhile, Reinsdorf told The Associated Press yesterday that he had not spoken with Jordan since Friday and didn't know which way Jordan was leaning.


Mississippi Mellows on Issue of Bias in State Universities
Just three years ago, state education officials were still insisting that Mississippi's system of five historically white universities and three historically black universities did not discriminate on the basis of race.
But those same officials now say they are pleased with this week's Federal court ruling in a 20-year-old case, and they moved on Thursday to ask the Legislature for $35 million in additional money to begin putting the court-ordered remedies into effect.


Suspicion Of Arson At Manor
After several years at the center of a development dispute, a landmark mansion in Whitestone, Queens, that was once home to one of Broadway's leading producers was gutted yesterday by a fire that officials believe was deliberately set.
The 15-room Tudor house on Powells Cove Boulevard, near the Throgs Neck Bridge, was the last architectural link to a time, in the 1920's, when the Beechhurst section of Whitestone was a playground for Broadway's elite.


Photographer Focuses On His Year of Pain
Tucked within the crisp black pages of the Feuer family photo album are bitter memories of humiliation.
There are black-and-white photos of Ejlat Feuer, frowning in a dark suit and tie as he prepared to face charges last year that he endangered his 6-year-old daughter by taking her nude photograph for a New York City art class.


Athlete to Speak at Conference
Youthful violence, drug abuse and the high school dropout rate will be addressed at a conference Thursday through Sunday, which will include an appearance by the former football star Jim Brown.
Newark officials said sponsors are the city, the Edison Job Corps Center, the New Jersey Training School for Boys and the Amer-I-Can Academy, founded by Mr.
Brown.


Mismanagement Charged At Mayor's Youth Services
THERE has indeed been mismanagement at the city's Youth Services Department.
But it wasn't in the Dinkins years.
It was under Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, a new review shows.
It was the Giuliani administration that left New York thinking for a year that David N. Dinkins and his government had manipulated the department to help his campaign and that somebody even ransacked files and computers in a cover-up attempt.
Last week, a Department of Investigation report grudgingly exonerated Mr.
Dinkins's Youth Services Commissioner, Richard L. Murphy, of everything but sloppy bookkeeping.


Councilman Assails Cost of Transit Buses
A City Councilman charged yesterday that the Transit Authority wastes tens of millions of dollars each year by not asking for Federal money to buy buses, and by paying too much for the buses it buys.
Councilman Charles Millard, a Manhattan Republican, said the Transit Authority could qualify to have the Federal Government pay up to 80 percent of the cost of its new buses.
He noted that when the city buys buses for private commuter lines, 80 percent of the price is paid with Federal money.


Christopher Confers With Saudi King On Aid and Arms
King Fahd was polite but noncommittal tonight when Secretary of State Warren Christopher asked the Saudi ruler to support a proposed development bank for the Middle East, earmark some of his country's aid to the Palestinians for their day-to-day operations and support the indefinite extension of the treaty against the spread of nuclear weapons.
The King did not say yes and he did not say no.


Ewing Takes a Fall, But Knicks Fall Harder
When Patrick Ewing fell to the Madison Square Garden floor Saturday night, he again tested the Knicks' threshold of pain.
Now they are faced with that recurring, but real, theme: Without their All-Star center, how much can they possibly take?
Ewing, who came down on the foot of Seattle's Sam Perkins, rolled his left ankle.
X-rays taken Saturday night were negative and it has been determined that the injury is a sprain.


Bowe the Conqueror Quickly Sets Wheels in Motion
Flanked by one hotel shaped like the pyramids and another one dedicated to the Caesars, Riddick Bowe put on his new crown and took off in a mobile barge early this morning for a meeting of two world heavyweight powers.
No, the summit isn't in Luxor or Rome, but outside of Indianapolis, where Bowe, who will not fly, expected to arrive Monday, transported there in his 40-foot Bowe Mobile.


Croatian Leader Agrees to Continuation of U.N. Force
The President of Croatia agreed today to allow the continued presence of United Nations peacekeeping forces in his country after the United States seized the diplomatic initiative from the Europeans who have dominated policy on the region for many months.
The agreement was announced here by the Croatian President, Franjo Tudjman, after meeting with Vice President Al Gore, who arrived in Copenhagen this morning to speak at the United Nations conference on world poverty.


A Young Hit-Run Victim Is Mourned


Talk About Strange Bedfellows!
THE FORBIDDEN BEST SELLERS OF PREREVOLUTIONARY FRANCE  By Robert Darnton  Illustrated. 440 pages.
W.
W.
Norton &amp; Company. $27.50.
In this age of television and computers, in this country where books tend to be regarded as a simple means of self-expression or a form of entertainment, it's startling to be reminded just how powerful a social and political force the printed word has been in other times and other cultures.
It's a realization brought home with great vividness by the historian Robert Darnton's new book, "The Forbidden Best Sellers of Prerevolutionary France."


G.O.P. SEEKS SHIFT IN CHILD WELFARE
In a little-noticed part of their welfare proposals, House Republicans are moving forward with a plan to rein in Federal support for foster care and adoptive services and turn existing programs over to the states.
The Republican plan, which entails a $2.9 billion reduction in the growth that was projected in Federal child welfare programs over the next five years, has raised alarms from some state officials and child advocacy groups.
These critics worry that the reduction is coming at a time when other proposed changes in the welfare program may force more poor women to relinquish custody of their children.


Man in the News; The Renaissance Banker: James David Wolfensohn
In today's Wall Street of 12-hour days and 7-day weeks, James D. Wolfensohn is probably as close as the modern investment banker can get to being a Renaissance man.
A renowned international financier, Mr.
Wolfensohn has for 14 years successfully forged his own company, James D. Wolfensohn Inc., into an investment banking powerhouse that competes with giant firms like Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company and Salomon Brothers, while doing annual business of $8 billion to $10 billion a year.


Body Is Found After 6 Months, and Paroled Murderer Is Suspect
A Long Island man missing for six months has been found dead alongside a Rockland County creek -- slain, the police suspect, by the same paroled murderer who has been accused of killing one woman and raping another.
The decomposed body of Robert Silk, 42, was discovered on Friday by a youth who was crayfishing in the creek near the busy intersection of the Old Nyack Turnpike and Pascack Road in Clarkstown, a state police investigator, Louis Roman, said yesterday.


INSIDE
U.S. Succeeds on Croatia
Seizing the initiative from the Europeans, Washington successfully persuaded Croatia to abandon its demand that United Nations troops leave the country.
Page A9.
New Tone on China Trade
A day after harshly criticizing each other, the United States and China agreed to work together to settle remaining trade disputes.
Page D1.
High-Tech Hate
A white separatist in Detroit using modern communications technology has awakened a once-moribund neo-Nazi skinhead movement.
Page A12.
Hello, We're Murray State
Sixty-four teams, including powerhouses like Kansas and underdogs like Manhattan and Murray State, are in the N.C.A.A. basketball tournament.
SportsMonday, page C1.


John C. Weaver, 79, University Official
John Carrier Weaver, a university administrator instrumental in the formation of the University of Wisconsin System, with 27 campuses when he was its president from 1971 to 1977, died on Friday at his home in Rancho Palos Verdes, Calif.
He was 79.
The Wisconsin State Journal reported that the cause of his death was not announced but that he had a heart attack years ago and had undergone open-heart surgery.


Argentine Tells of Dumping 'Dirty War' Captives Into Sea
Many of the victims were so weak from torture and detention that they had to be helped aboard the plane.
Once in flight, they were injected with a sedative by an Argentine Navy doctor before two officers stripped them and shoved them to their deaths.
Now, one of those officers has acknowledged that he pushed 30 prisoners out of planes flying over the Atlantic Ocean during the right-wing military Government's violent crackdown in the 1970's.


In Sickness and in Health; Building Loving Relationships When One Partner Has H.I.V.
James E. Miles Jr. has just about everything that George Bellinger Jr. looks for in a companion.
Not only the stuff of romance and resumes; he even shares Mr.
Bellinger's passion for collecting giraffe figurines.
Mr.
Miles has something else, something that Mr.
Bellinger does not: H.I.V., the AIDS virus.


No Headline
"A distinguished speaker said that we must put children first. We in Bosnia wonder if we have any children left. Seventeen thousand children have been killed in Bosnia in the last three years. Those living, some with gray hair and eyes and hearts of old men, are hardly children any more." -- HARIS SILAJDZIC, Prime Minister of Bosnia.  [ A7:3. ]


Audit Assails Former Chief Of Javits Hall
In an attempt to bolster his efforts to take control of the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, Gov.
George E. Pataki today released a summary of a state audit that harshly criticizes the center's management by its board and its former chief executive, Fabian G. Palomino.
The two-page letter, which was delivered to Mr.
Pataki on Friday by the State Comptroller, H. Carl McCall, explains that the yet-to-be-completed audit will find "a disturbing pattern of management override of established policies and procedures."


Bottle of Red Takes Home Cup
Richard Dilts and Judy Rampel are in the mood to celebrate.
Their Poor Richard's Winery here received the Governor's Cup for the best New Jersey wine on Saturday at the Foregate Country Club in Jamesburg.
The cup was presented by Agriculture Secretary Arthur R. Brown Jr.
Judges for the 10th annual state wine competition were members of the Society of Wine Educators and the American Wine Society and other representatives of the wine industry.
New Jersey has 15 wineries producing about 170,000 gallons a year.


O'Meara Ends Long Victory Drought
As he stood on the final fairway today at the Honda Classic, a one-stroke lead and a 5-iron in hand, Mark O'Meara squinted at the green across the water.
There were so many things he could have been thinking, about the three-year victory drought, about Nick Faldo still breathing down his neck, about the long climb back to respectability.
But he was having none of that.
Not yet.
Not with 142 yards left into a wicked, three-club wind.
Not with Faldo hitting iron shots with the precision of a diamond cutter.
So he did what winners do, what he used to do himself before he got derailed somewhere along the way.
He remembered what Ben Hogan told him back when he first came out on tour back in 1981.


Sports of The Times; When Is Peacock a Lamb? When Fed to Lions
MOMENTS before the nationally televised, long-awaited selection show, members of the St.
Peter's Peacocks basketball team were sitting anxiously in the school's McIntyre Lounge last night.
In low tones, they speculated and conjectured about what region they would be sent to and what team they might play in the coming National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.
Since securing an automatic berth with a stunning last-second victory over Manhattan in the Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference tournament last week, the St.
Peter's players have been floating on a high.
Earlier in the day, the team participated in a St.
Patrick's Day parade in Jersey City.


Girard Makes His Exit at Channel 11
JERRY GIRARD, WPIX-TV/Channel 11's acerbic and witty weeknight sportscaster since 1974, has quit rather than be switched to weekend duty in favor of SAL MARCHIANO, who has been working weekends for the past year.
"C'est la vie, that's the business," Girard said last night.
"There's no anger, there's no bitterness. People come and go in this business and sometimes you realize you're going to go. I was up there for 20 years."


Gun Dealers
The number of people licensed to sell firearms nationally and in the region is falling sharply.
The Brady bill raised the fee for the most common Federal Firearms License from $30 to $200 for a three-year license.
And reforms in last September's crime bill made it more difficult for "kitchen-table" dealers, who operate out of their homes, to stay in business.
There are still about 194,000 licensed gun dealers in the United States.
By comparison, there are approximately 93,000 convenience stores.
The most publicized feature of the Brady law, mandating a five-day waiting period and background check before the purchase of a hand gun, did not apply in this area as New York, New Jersey and Connecticut already had stricter controls in place.


The Dawn of Dumb
I guess my father was always dumb.
But in the decades when he was at his dumbest, the 70's and 80's, a high premium was not placed on random acts of stupidity.
So whenever he behaved in a way that seemed somehow less than intelligent -- like the time he put a pile of forks in the microwave saying, "I just have to know" -- there were no critics there to call it art.
Like lots of dumb people, my dad was born too early.
His stupidity was something done in private, something only the family could enjoy.
In the last few years, however, dumbness has come out from under the sheets and behind the picket fences, out into the public square to be admired by all.
It's on display in movies like "The Brady Bunch" and "Dumb and Dumber," and TV shows like "Beavis and Butt-head." And the trend gives no sign of slacking, with the forthcoming release of "The Stupids," a John Landis picture based on the notion that if a stupid person is funny, then a whole stupid family is real funny.


Down the Shore and the Hatch
It's not even spring, but hotel executives, restaurant managers, travel agents and convention-center directors will lunch today on foods typical of casual summertime dining at the shore: hoagies, soft pretzels, pizza, hot dogs, sausage and peppers.


Latin Rallies Follow Gains In Mexico
For all their effort to separate themselves from Mexico's financial roller coaster, other Latin American nations cannot seem to escape the same wild ups and downs.
The stock markets of Brazil and Argentina, which have lost half their value since Mexico's peso crisis began in December, erupted in near-record rallies on Friday.
So did Chile's stock market, which had not been as battered as the others.


Science Times E-Mail
Science Times has an electronic mail address for comments from readers about published articles and suggested areas of coverage:
scitimes@nytimes.com.


Observer; Fat Is Easier
Here's a new biography of Tom Paine.
It is 644 pages long.
Just thinking of those 644 pages makes you want to kick the nearest computer.
And of course you can't -- kick computers I mean.
Unlike typewriters, they're too expensive.
A typewriter once put me in such evil temper that I threw it out a second-floor window.
For a week or more it had insolently refused to have anything halfway literate written on it.


General Nutrition Cos.(GNCI,NNM) reports earnings for 16wks to Feb 4


What's in a Number? 143 Years of News
This was front-page news in No. 1: "In England, political affairs are quiet." So were two stories about New-York, a city that still had a hyphen in its name: a 35-year-old Manhattan woman had died in police custody, and two Death Row inmates were facing execution.
No. 25,320 was the one that said Lindbergh did it, flying to Paris in 33 1/2 hours.
No. 30,634 described the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.
No. 35,178 reported that the Supreme Court had banned segregation in public schools.
No. 40,721 said that men had walked on the moon, No. 46,669 that the Challenger had exploded.


Almost Alone, 2 Contractors Resist Labor Extortion Groups
The phone calls come almost weekly -- death threats and extortion demands that are recorded on Tom Keller's answering machine.
Mr.
Keller, a construction contractor who has spent more than two decades rebuilding poor sections of Brooklyn, plays the tapes and then erases them, never much moved.
Tony Barrett gets similar messages.
They come from groups that say they are searching for jobs for black and Hispanic workers, but that the police call criminal enterprises bent on strong-arming jobs or extorting payoffs at construction sites across the city.


Screen Test: Television on Your PC
CERTIFIED professional psychics! (Mouse click.) The O. J. Simpson trial. (Mouse click.) Disney on Ice! (Mouse click.) Judge Lance A. Ito. (Mouse click.) "I agree with what Ann's saying, but as a therapist . . ." (Mouse click.) O. J. (Mouse click.) O. J. (Mouse click.).
O.
J. (Mouse click.) And now back to our regular program: "Processing Words."
Nicholas Negroponte, a media futurist, recently suggested on the Op-Ed page of The New York Times that by the year 2000, "many Americans will be watching TV in the upper-right-hand corner of their P.C.'s." But if you have a burning desire to keep up with the latest prices of Kurly Ties on QVC while you peck out the Great American CD-ROM, you need not wait until the millennium.
The promise and threat of "digital convergence" have arrived in the form of multimedia computers with built-in television tuners.
The one I tried was a Presario 920 CDTV (about $1,900 without monitor) from the Compaq Computer Corporation; (800) 345-1518.


Invacare Corp.(IVCR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tuberculosis Cases Decline 2d Year in a Row, City Says
New York City officials declared yesterday that tuberculosis was on the wane in the five boroughs, and cited statistics showing that the incidence of the disease had dropped for the second straight year.
The number of new cases reported in 1994 dropped 7.4 percent, to 2,995 from 3,235 the previous year, city health officials said.
The decline represented a 21.4 percent decrease from 1992, when 3,811 cases were reported -- the highest in three decades.


G.I.'s to Join A NATO Unit In Croatia
A small number of United States soldiers will be sent to Croatia to assist in the planned scaling back of the United Nations peacekeeping force there, Defense Secretary William J. Perry said today.
In outlining for the first time a NATO plan to assist in the withdrawal, Mr.
Perry told reporters that American communications units would form part of a small contingent that is to be sent to the region.
The NATO soldiers are to help in an operation, approved over the weekend in a compromise between the Western allies and the Croatian Government, that will see the 12,000-member United Nations force in Croatia reduced to 5,000 troops.


The Small Print in the 'Contract'
What's a good Republican to do?
Representative Marge Roukema of Ridgewood wants to go along with her party's proposed $17 billion spending cut, but not at a cost of $300,000 to her constituents.
That's how much the Kittatinny and Sandyston-Walpack school districts stand to lose in Federal aid under the cuts scheduled for debate in Congress tomorrow.


Your Broker or the Other Guy's?
Home buyers do not have to have a lawyer assist in the closing of a sale, the State Supreme Court ruled yesterday.
But the court said brokers who help close deals must disclose potential conflicts of interest, such as representing the seller, too.
And it said that buyers and sellers must be warned of the pitfalls of proceeding without a lawyer.
What people do now often depends on where they are buying a home.
In South Jersey, 60 percent of home buyers and 65 percent of the sellers do not use lawyers.
In North Jersey, more than 99 percent of the buyers and 86 percent of the sellers have lawyers at closings.


Barbara Mercati, Socialite, 87
Barbara Mercati, who was active in cultural, charitable and volunteer work, died on Saturday at her home in Manhattan.
Mrs.
Mercati, who also lived in Vineyard Haven, Mass., on Martha's Vineyard, was 87.
The cause of death was cancer, said her son George.


Columnist Appears In Barneys Campaign
A journalist who covers people being talked about is now being talked about himself.
Richard Johnson, who writes the "Page Six" gossip column for The New York Post, wears an Italian wool suit in a new print advertising campaign for Barneys New York.
Mr.
Johnson is one of several nonmodels to appear in the campaign, created by an in-house team; it will include more than 40 ads.


Garbo's Pedestrian Side: Everything Not on Film
GARBO A Biography  By Barry Paris  Illustrated. 654 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $35.
She watched "Matlock" and "General Hospital," cooked with peanut oil and collected paintings of harlequins and dogs.
She kept a secret cache of dynel-haired toy trolls.
Leading a life that was pedestrian in every sense, with a daily routine incorporating two long walks and a nap in between, she worried obsessively about sensible shoes.
She loved fresh vegetables but never bothered with flowers.
"What's the point?" she would say.
"They'd only die."


CLASSICAL MUSIC
An Infrequent Visitor Arrives Bearing Gifts  Gustav Leonhardt, harpsichordist Church of St.
Mary the Virgin
Thump a key on a harpsichord, and you get a twang.
One volume fits all, and the sound vanishes instantly, meaninglessly, unless others rush to fill the void.


Corrections
A subheading on Saturday with an article about a former Mexican Government official accused of tampering with an inquiry into a political assassination in 1994 misstated an accusation against him.
Investigators said they suspected that the former official, Mario Ruiz Massieu, had accepted huge payments from drug traffickers, but they acknowledged that they had too little evidence to be sure of the source of more than $ 10 million in bank accounts in his name.


Keeping Body and Soul Together in Chechnya


Old-Line Museum Shakes Off the Dust
For years after its founding in 1805, the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts was at the center of the art establishment in America.
It can count among its founders the painters Benjamin West and Charles Willson Peale and the gifted sculptor William Rush, and, among its alumni the painters Thomas Eakins, Thomas Anshutz, Robert Henri and Stuart Davis.
In 1908, the academy mounted an exhibition of the Realists known as the Eight, organized by Henri, after their paintings had been rejected by the National Academy of Art in New York.
And even as late as the mid-1960's, when the Pennsylvania Academy was relatively moribund, its annual exhibitions were routinely reviewed in tandem with those of the Whitney Museum of American Art.
At the moment, the academy may be edging toward the center again.
For one thing, the body -- or the figure, as academicians would say -- has been ubiquitous in much recent art, and even realist painting has more adherents among younger artists than it has had in some time.
So there's a chance that the academy can remain true to its founding principles and regain a contemporary relevance it has not enjoyed at least since the advent of Abstract Expressionism.
More important, the academy itself seems to be trying to raise its profile, celebrating its latest round of renovations with a large exhibition drawn from its idiosyncratic collection.


A Tale of National Pastimes Unfolds Down in Argentina
As he barbecued for his guests at his farm on Sunday, the smoke wafting from his pit like a succulent fog, Eduardo Crowder said he would not watch Argentina play the United States in soccer at the Pan American Games.
His hobby is sculpting.
What interest would he have in a sport where use of the hands is forbidden?
"You must be the only person in Argentina who doesn't like soccer," a visitor said to a round of laughter.


Political Memo; Variety of Motives in the Making of Endorsements
At a recent fund-raising gala in Dallas for his Presidential campaign, Senator Phil Gramm looked like the most-beloved Republican inside his home state of Texas and out.
He was surrounded by the Governor, senators, even Charlton Heston.
The hugs, the hearty slaps on the back, the "Mr. President" introductions were endless.
But all was not as it seemed.
Though many of those on stage genuinely want Mr.
Gramm to be the next President, others were tortured.


Graceful Or Gaudy?; As Towns Ban Signs, Merchants Fight Back
In recent months, the colorful and sometimes quirky windsocks and banners festooning the Victorian porch of Gary Rosenblatt's Chatham Florist shop here have stirred the deepest of passions.
"As a 40-year resident, I say it's about time this town saw some color!" one fan wrote on a petition declaring that Mr.
Rosenblatt's banners of leprechauns and crabs, firefighters and dinosaurs "enhance the beauty of Main Street." To which a couple from Union added: "We drive to Chatham just to see them!"


Clinton Rebuffs British Leader on I.R.A. Issue
Despite a personal request from Prime Minister John Major of Britain, President Clinton does not intend to put pressure on the political leader of the Irish Republican Army this week about dismantling the I.R.A.'s arsenal, Administration officials said today.
That American stance could add to tensions between Washington and London over Mr.
Clinton's decision to play host to Gerry Adams, the leader of Sinn Fein, the I.R.A.'s political wing, who will attend a St.
Patrick's Day reception at the White House on Friday.


Conoco's Deal In Iran Faces Board Hurdle
Three members of the Bronfman family who hold powerful positions on the board of E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company are expected to vote against a deal by the Conoco subsidiary of Du Pont to develop two large oilfields in Iran, making it unlikely that the project will be approved.
The Bronfmans are the top officers of the Seagram Company, which owns 24.2 percent of Du Pont.
They are Edgar M. Bronfman, co-chairman of Seagram; Charles R. Bronfman, co-chairman and chairman of the executive committee, and Edgar Bronfman Jr., president and chief executive, and they sit on the 16-member board of Du Pont, the chemical giant based in Wilmington, Del.
Though there are only three of them, the Bronfmans control 25 percent of the votes on the Du Pont board and exercise considerable influence over other board members.


Surprising Manhattan Carrying City's Banner
The green banners hanging from the rafters of Draddy Gymnasium, home of the Manhattan College Jaspers, mostly represent appearances in the National Invitation Tournament during an era when it was the elite post-season basketball party.
More than a few people would have thought any practice held on this court by the Jaspers yesterday afternoon would have been for another one of those green N.I.T. banners.
But in a stunning move by the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament selection committee on Sunday evening, Manhattan College received an at-large bid to the N.C.A.A. tournament.


Killing Poses Hard Questions About Talk TV
A new breed of television talk show, specializing in salacious subjects and emotional confrontations, has become so successful in drawing audiences that few producers of the programs, executives of the big corporations that own them, or advertisers that support them raise any questions about their content.
For a successful show, like the ones presided over by Jenny Jones or Ricki Lake, profits can reach $50 million to $60 million a year, comparable to what Jay Leno brings NBC with his "Tonight" show.
So, despite a murder in Michigan last week that the authorities have linked to an encounter at a taping of "The Jenny Jones Show," few industry executives expect any serious effort to tone down the broadcasts.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  MEXICAN PRESIDENT REFLECTS
In an interview, Ernesto Zedillo acknowledged that when he became Mexico's President, he did not fully understand the weaknesses of Mexico's economic strategy.
A1


In the Mets' Booth, A Time for Mockery
It was bad baseball, the inanity called the Mets-Indians game on Saturday.
Yet there were WWOR-TV/Channel 9's Tim McCarver, back from an African safari hunting the Wild Reinsdorf, Ralph Kiner and Gary Thorne calling a game the station should have hired replacement voices for.
Mel Blanc's son could have provided a crew of Tweety, Sylvester and Porky behind the mike.


Clinton to Tell Yeltsin That NATO Is Not Anti-Russian
Eager to reduce Russia's opposition to expanding NATO, President Clinton is planning to exchange letters with President Boris N. Yeltsin to assure him that NATO no longer is an anti-Russian alliance, senior Administration officials said today.
Administration officials said they were going out of their way to make Mr.
Yeltsin feel comfortable about the extension of NATO into Eastern Europe in hopes of easing tensions that have developed not only over NATO but also over Russia's offensive in the breakaway region of Chechnya and Moscow's plans to build nuclear reactors in Iran.


Met Plight: Stand-Ins In Need of Stand-Ins
The Mets have 20 errors in 9 games.
They have not won a game, had not hit a home run until the ninth inning today, and have a batting average that falls far short of .200.
They are the worst team in a spring training marked by bad replacement baseball.
Don't expect things to improve anytime soon.


Simpson Team Begins Sketching Its Case for a Police Conspiracy
A lawyer for O. J. Simpson set out to show today that a police detective was so incurably racist that he picked up one of two bloody gloves at the crime scene, rubbed it inside Mr.
Simpson's Bronco and then placed it behind Mr.
Simpson's house.
Court adjourned before the lawyer, F. Lee Bailey, could question Detective Mark Fuhrman about finding the glove, and Mr.
Bailey did not explicitly tell the jury that the detective planted it on Mr.
Simpson's estate.
But earlier, in a hearing before Judge Lance A. Ito, he said that Mr.
Fuhrman "is very definitely a suspect" in such misconduct.
"And that's what we intend to show with circumstantial evidence far stronger than the people will ever offer against O. J. Simpson for the murders," Mr.
Bailey stated.


Why Do We Watch Those Awards Shows?
To the Editor:
Re "Grumbling Gets Louder Over Voting on Grammys" (Arts pages, March 1): For a time it seemed as if every other night television was spawning another award show; it's noticeable that many have since disappeared, but evenings like the Grammys and Tonys evidently still fascinate people or they'd be history.


Carlo E. Grossi, 67, Professor of Surgery
Dr.
Carlo E. Grossi, a former director of surgery at La Guardia Hospital in Queens and a professor of surgery at New York Medical College, died on March 8 at New York University Medical Center.
He was 67 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Dr. Margaret T. Grossi.


No Headline
"I thought to myself: That's it, the end of apartheid." -- FIDEL CASTRO, in Paris.  [ A9:1. ]


ADT Ltd.(ADT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Woman Killed on C Train
An unidentified woman was stabbed to death yesterday on a southbound C train as it entered the 135th Street station in Manhattan, the transit police said.
Albert W. O'Leary, a police spokesman, said the woman was killed in the third car of the train at 6:16 P.M.


Of 2 Years And 10 Inches


Luby's Cafeterias (LUB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


New Today; An Expanded Business Day
The New York Times presents a redesigned and reconceived business section today.
For the first time since Business Day was created in 1978, the section has been expanded and given a more accessible look.
It will complement a new Sunday section, known as Money and Business, to be introduced this weekend.


Re-signing Riley Is Now Checketts's Permanent Concern
Dave Checketts, whose status changed yesterday from interim to permanent president of Madison Square Garden, said he had no firm timetable to extend the contract of Knicks Coach Pat Riley beyond next season.
"Pat knows I have great respect for him," Checketts said.
"A lot of negotiating has gone on. But we're in the stretch run now. We have to make a strong challenge. I want him back. I've made that very clear."


Modern Life Suppresses An Ancient Body Rhythm
AS the vernal equinox advances, and the sun lingers in the sky a bit longer each day, and the buds poke forth like babies' fists from every barren twig, even urbanites may feel the pagan craving to revel in seasonal rhythms.
After all, the lengthening of the day and the warming of the air exert a tremendous influence on virtually every other life form, inspiring migrations, ending hibernations, inciting growth and exciting lust.
Surely humans, too, must be prey to the power of the seasons, the return of light and the chastening of night.
Surely people's innate circadian clocks must react to the return of spring, resetting themselves to keep pace with the extra daytime hours.


Dow Industrials Drop 10.38 on Continued Decline of the Dollar
The Dow Jones industrial average dropped 10.38 points yesterday, to 4,025.23, after the dollar continued to fall on international currency markets.
Bond prices moved slightly higher.
But the fact that the stock market did not fall farther as traders sold stocks after the 52-point rally on Friday was taken as a positive sign by some analysts.


Greenspan Calls for a New Panel To Set Cost-of-Living Adjustments
Reiterating his belief that the Government's Consumer Price Index overstates inflation, the chairman of the Federal Reserve called today for an independent commission to set new cost-of-living adjustments for income taxes and benefit programs like Social Security that are pegged to the index.
Roughly 30 percent of all Federal spending is pegged to the Consumer Price Index and rises with it.
Personal income taxes account for 45 percent of Federal revenues and the brackets for them are also linked to the price index.


Win Some, Lose Some, But Jets Plan to Cope
The Jets have suffered a blow to their stature because of their inability to sign two important players, Jeff Lageman and Dwayne White.
Every National Football League team is losing players to free agency, even the San Francisco 49ers.
But the Jets are starting fresh (again), and their new order has had mixed success.
The hierarchy is nominally headed by General Manager Dick Steinberg.


Gingrich Looks to Victorian Age To Cure Today's Social Failings
Speaker Newt Gingrich suggested today that out-of-wedlock births and other scourges of society could be reduced by using moral leadership to shame the offenders.
Mr.
Gingrich said that in Victorian England, "they reduced the number of children born out of wedlock almost by 50 percent.


It's Time for the Charts


A Failed Plot to Overthrow Hussein Is Reported in Iraq
The head of Iraqi military intelligence during the Persian Gulf war tried but failed to overthrow President Saddam Hussein early this month, according to American intelligence reports.
Wafiq Samaraii, a retired major general who was relieved of his military intelligence post in a purge, apparently tried to mount a coup with Iraq's main opposition group and with help from the Kurds in the north and the Shiites in the south, the reports said.


Howard S. Meighan Dies at 88; Led in Using Videotape on TV
Howard S. Meighan, an executive of CBS Inc. who helped change the face of television by introducing the use of videotape, died on Wednesday at New York Hospital.
He was 88 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was cardiac arrest, his family said.


New York State G.O.P. Leaders Endorsing Dole
In an unusual show of unity orchestrated by Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, New York's Republican Party leaders, including Gov.
George E. Pataki, lined up behind Senator Bob Dole's Presidential campaign yesterday.
With one notable exception, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani of New York City, virtually every New York Republican officeholder of any significance, including every member of the State Senate majority, announced their support for Mr.
Dole yesterday.


Review/Fashion; From Young Designers, Familiar Echoes
As Sonja Nuttall's show, titled "Triste," drew to its somber conclusion, it was natural to wonder what devastating event had drawn the young designer to her dire fashion: black monastic clothes with only the model's head bringing color to the runway.
Vogue's fashion news director, Katherine Betts, surmised what it might have been.
"She went to a Comme des Garcons show," she said.
What the young talents here must overcome more than anything is the strength of their predecessors.
This is the first generation of designers to emerge in the wake of the ready-to-wear visionaries who trained many of them in their studios: single-minded creators like Yohji Yamamoto, Rei Kawakubo, Romeo Gigli and Issey Miyake.
Instead of fighting these overwhelming influences, London's young talent seems to be succumbing to them.


Antarctica May Offer Clues on Whether Life Ever Existed on Mars
IT has been nearly 19 years since two Viking spacecraft analyzed Martian soil and failed to find any evidence of past or present life.
But some biologists believe that at least fossil remnants of extinct life may yet be found on the red planet, and that Antarctica offers clues to where future Mars explorers should look.
Almost since the time of the two Viking missions in 1976, planetary scientists have focused attention on the region of Antarctica known as the dry valleys -- a network of glacial gorges and valleys transecting the Royal Society mountain range and leading to the west coast of the Ross Sea.
As a result of high winds that sweep away the snow and the mountain range that obstructs the downward flow of ice from the polar plateau, the valleys are almost bare of snow and ice.


POP
A Night for Celebrating Survival Through Hip-Hop  The Wu-Tang Clan and the Notorious B.I.G.
Beacon Theater
In New York City, the birthplace of hip-hop, big rap concerts are so rare that fans take what they can get, including disorganized productions and short sets.
On Friday night, the Wu-Tang Clan and the Notorious B.I.G. headlined the sold-out Beacon Theater; their sets lasted about 20 minutes each.
The show, including three other acts, started an hour late so that audience members could face metal detectors and frisking.


Evolution Of Humans May at Last Be Faltering
NATURAL evolutionary forces are losing much of their power to shape the human species, scientists say, and the realization is raising tantalizing questions about where humanity will go from here.
Is human evolution ending, ushering in a long maturity in which Homo sapiens persists pretty much unchanged?
Or will humankind, armed with the tools of molecular biology, seize control of its own evolution?


Not Guilty Plea in Carjacking
A handcuffed Earl Bethel, accused in the Friday carjacking in which a 65-year-old West Caldwell woman was wounded, pleaded not guilty yesterday to charges that include attempted murder, assault, weapons possession and robbery.
After the arraignment in Essex County Superior Court, Mr.
Bethel, 19, was returned to jail in lieu of $1 million bail.
If convicted on all counts, he could be sentenced to more than 80 years in prison.
A 17-year-old suspected accomplice faces Family Court action.


Norman Herzig, 82, Doctor and Adviser
Dr.
Norman Herzig, medical adviser to the Albert Schweitzer Institute for the Humanities and a former director of obstetrics and gynecology at Montefiore Medical Center and Morrisania and North Central Bronx hospitals, died on March 4 at Yale-New Haven Hospital.
He was 82 and moved to Hamden, Conn., from Manhattan six years ago.
The cause was heart disease, said his wife, Helen.


Bankers Trust Stock Plunges on Doubts About Outlook
The stock of Bankers Trust Company plunged 16 percent yesterday as both employees and outside analysts expressed growing doubts about the ability of the one-time industry leader to turn itself around quickly.
The drop in the stock, which fell $9.875 to close at $51.50, was far steeper than most analysts had expected, even after the bank's surprising disclosure Friday of large losses.
Problems in its derivatives business and with Latin American markets, the bank announced after the stock market closed, would would cause a loss of up to $125 million in the first quarter.


METRO DIGEST
SEX SHOPS FACE STRICT ZONING LIMITS
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the City Council agreed to a set of strict new zoning rules for X-rated video stores and topless bars that city officials say will drastically reduce the number and concentration of the establishments throughout New York City.
A1.
NEW YORK REPUBLICANS BACK DOLE
In an unusual show of unity orchestrated by Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, New York's Republican Party leaders, including Gov.
George E. Pataki, lined up behind Senator Bob Dole's Presidential campaign.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  SCHOOL WORKER CHARGED IN KICKBACKS
A former mid-level administrator at Board of Education headquarters was charged with pocketing $20,000 in kickbacks from a vendor of office supplies.
B3.
CONTRACTORS RESIST EXTORTION GROUPS
The phone calls come almost weekly -- death threats and extortion demands that are recorded on Tom Keller's answering machine.
Mr.
Keller is a contractor, and the calls come from groups that say they are seeking jobs for black and Hispanic workers.
The police call the groups criminal enterprises bent on strong-arming jobs or extorting payoffs at construction sites across the city.
B3.
INFORMER TESTIFIES ABOUT ATTACK PLANS
Emad Salem, the informer who secretly recorded the 11 men on trial for sedition in Federal District Court in Manhattan, testified that some of the defendants had planned in early 1992 to explode 12 bombs at once around the city, with Jewish leaders and institutions as their main targets.
B3.
HOSPITAL PATIENT DIES AFTER ACCIDENT
An 82-year-old patient died after he was jolted off a gurney when an elevator dropped between floors at a small city-operated hospital on the Lower East Side.
B3.
REGION  SETTLEMENT IN PRAYER ON BUS
The Jewish men wanted to sit together on the bus for prayers.
The Jewish woman didn't want to move.
Now, an out-of-court settlement of Talmudic subtlety has given each side something of what it wanted.
But as often happened with Talmudic adjudications, the parties have conflicting interpretations of the terms.
B4.
SCIENCE COMPETITION BRINGS HONORS
A Long Island high school student who invented a talking wallet for the blind was the highest-ranking of four New York area winners in the Westinghouse Science Talent Search.
They were among the top 10 scholarship recipients in what is considered the nation's most prestigious high school science competition.
B4.
PRESSURE BUILDS IN BUDGET BATTLE
On the airwaves, in the quiet of lawmakers' offices and in rowdy protests at the Capitol, the battle has begun over Governor Pataki's budget and the deep cuts that it would inflict.
B5.
BILL AIMS AT REPEAT VIOLENT OFFENDERS
The New Jersey Assembly passed a bill that would impose a life sentence without parole on anyone convicted of a third violent offense.
B5.
APARTMENTS, AND LIVES, TORN UP BY ROOTS
When she thinks hard, Marisol Rivera can recall Charter Oak Terrace as a sweet little village, with the brick houses still young and strong, children doing flips off the playground swings and barbecues on the front lawns.
"It was nice 30 years ago," Ms.
Rivera said, standing on a parking pad littered with broken beer bottles.
"It was different." Our Towns, B5.


Essex Just Wants to Get It Right
Essex County Executive James W. Treffinger was to introduce his 1995 budget tomorrow but county and state officials gave him an extension until next week.
The county faces a $161 million deficit, and Mr.
Treffinger hopes this year's budget can be $50 million less than last year's package, which started with a $508 million budget and was augmented by another $110 million in expenses and liabilities. (Maybe there is no danger in the delay; budget or no, the county has not shut down. Last year it operated on a temporary budget until August.)


Privacy Concerning Taxes? Maybe Not in Ohio
Most Americans trust that the Government will keep their tax returns private.
But an Ohio case shows otherwise, raising questions about just how vulnerable returns are to being seen by others, including members of the public.
In the case, a tangled payroll tax dispute between the Internal Revenue Service and an employment services company, the Government recently placed the names and incomes of 48 taxpayers on file in the Cleveland Federal courthouse.
And in an earlier stage of the dispute, the employment company, Jastech Inc. of Cleveland, was able to get the Government to hand over lightly edited copies of 30 returns filed by people it had placed in short-term jobs.


A Consultant on Being A Practicing Consultant
YOU are a consultant, or are considering becoming one.
Maybe the career choice came about as the result of a deliberate decision or, perhaps more likely, you were "down-sized" into becoming one.
At any rate, you need all the help you can get.
There is plenty of help in "Consulting Readyworks," a book-disk combination from the Round Lake Publishing Company of Ridgefield, Conn.


Mexico Without Blinkers
Even close watchers of Mexico have been shaken by the explosive allegations of narco-corruption and murderous intrigue being leveled against former Government officials by the new authorities in Mexico City.
Those allegations led former President Carlos Salinas de Gortari to flee Mexico over the weekend for a potentially extended exile in the United States.
This is not just the modest settling of scores after a high-profile administration leaves office.
President Ernesto Zedillo, who shattered precedent by naming an opposition lawyer to the sensitive post of Attorney General, has now authorized a far-reaching and unflinching inquiry into past misdeeds, mysteries and cover-ups.


Deadly Nuclear Waste Piles Up With No Clear Solution at Hand
INCREASINGLY, the world is awash in plutonium, the deadly gold of the nuclear era, the man-made element that is produced in all nuclear reactors and prized for making atom bombs.
And increasingly, no one knows what to do with it, as big nuclear arsenals become passe and as alternative plans for the perilously radioactive stuff lose their luster.
The simplest option is to bury it.
But that is now under fire as scientists debate, and Federal agencies study, whether a proposed underground dump in Nevada might eventually blow up in a nuclear explosion fed by waste plutonium.
For years the dump has been seen as a crucial solution to the plutonium problem, and its rejection would be an enormous blow to nuclear planning.


Springtime! Yes!
There's something about a sudden rush of warm weather that turns a Sunday into a playground, and a Monday into an excuse for a three-hour lunch.
Now that the sun is hanging around a little longer and the wind has lost its steel underpinning, half the city decided Sunday that spring was here.
The other half must surely have come to the same conclusion yesterday, when the temperature reached an almost summer-like 70-plus degrees in Central Park, and men doffed their jackets and women their coats.


G-I Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


An Official French Welcome for Castro


On My Mind; Plugging the Leak
Oh dear, what to do?
How can we get that Conoco company to cancel its billion-dollar deal to develop oilfields for Iran?
I know!
Appeal to patriotism.
Tell the Conoco people the deal worries the President and his Secretary of State sick, because it blows a huge hole in the containment policy.
Both say containment -- mostly of trade and arms -- is necessary to keep some rein on Iranian terrorism, militarism and its political and religious warfare against the United States.


Champion of Elitism: PBS's Best Defense?
PBS haters tend to go easy on children's programs, in acknowledgment that commercial television, with a few exceptions, does little for minors except excite them to badger their parents for the latest toys.
It would take a market-intoxicated critic to assert that the networks and cable channels were likely to pay the sort of respectful and sustained attention to the young evidenced for so many years by the Children's Television Workshop.
Sure, one good book may be worth 100 episodes of "Sesame Street" or 1,000 episodes of "Barney," but if more youngsters were reading books we could stop worrying about television.


Judicial Panel Is Advised on Cisneros Case
In sealed legal papers, Attorney General Janet Reno advised a special judicial panel today on whether an independent prosecutor should investigate Housing Secretary Henry G. Cisneros about his statements to Federal agents concerning payments he made to his former mistress.
Lawyers following the case said tonight that Ms.
Reno leaned strongly in favor of the appointment of an outside prosecutor after hours of agonized deliberations.
But Justice Department officials would not confirm that she had formally asked the judicial panel for an appointment.


Duty Free Intl.(DFI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Trade Center Defendants Plotted to Bomb 12 Jewish Targets, Informer Says
Emad Salem, the informer who secretly recorded the 11 men on trial for sedition in Federal District Court in Manhattan, testified yesterday that some of the defendants had planned in early 1992 to explode 12 bombs at once around the city, with Jewish leaders and institutions as their main targets.
On the stand for a third day, Mr.
Salem continued to round out his portrait of what the prosecution has described as a ring of terrorists who intended to blow up New York City landmarks to protest American foreign policy in the Middle East.


Buffett Takes a Big Write-Down on USAir Preferred Stock
After months of warnings, Warren E. Buffett, the nation's most famous investor, made it clear today that his legendary patience had been worn down by the USAir Group's inability to reach agreements with its pilots and other unions to slash operating costs.
Mr.
Buffett said Berkshire Hathaway Inc., the investment company he controls, had written down the value of the USAir preferred stock it bought in 1989 for $358 million to just $89.5 million.
He also announced that he and Charles T. Munger, Berkshire's vice chairman, would give up their seats on USAir's board at the troubled airline company's annual meeting this summer.


A Debut Ends the Tour Of Bordeaux's Ballet
Ballet-Theatre de Bordeaux is a company in transition.
The French troupe made its New York debut on Sunday afternoon as an attraction of the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts at Brooklyn College.
It was the last stop on a nationwide tour that began in January, and when these attractive dancers return home they will be working with a new director.


A Good Year For I.B.M.; A Great Year For Its Chief
I.B.M. had a relatively good year in 1994, fighting its way back into the black after a momentous downturn in the early 1990's.
But its chairman and chief executive, Louis V. Gerstner, and his fellow executives had an even better year.
Mr.
Gerstner earned $4.6 million in salary and bonus for his efforts and received additional stock options that would be worth more than $4.9 million if they were exercised today, according to the company's proxy statement.
In addition, the International Business Machines Corporation awarded Mr.
Gerstner about $7.7 million as part of an agreement to pay him a guaranteed price for 3.2 million shares of stock in RJR Nabisco, the company he left in 1993 to join I.B.M.


Actava Group (ACT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


On the Air to Battle Pataki's Plan
ORGANIZATION The Emergency Coalition to Save New York's Health Care, a group including Local 1199 of the National Health and Human Service Employees Union, the Greater New York Hospital Association, the New York AIDS Coalition and several other groups against Gov.
George E. Pataki's health care cuts  PRODUCER Fingerhut, Powers, Smith &amp; Associates, Washington


Small Jets Need Boot To Clear Wing Ice
To the Editor:
Re Eli Graubart's contention (letter, March 7) that the ATR's design is inadequate because it does not include a heated wing surface to prevent icing: Unlike large jets, turboprop engines do not generate sufficient heat to serve as a de-icing mechanism.
The ATR -- like all other turboprop and piston-engine aircraft -- employs the highly reliable inflatable rubber boot to clear ice from the wing's leading edge.


Apartments, and Lives, And an Unsure Future
WHEN she thinks hard, Marisol Rivera can recall Charter Oak Terrace as a sweet little village, with the brick houses still young and strong, children doing flips off the playground swings, family barbecues on the front lawns.
"It was nice 30 years ago," Ms.
Rivera said, standing on a parking pad littered with broken beer bottles.
"It was different."


Long-Distance Telephone Calls Are Coming Soon to the Internet
Motorola Inc. said yesterday that it would begin including software with some of its modems that will let computer users make long-distance telephone calls through the Internet.
The software, produced by Vocaltec of Northvale, N.J., would allow calls all over the world for the cost of a local call and the fee of a service that connects the user to the Internet, the web of computer networks.


Washington Newly Aloof to Its Ex-Hero
Last year the Clinton Administration was -- publicly at least -- calling Carlos Salinas de Gortari a hero of democratization and free markets.
He was its candidate for the one of the most powerful posts of the new economic age, director of the World Trade Organization.
Today, in a measure of how quickly the former Mexican President's star has fallen, the White House was scrambling to find out if Mr.
Salinas was really seeking to take up residence in the United States and through much of the day professed not to know where he was.
Administration officials said they had not struck any kind of deal to give him sanctuary, but expressed hope that Mr.
Salinas's departure from Mexico would help the chances of repairing the economic damage for which he has been partly blamed.


Saatchi to Acquire Laing Henry Agency
The Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company P.L.C. said yesterday that it would acquire Laing Henry Ltd., a small agency in London, and would install Jennifer Laing, chairwoman and chief executive of that shop, as chairwoman of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi's flagship British agency.
Ms.
Laing, 46, whose appointment is effective March 31, will be paid $274,313 a year.
She succeeds David Kershaw, former chairman and chief executive of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising U.K. in London, who resigned on Jan. 9 in response to the ouster of Maurice Saatchi as chairman of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi.
Adam Crozier and Tamara Ingram will continue as joint chief executives of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising U.K.


To Our Readers
Today is the beginning of a new chapter in business coverage in The New York Times.
Starting with this issue, we offer readers an expanded news and analytical report on the world of business.
To do the job, The Times has added strength to its reporting and editing team.
It has redesigned the pages of Business Day.
And this weekend it will bring a new focus and depth to the Sunday business section.
These changes reflect The Times's commitment to sophisticated coverage of the plays and players in the business and economic worlds and their impact on each reader's personal financial situation.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A new ranking of the '50 best' television commercials ever made.
IF there is something that Madison Avenue welcomes more than a big advertiser embarking on a search for a shop, it is an opportunity to debate the merits of the work that agencies have created through the decades.
So, a list of the "50 best" commercials since television began will stir passionate discussion.
The list was compiled by the editors of the trade publication Advertising Age, for a special spring issue commemorating 50 years of television advertising.
It also serves as the focus of an hourlong special program, "The Greatest Commercials Ever Made," which CBS will broadcast tomorrow at 9 P.M., Eastern and Pacific times.


Deadly Rainstorms in California Likely to Be Most Expensive Ever
One of the most disastrous storm systems to hit California this century continued over a broad front today, causing tens of millions of dollars more in damage to roads, homes and businesses, and ruining crops in some of the nation's richest farmland.
At least 12 people have died or are missing as a result of the series of winter storms that began sweeping off the Pacific last week and have drenched the region almost relentlessly since then.
More rain is expected in the next few days, and disaster officials warned that rivers in the region could remain above flood levels for a week or more.


N.C.A.A. Tournament Guests Run Into Trouble
Normally, the drill is simple.
The roll call for the national collegiate basketball tournament is made on Sunday night, and attendance is not an issue.
But no one is describing this season as anything close to normal, and as 64 teams plot their logistical plans and their strategic approaches in the hope of playing one more time, questions lingered about three significant participants.
University of Arizona officials are hoping to learn today whether Damon Stoudamire, a finalist for national player of the year, and Ben Davis will have their eligibility restored by the National Collegiate Athletic Association.


L.I. Youth Among Winners In National Science Contest
A Long Island high school student who invented a talking wallet for blind people was the highest-ranking of the four New York area winners in the Westinghouse Science Talent Search, contest sponsors announced today.
The 4 were among the top 10 scholarship recipients in what is considered the nation's most prestigious high school science competition.
A teen-ager from San Diego, Irene Ann Chen, 17, won first place for her study of lymphoma, a type of cancer.
Irene is first in her class of 300 at La Jolla High School.
She plans to attend Harvard and is also an accomplished pianist.


Patterns
High-Intensity Preparations
Fashion's return to glamour, with its inherent attention to detail, has made the work of designers and their menage of models, pattern makers, sewers and the like especially arduous.
But nowhere was the intensity as high as it was at the studios of Thierry Mugler and John Galliano, high priests of glamour.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Bullets Upset Hornets  Gheorghe Muresan scored the go-ahead basket with 24 seconds left and the visiting Washington Bullets overcame a 19-point second-half deficit to post a 106-103 victory last night over the Charlotte Hornets.
Juwan Howard led the Bullets with 18 points, while Alonzo Mourning had 32 points for the Hornets, leaders in the Central Division. (AP)


Talks Off as N.L.R.B. Summons Parties
First, they disagreed about which day they would meet.
Now they're not sure they will meet at all.
The round of talks in the baseball strike that had been scheduled to begin Tuesday or Wednesday was delayed today in the face of a scheduled meeting in Washington Tuesday at which the owners are expected to learn that the National Labor Relations Board will issue a complaint against them.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
An Oboist Does Bach And Works Based on Bach  Peggy Pearson, oboist 92d Street Y
Peggy Pearson came up with an uncommonly good programming idea for her concert of oboe music on Sunday evening.
The music of Bach, which is as lilting as oboe music gets, was the central focus.
It was, in a way, the periphery as well: Ms.
Pearson had John Harbison, Martin Brody and Elizabeth Brown compose new works for her that used Bach chorales as themes.


Keep What Works In Mental Health Care
To the Editor:
Re "Psychiatry Doesn't Help Mental Health Cause" (letter, March 9): Peter R. Breggin, M.D., is right to point out the limits of a purely biological approach to psychiatric care (that is, medication), which assumes that the successful treatment of mental illness begins and ends with pills and injections.


Answers to Questions Best Left Unasked
"What day is it? What time is it? What are you reading?" one character asks another in Horton Foote's "Laura Dennis," which has been given its world premiere by the Signature Theater Company at the Kampo Cultural Center.
The speaker here, as it happens, is drunk.
But nearly everyone in this bleakly comic drama has a tendency to pour out questions with the doggedness of a fretful 2-year-old.


Assembly Passes Bill Against Repeat Violent Offenders
The New Jersey Assembly passed a bill today that would impose a life sentence without parole on anyone convicted of a third violent offense.
The bill was sent to Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman on a 64-to-4 vote, although the Governor has raised questions about its costs and Democrats have argued that it will not reduce crime.


Securities Fraud Bill Doesn't Go Far Enough; The Litigation Jungle
To the Editor:
Your lead editorials of Feb. 21 and March 8 on litigation reform suggest that you seem not to be well aware of what is going on out there.


Securities Fraud Bill Doesn't Go Far Enough
To the Editor:
Passage by the House of Representatives of the securities litigation reform bill prompts cheer and dismay (front page, March 9).


Pavarotti and Anderson in an Off-Hours Concert
Usually dark on Sundays, the Metropolitan Opera House was as brightly lit as ever two nights ago.
The Met orchestra and chorus crowded this big stage; elegant tables were set in the foyers upstairs, and Luciano Pavarotti, June Anderson and James Levine were there for a long and interesting concert to benefit the company's pension fund.
Mr.
Pavarotti, the picture of tenorial exuberance, made a strange partner for the hard-hitting Ms.
Anderson.
The tenor's smothering embraces and random smooches during and between duet numbers made the American diva noticeably uncomfortable, if not downright embarrassed.
It would also have been interesting to take Ms.
Anderson's temperature as Mr.
Pavarotti stood behind her and mugged during the soprano solos of their "Traviata" encore.


Elderly Hospital Patient Dies After Elevator Accident
An 82-year-old patient died yesterday after he was jolted off a gurney when an elevator dropped between floors at a small city-operated hospital on the Lower East Side.
The patient, identified as Hsou Chuen Lee, was taken by ambulance from the Gouverneur Skilled Nursing Facility, Diagnostic and Treatment Center to New York Downtown Hospital, where he was pronounced dead.


Butler Intl.(BUTL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Novacek Signed by Cowboys
TROY AIKMAN, though he lost his deep threat when ALVIN HARPER left, kept his third-down go-to guy in tight end JAY NOVACEK.
A $1.8 million signing bonus clinched a deal for Novacek as he agreed to a three-year, $4.8 million contract with the Dallas Cowboys late Sunday, countering a strong bid from Green Bay.
The Cowboys needed to keep Novacek after they lost Harper, the starting wide receiver, to Tampa Bay and center MARK STEPNOSKI to the Houston Oilers.
"This was a big priority for us," said Coach BARRY SWITZER.
"Jay's the only tight end Troy has ever thrown to. When it's third-and-medium, it's critical to have Jay. He makes it happen."


Castro Given Big Welcome By Mitterrand
In a slap at American policy toward Cuba, President Francois Mitterrand welcomed President Fidel Castro to Paris today for a three-day private stay that has most of the hallmarks of a state visit.
Mr.
Mitterrand, who has often described the United States blockade of Cuba as "stupid," welcomed Mr.
Castro to Elysee Palace with military honors and a formal lunch.


G.O.P. Freshman Quickly Makes History
As if the House Republicans have not shaken up the Capitol enough already, one is now pregnant and planning to maintain the frenetic pace of the Capitol's newcomers before and after her baby's scheduled delivery in September.
Representative Enid Greene Waldholtz of Utah is the first pregnant Republican to serve in the Congress, her office says.
A Democratic Representative, Yvonne Brathwaite Burke of California, was the first woman to have a baby while in Congress.
She gave birth to a daughter a year after her election in 1972.
In this, as in other matters, the Senate lags behind the House; it has yet to record its first pregnancy.


Labor Moves to Take British Center
Leading the Labor Party through what he called a "defining moment" in its history, Tony Blair scored a significant victory today as the party leadership voted to drop a 77-year-old commitment to "common ownership of the means of production, distribution and exchange."
The rewriting of the party's charter -- with its implicit abandonment of socialist high doctrine and its explicit embrace of free market pragmatism -- is intended to reposition Britain's perennial opposition into the political mainstream.


Keeping Track of Time


Winners of Wireless Auction to Pay $7 Billion
The Federal Government completed the biggest auction in history today, selling part of the nation's airwaves for $7 billion to a handful of giant companies that plan to blanket the nation with new wireless communications networks for telephones and computers.
SC.1Lasting more than three months and 112 separate rounds, the auction marked the most ambitious attempt so far by the Government to sell the kinds of radio licenses that were once given away.


Compuserve to Buy Spry, an Internet Company
H &amp; R Block Inc. said yesterday that its Compuserve on-line service would buy Spry Inc., a leading provider of software that allows access to the global Internet computer network, for about $100 million in shares and cash.
The deal is the largest acquisition yet in the Internet business.


Market Place; The Dial Corporation's markets and management prove popular.
JOHN W. TEETS, chief executive of the Dial Corporation, visited Wall Street analysts early this month to discuss his multimarket company.
And after the meeting, many analysts are continuing to rate the company, which is based in Phoenix, a buy.
"In each of the areas the company is in, it is a leader," said Carol Neves of Merrill Lynch.
"It couldn't have gotten this far if it didn't have good management."


Robert Hershman, TV Producer, 41
Robert Hershman, a producer of documentaries for CBS News, died at his home in Santa Monica, Calif., on Sunday.
Mr.
Hershman, who lived in Manhattan until recently, was 41.
The cause of death was AIDS, said Gary Barton, his companion.


Pressure On All Sides In the Battle Of the Budget
On the airwaves, in the quiet of lawmakers' offices and in rowdy protests in the halls of the Capitol, the battle has been joined over Gov.
George E. Pataki's budget and the deep cuts that it would inflict.
With 19 days until the start of a new fiscal year, when Mr.
Pataki says he will virtually shut down the state government if the Legislature has not passed a budget, all sides are feeling the pressure.


Chess
The winner of the Pan-Pacific International Tournament in San Francisco was the oldest, boldest, hardest-fighting player in the round-robin event: Viktor Korchnoi, age 63.
The former Soviet grandmaster, now a Swiss, is one of the super class who have repeatedly challenged for the world championship.
Scoring 8-3 in a field of 12, Korchnoi was trailed by Boris Gulko, a Fair Lawn, N.J., grandmaster, and John Nunn, an English grandmaster, sharing second place.
Each scored 7 1/2-3 1/2 in the tourney, sponsored by Mindscape, maker of the computer program Chessmaster 4000, and by the Mechanics Institute, one of the oldest chess clubs in America.
FINAL STANDINGS  Player . . .
Pts.
Korchnoi . . . 8 Gulko . . . 7 1/2 Nunn . . . 7 1/2 De Firmian . . . 6 1/2 Hubner . . . 6 Christiansen . . . 5 1/2 Xie . . . 5 1/2 Browne . . . 5 Waitzkin . . . 4 Polgar, Z. . . . 3 1/2 Tisdall . . . 3 1/2 Ashley . . . 3 1/2
Korchnoi's daring, pugnacious play was nowhere so evident as in his defiant victory over the German grandmaster Robert Hubner in Round 5 on Feb. 26.
One virtue of 4 e5 in the Classical French Defense is that it avoids the reduction of material that can arise from 4 Bg5 de 5 Ne4 Be7.
Over a century ago, Wilhelm Steinitz favored it because it pressed for spatial superiority in the center.
The main question is how well it can put down black counterattacks.
On 4 . . .
Nfd7, the old attempt to erect an imposing center with 5 Nce2 c5 6 c3 Nc6 7 f4 b5 8 a3 cd 9 Nd4 Nd4 10 cd has reappeared again; it is not clear whether White's lead in endgame development after 10 . . . b4 11 Nf3 ba 12 ba Ba6 13 Ba6 Qa5 14 Bd2 Qa6 15 Qe2 Qe2 16 Ke2 should amount to anything serious.
Steinitz preferred a more modest center with 5 f4 c5 6 Nf3 Nc6 7 Be3, the plan that Hubner follows in this game.
In an encounter last year in Amsterdam, Jan Timman returned to the violent 7 . . .
Qb6 8 Na4 Qa5 9 c3 cd 10 b4 Nb4 11 cb Bb4 12 Bd2 Bd2 13 Nd2 g5 14 Rb1 gf, but with 15 Bb5 Rb8 16 Nc5 Qc3 17 Nd3, Nigel Short got decisive advantage for White.
Korchnoi's order of moves, 7 . . . cd 8 Nd4 Qb6, produces a considerable change.
Now, 9 a3 Bc5 10 Na4 Qa5 11 c3 Bd4 12 Bd4 Nd4 13 Qd4 b6 14 Qb4 Qb4 15 ab Ke7 gives White nothing more than an even game.
And the gambit with 9 Qd2 Qb2 10 Rb1 Qa3 11 Bb5 Nd4 12 Bd4 Bb4 13 O-O a6 14 Rb3 Qa5 15 Rfb1 Be7 yields Black positional advantage after 16 Bd7 Bd7 17 Rb7 Rc8 18 Kh1 Bc5 19 Bc5 Rc5 20 Rb8 Bc8, according to an analysis by Jorge Magem Badals in Informant 61.
So Hubner reverted to the sharp 9 Ncb5, which John Nunn introduced in 1988, but Korchnoi unflinchingly came up with the innovation 9 . . . a6!, in place of the weak 9 . . .
Bc5 or 9 . . .
Qa5.
Hubner could not retreat without losing his b2 pawn and therefore came on with 10 Nf5.
And once again, Korchnoi stood his ground with 10 . . .
Bc5!
He did not mind having his king jolted by 11 Bc5 Nc5 12 Nbd6 Kf8 and he resisted 13 Qh5 by 13 . . .
Nd8.
A retreat with 14 Nd4 would have failed against 14 . . .
Qb4! 15 c3 Qb2 16 Rd1 Qc3 17 Kf2 Bd7 18 Be2 Ba4.
Thus, Hubner tried 14 Ng7, hoping for 14 . . .
Kg7 15 Qg5 Kf8 16 Qh6 Kg8 17 Ne8, forcing mate.
But Korchnoi struck first with 14 . . .
Qb4! 15 c3 Qb2 16 Rd1 (16 Qh6 Qa1 17 Ke2 Ke7 18 Qf6 Kd7 also fails to rescue White) Qc3 17 Rd2 h6!
There was no use playing 18 Qh4 because 17 . . .
Kg7 18 Qf6 Kh7 19 Nf7 would be crushingly rebuffed by 19 . . .
Qd2! 20 Kd2 Ne4!
After 18 Nge8 Ne4!, Korchnoi's easiest winning procedure would probably be 19 Qe2 Ke7 20 Nc8 (20 Ne4? de 21 Nd6 e3 is even worse) Rc8 21 Nd6 Nd6 22 ed Kd6 with two pawns to the good.
Hubner gave up.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.94
5.90
3.30
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.76
5.75
3.57
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.92
5.91
3.85
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.17
7.21
6.51
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.45
7.46
6.95
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.32
8.35
7.78
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.41
6.42
6.05
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Norma F. Furst, 64, University President
Norma Fields Furst, the president of Baltimore Hebrew University for the last three years, died on March 7 at her home in Wynnewood, Pa.
She was 64.
The cause was lung cancer, her family said.


Sandbags Save Little
Californians recovering from a January flood now find themselves battling a larger one.
On Oliver Street in Carmel, volunteers built a sandbag barrier and thought they had the upper hand but turned to see the waters sweep into their houses.
Article, page A9.


PROPOSAL MADE ON GRACE BOARD
The College Retirement Equities Fund, a big institutional shareholder of W. R. Grace &amp; Company, has submitted a proposal to limit the age of the company's directors, a Grace spokeswoman said yesterday.
The proposed amendment to the company's bylaws, received by W. R. Grace late on Friday, was made after meetings in New York last week with Thomas A. Holmes, Grace's interim president and chief executive, and other company executives.
The proposal would prevent directors from sitting on the Grace board past the age of 70.
The fund and other big shareholders had sought the Friday meeting to discuss the abrupt resignation on March 2 of J. P. Bolduc.
Mr.
Bolduc, who is 55, remains a director.
The average age of the 22-member board is slightly younger than 70.
The terms of eight directors expire in May.
Six of those eight are 70 or older.
In a statement issued late yesterday, Mr.
Holmes said the company would meet with institutional shareholders to discuss the proposed change.


Mexico's New Leader Finds Job Full of Painful Surprises
Ernesto Zedillo did not expect the presidency of Mexico to be "pleasant," he said today.
Nor, he acknowledged, did he fully understand the weaknesses of Mexico's economic strategy, the depth of the demands for reform, or what it might mean to be the first developing country to fall precipitously out of favor with the world financial markets.
"I thought it was going to be rough," Mr.
Zedillo said.
"But I must be honest -- I never expected anything as complex as what we have lived through over these last three months."


COMPANY BRIEFS
BAYER, Leverkusen, Germany, a chemical and pharmaceutical company, agreed to acquire Florasynth Inc., Teterboro, N.J., a maker of food flavorings and scents for perfumes and toiletries, for an undisclosed price.
BOLT BERANEK &amp; NEWMAN INC., Cambridge, Mass., reached a final agreement to acquire the Southeastern Universities Research Association's Suranet service, owned by 41 universities, which provides access to the Internet.
A preliminary agreement for the purchase was announced in December.
Terms were not disclosed.


Special Election for 5 Seats
Polls will be open from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M. today in five special elections to fill vacant seats in the New York State Senate and Assembly.
In the 68th Assembly District, in Manhattan, William Del Toro, Francisco Diaz Jr. and Nelson Antonio Denis are the candidates to succeed Mr.
Del Toro's brother, Angelo, who died in December.


Vermont Sticks to Its Rules
In the spring of 1992, A and T Bus Company of Hoboken lost its license to operate in Vermont for failing to pay for a permit required of out-of-state buses.
This event was little noticed by the outside world, perhaps because the presidential campaign was under way.
On Sunday afternoon, the license problem suddenly became very important (and infuriating) to 45 New Jerseyans who were on their way home after a skiing weekend.
A conscientious police officer ran a routine check on the bus's license plate and discovered the suspension.
The officer pulled the bus over near Rutland.
The passengers waited nearly two hours for a Vermont bus to take them home.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about the Long Island Rail Road's purchase of double-decker coaches referred incorrectly to the places where such coaches are now used.
Besides Chicago, they indeed include the East Coast -- in Boston and Miami.


Sapp, Potential No. 1 Draft Pick, Fails Drug Tests
University of Miami defensive lineman Warren Sapp, the potential No. 1 pick in next month's National Football League draft, and his teammate, running back James Stewart, also a potential first-round pick, both failed drug tests at the N.F.L. scouting combine in February, according to several club executives and people in the league.
According to people who were notified in writing by the league about the test results, Sapp failed both cocaine and marijuana tests.
Stewart, they said, failed only the marijuana test.
At the combine, a showcase of college players in front of N.F.L. talent evaluators, players are tested for cocaine, marijuana, steroids and alcohol.


CHRONICLE
Common Cause, the 250,000-member national organization that works to make government more accountable, has a new president and chief executive, and she's no stranger: ANN McBRIDE, who joined the group in 1972 as a volunteer.
Ms.
McBride, 50, had been the group's senior vice president since 1984.
She was elected on Saturday by the 60-member governing board and took office yesterday.
She succeeds Fred Wertheimer, who announced his resignation in October after serving for 14 years.


Sampras Takes Pleasure in Showing Agassi Who Is King of Court
It was a shadowy court, but an inspired Pete Sampras put on such a luminous display of tennis upon it today that his frazzled opponent, Andre Agassi, was left in the dark to play an increasingly desperate game of catch-up in their straight-set sundown final at the Newsweek Champions Cup.
When Agassi couldn't close the gap, Sampras took advantage to create a larger gap in their respective positions as the world's top two players.


Californians Try to Cope With the Latest Deluge
As the men of Oliver Street sweated to build a sandbag barrier to the north, the Carmel River swept around behind them, filling their houses with mud and slop, and chasing them to higher ground.
Flood waters, these men have learned, have a mind of their own.
Steve Adams, a communications consultant, said that moments after he stood up from his labors at midday Sunday and exclaimed, "We've licked it!" he turned to see the river inundate the only home he ever owned.


Knicks Paying the Price for Losing Twice
After a grueling, three-hour practice today, the Knicks were dragging their feet even more than they had in back-to-back losses to Atlanta and Seattle over the weekend.
"I needed an extra pair of socks today because my feet were on fire," said John Starks.


INSIDE
Opposition to Iranian Deal
Three members of the Bronfman family who hold powerful positions on the Du Pont board are expected to vote against its Conoco subsidiary's Iranian oil deal.
Page D1.
Welfare Rolls Decrease
After rising through good and bad economic times over the last six years, the welfare and food stamps lists are decreasing.
Page A18.
Hint: See Above
The Times has reached the journalistic equivalent of a car odometer's rolling over, and it has taken a mere 143 years and 177 days.
Page B1.


Istanbul Journal; A Prophet Tests the Honor of His Own Country
In physical stature Yasar Kemal, Turkey's best-known and best-loved novelist, is decidedly Hemingwayesque -- a big, barrel-chested man who looks as if he's ready to wrestle with the devil.
And that, a lot of people feel, is exactly what he's doing.
Mr.
Kemal, 71 or thereabouts -- such things are a bit vague in the wild mountains near Adana where he was born -- is facing the wrath of the avenging state.


Q&amp;A
Wayward Hair
Q.  Why does humidity make some hair curly and some hair straight?


Full-Employment Republicans
The mighty movement for term limits has hit a wall of Republican opposition.
Even hand-picked Gingrich loyalists in the Republican leadership are against it.
The I-like-my-job Republicans point out that their Contract With America merely promised to bring term limits to a vote within the first 100 days.
They never actually said they would pass it.
It is amusing now to see the Republicans trying to hold onto their jobs by resorting to the kind of politics-as-usual hair-splitting perfected by the Democrats.
But amusement at their petty chicanery is tempered by awareness that the G.O.P. holdouts are right on principle.
Term limits are a bad idea that weaken representative government.


Arraignment in Club Stampede
The owner of the nightclub where four people were killed in a stairwell stampede on Dec. 3 was arraigned on manslaughter charges yesterday, and a not-guilty plea was entered on his behalf by his lawyer.
Fernando Bravo of Sayreville faces four counts of manslaughter in the deaths at the El Balcon club.


First Hearing In Court Test On Gay Rules
In the first legal test of the Pentagon's new policy on homosexuals, lawyers for six gay service members argued today in Federal District Court that the rules discriminate against gay men and lesbians to accommodate the fears and prejudices of heterosexual troops.
But Government lawyers said the new regulations, often described as "don't ask, don't tell, don't pursue," were necessary to preserve order and discipline in the ranks.
Moreover, the Government argued that the courts should defer to the judgment of military commanders and Congress in establishing rules of conduct for the armed forces.


Sports of The Times; Answering The Bells, Finally
EVER since the hard noses of Andy Robustelli and Sam Huff prompted Giants fans to chant "de-fense, de-fense" at Yankee Stadium, that word has been part of every sport's vocabulary, particularly pro football.
Now the word "defenseless" has finally been heard.
Whenever a pro football player, often a quarterback, wobbled to his feet after having been flattened, the unmedical diagnosis was that "he got his bell rung." Hearing that phrase, people usually reacted with a smile or a laugh.
Getting your "bell rung" sounded funny.


Real Yankees Almost Meet Replacements
A handful of replacement players in Yankee uniforms took batting practice at the sprawling minor league facilities here this morning, then departed shortly before two real members of the Yankees arrived in grunge gear to work out.
No, Pat Kelly and Jim Leyritz did not bump into John DiGirolamo or Kevin Riggs in the parking lot.


School Aide Is Charged In Kickbacks
A former mid-level administrator at Board of Education headquarters was charged yesterday with embezzling $20,000 in kickbacks from a vendor of office supplies.
The administrator, Sandra Orter, received most of the kickbacks for ordering more than $40,000 in supplies, which the Board of Education paid for but which were never delivered, investigators said.
The investigators, for the New York City school system, said the administrator and vendor had succeeded with the phantom-purchase scheme because of inadequate supervision in the supply-purchase system.


Croatia's Serbs Balk at a New U.N. Role
The latest step toward peace in the Balkans faltered today when the Croatian Serbs rejected any change in the role of United Nations peacekeepers in the country.
Just a day earlier, Croatia's President said he would allow peacekeepers to remain, but only if they expanded their mandate.
In exchange for allowing the forces to stay past a March 31 deadline, President Franjo Tudjman demanded that they expand their role to include patrolling borders, in order to stop the flow of arms to the Serbs.
In the last couple of days there has been a considerable movement of tanks into eastern Croatia, from Serbia, a senior diplomat said today.
He said he thought the Serbs might have been acting in advance of the new plan for the peacekeepers.


World News Briefs; Christopher Begins Talk About Golan With Assad
Secretary of State Warren Christopher today began discussing the details of security arrangements for the Israeli-occupied Golan Heights with Syria's President, Hafez al-Assad, in an effort to restart direct negotiations between the two countries.
Mr.
Christopher and Mr.
Assad focused in their five-hour meeting on possible security arrangements that would be installed if Israel withdrew from the strategic Golan Heights.


Clinton and Gingrich Speak Louder on Action
Bill Clinton and Newt Gingrich agree on what they want: action.
It's just that they are so far apart on what to do.
"The veto is a useful device and an important thing on occasion, but what the country really needs is action," President Clinton told the National League of Cities meeting here today.
He had just outlined objections to Republican plans to cut some of his favorite programs, like national service, Head Start, school lunches and drug education.


Naming Interim Chief, Alcatel Defends Indicted Chairman
Alcatel Alsthom, the French telecommunications, energy and transportation giant, whose chairman and chief executive was indicted last Friday, said today that a top company executive had been named to oversee its management and executive committee.
The executive is Francois de Laage de Meux, Alcatel's director general, effectively its chief operating officer.


Seifert Gets 2-Year Pact At Salary Second to Shula
GEORGE SEIFERT, who directed the San Francisco 49ers to the Super Bowl championship, yesterday was given a two-year contract extension that will keep him with the team through the 1997 season at an average of $1.4 million.
Seifert, who also won the Super Bowl in 1989, his first year as BILL WALSH's successor, has a record of 85-23 in six seasons and a winning percentage of .801 that's by far the best in National Football League history for a coach who has coached more than 100 games.
The contract makes him the second-highest-paid coach in history behind Don Shula, who makes between $1.5 million and $1.6 million.
Despite five trips to the National Conference title game in his six seasons and his Super Bowl victories, Seifert was thought during the season to be in trouble if he didn't get by Dallas, which San Francisco did, 38-28, in the N.F.C. championship game.


The Yad Vashem Photos
To the Editor:
The nudity in photos depicting victims of Nazi atrocities should never be permitted to become another political issue dividing secular and orthodox Israelis and Jews elsewhere (Jerusalem Journal, March 7).


Students Must Know Guns Are Not Tolerated
To the Editor:
I would like to state my strong support for the proposal by Ramon C. Cortines, New York City Schools Chancellor, to remove students carrying guns from their regular schools for one year (news article, March 8).


Two Genes Identified In Heart Malfunction
Researchers at the University of Utah have discovered two genes that cause a rare inherited disorder that can foul the heart's electrical system and kill young and otherwise healthy people.
The disorder, known as long QT syndrome, can cause seizures or rapid loss of consciousness.
Often the first sign of a problem is a fatal sudden chaotic rhythm in the ventricular side of the heart, said Dr.
Mark T. Keating, who directed the research at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute on the university's Salt Lake City campus.
The findings are reported in the current issue of the journal Cell.


Castle (A.M.) &amp; Co. (CAS,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $40 million of debentures due in 1998 through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
The debentures are noncallable, carry an interest rate of 6.98 percent and are priced at par. *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $33 million of notes due in 2000 through Chase Securities Inc.
The notes, which are noncallable, carry an interest rate of 7.13 percent and are priced at par. *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $31.5 million of notes due in 1997 through Smith Barney Inc.
The notes are noncallable, carry an interest rate of 6.85 percent and are priced at par. *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $25 million of notes due in 2000 through Smith Barney Inc.
Callable in three years, the notes carry an interest rate of 7.41 percent and are priced at par.


Original Brahms Requiem
Brahms's "German Requiem" is to be presented in the composer's rarely performed original version for piano four hands on March 26 at 7 P.M. at Central Presbyterian Church, 593 Park Avenue, at 64th Street.
Deborah Stephens (soprano), Jack Eppler (baritone), Alfred and Heidi Kanwischer (pianists) and the Central City Chorus will be under the direction of Charles Pilling.
Admission is $15; $12 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 838-0808.


State Will Try to Shore Up Cleveland's Shaky Schools
Just 25 minutes before students would have been sitting at their desks, on a cold morning in January, part of a ceiling collapsed at Audubon Middle School here and crashed down on a social studies classroom.
The dilapidated building on Martin Luther King Boulevard, where rain falls through the roof in some spots, has become a metaphor for a school system that is falling apart.
Citing what he called a "crisis," a Federal judge this month took the extraordinary action of placing the 70,000-student district under the control of the State Superintendent of Schools.


Commuters Reach Settlement Over Jewish Prayers on Bus
The Jewish men wanted to sit together on the bus for prayers.
The Jewish woman did not want to move.
Now, an out-of-court settlement of Talmudic subtlety has given each side something of what it wanted.
But as often happened with Talmudic adjudications, the parties to this dispute have conflicting interpretations of the terms.


Gillooly Completes Sentence
JEFF GILLOOLY left a detention center in Hauser, Ore., yesterday after finishing his sentence in the attack on NANCY KERRIGAN.
Sentenced to two years in prison for racketeering, the former husband of the figure skater TONYA HARDING served just six months by going through an Oregon boot camp program.
The program's intense discipline is aimed at teaching inmates to take responsibility and recognize how bad choices lead to problems in life.


Meet Me in Phoenix; Rams Debate Continues
The Los Angeles Rams' proposed move to St.
Louis continues to spin and boil toward a controversial vote here later this week when the National Football League owners will decide the team's fate.
Will the Rams remain in Anaheim, Calif., or will they play the 1995 season and beyond in St.
Louis?
The Rams want to move to St.
Louis and have completed a deal with the city to do so.


By Design; The Time for White
When the fashion flock landed in Milan, Italy, last week, the first stop for many was a Prada shop.
And what was high on many shopping lists?
Not only Prada's famous nylon bags, but also its white patent leather bags, white patent shoes and crisp white jackets.
And what was marching down just about every Milanese runway?
White coats, white jackets, white shoes and white bags.
And these were fall shows.
In Paris this week, at the Premiere Vision exposition of fabrics for spring 1996, the main trend is white-washed pastels.
And in every boutique on the Faubourg St.-Honore there is a blaze of white.
There are white linen jackets, white patent loafers and pumps in the shoe stores and high-heeled white patent multi-strap sandals in the Valentino and Versace stores.


In 1996, a World's Fair to Be Held in Cyberspace
An ambitious plan for creating a world's fair in cyberspace to demonstrate the capabilities of global information networks has been endorsed by the Clinton Administration and a number of companies and private organizations.
The Internet 1996 World Exposition, organized by the Internet Multicasting Service of Washington, is to be announced later this month.
Current plans include the distribution of government, cultural, educational, entertainment and technological information over the Internet, a computer network that connects millions of users in more than 100 countries.


Woolly Flying Squirrel, Long Thought Extinct, Shows Up in Pakistan
MISSING since early in the century, the woolly flying squirrel was thought to have gone extinct, apparently having vanished from the Himalayas' frigid cliffs.
But this giant among squirrels has resurfaced in northern Pakistan, setting the squirrel world abuzz and persuading many scientists that some species that have been written off may yet be hanging on by a claw out there somewhere.
"I was flabbergasted when I heard," said Dr.
Charles A. Woods, a mammalogist at the University of Florida in Gainesville who is writing a book on the mammals of Pakistan.
"I've worked all through there, in all sorts of high valleys in the mountains. We've really scoured the area and never seen it. This is simply marvelous."


Mr. Deutch Gets Cabinet Rank
It was a buyer's market at the White House last week when President Clinton called in John Deutch, second in command at the Pentagon, to sell him on taking the post of Director of Central Intelligence.
Mr.
Clinton's earlier selection, the retired Air Force general Michael Carns, was sinking fast and the White House was eager to have a substitute ready.
Mr.
Clinton got his man, and Mr.
Deutch got his price: elevation of the post to cabinet rank.
It should not have happened.
The last Director of Central Intelligence to serve as a policy maker and Cabinet member was William Casey during the Reagan Administration.
The policy he helped produce was the Iran-contra affair.


A Hard Act to Follow? Here Goes.
"I don't care who writes a nation's laws -- or crafts its advanced treaties -- if I can write its economics textbooks." -- Paul Samuelson
N.
Gregory Mankiw, a dweeby 37-year-old economics professor who named his dog Keynes, was not counting on getting rich overnight.
Most academics, even at Harvard, don't.
But a phone call from a Texas publisher changed all that.


BUSINESS DIGEST
President Zedillo of Mexico Sees Crisis in Other Nations President Ernesto Zedillo of Mexico said his country was merely the first emerging economy to confront the growing power and immediacy of the global financial markets.
Discussing the vulnerability of Mexico's economy, Mr.
Zedillo said international markets were changing faster than governments could cope.
His Finance Minister is to meet with bankers in New York today to brief them on the austerity program that Mexico announced last week.  [ Page A1. ]


New York's Desperate Hours
This should have been the fiscal year that New York City turned the corner.
After five straight years of severe budget problems, of staggering through an endless cycle of cutting services and stretching out debt, the city got a half-billion-dollar gift: a temporary downturn in debt service payments to the Municipal Assistance Corporation.
It was a rare opportunity -- not only to balance the 1995 budget but to buy time, to start taking long-term measures that wouldn't necessarily pay off this year but would lead to big savings in the future.
As the City Council holds hearings into next year's budget -- still severely out of balance despite the deep cuts proposed by Mayor Rudolph Giuliani -- it has become all too clear that the opportunity was wasted.


GIULIANI IN ACCORD WITH CITY COUNCIL ON X-RATED SHOPS
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the City Council agreed yesterday to a set of strict new zoning rules for X-rated video stores and topless bars that city officials say will drastically reduce the number and concentration of the establishments throughout the city.
The new rules, which officials hope will be put into effect before the end of the year, would prevent sex-related businesses from operating within 500 feet of residences, schools and houses of worship and within 500 feet of one another.


Securities Fraud Bill Doesn't Go Far Enough; Punish Corporate Crime
To the Editor:
Re "Contract on the Consumer" (column, March 4): Bob Herbert declares that if the Republicans' negligence-law reform passes, the "pendulum of protection would begin to swing away from the hundreds of thousands of innocent victims who are maimed or killed by corporate recklessness and toward the corporations responsible for the carnage."


Labatt (John) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


CHRONICLE
GREG LOUGANIS, the four-time Olympic gold medal diver, accepted the Visibility Award given by United States Representative Gerry E. Studds, Democrat of Massachusetts, in Boston on Sunday night, The Associated Press reported.
The award honors gay men for leadership.


Bowe Pays Tyson Short Visit
Delayed by bad driving weather, Riddick Bowe was able to visit Mike Tyson in prison for only 45 minutes last night before going back home, but said afterward "it will be a dream" if the pair of heavyweights fight.
They met at the Indiana Youth Center in Plainfield, where Tyson will continue serving time for his rape conviction until his release on March 25.
While Bowe left after their meeting, his manager, Rock Newman, is remaining until tomorrow to continue talking about a match.


Fedders Corp.(FJQ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Sentencing in N.J. Transit Fraud
The last of five members of a Toms River family who admitted bilking New Jersey Transit of more than $600,000 was sentenced to five years' probation yesterday and ordered to perform 300 hours of community service.
The defendant, Virginia Farrelly, also agreed to help her husband, Harold, make restitution.
Mr.
Farrelly was sentenced earlier to seven years in prison.


Another King Under His Crown
In the 1930's, Gov.
Huey P. Long ruled Louisiana under the slogan "Every man a king." In 1991, in the movie "King Ralph," the actor John Goodman played a Las Vegas lounge singer who becomes the King of England.
Governor (eventually United States Senator) Long, a Populist demagogue who mightily boasted of his humble origins, lined his pockets while in office.
Mr.
Goodman, a liberal Democrat, has made a fortune portraying big-hearted working stiffs in the movies and on television.
Thus, by impeccable Hollywood logic Mr.
Goodman is the perfect man to bring Long, who called himself the Kingfish and who was assassinated in 1935, back to life.
He is the star and a producer of "Kingfish: A Story of Huey P. Long," a new movie biography made for the TNT cable channel to be broadcast at 8 and 10 P.M. on Sunday.


Accounts
*
Madame Alexander Doll Co., New York, to Goldsmith/Jeffrey, New York, to handle its account, previously at Scott/Lancaster Advertising, Rolling Hills Estates, Calif.
The billings were estimated at $4 million. *
Medallion Hotels Inc., New York, to Klein &amp; Solin, New York, as the first agency to handle the hotel chain's account.
The billings were estimated at $1 million.


Welfare and Food Stamp Rolls End Six Years of Increases
Welfare and food stamp rolls, which increased relentlessly through recession and economic recovery in the last six years, have finally leveled off, new Government data show.
The persistent increases in the rolls had become one of the great puzzles of social welfare policy.


3 in Extortion Case Also Tied to Murder
Four men were charged with extortion and weapons violations in Federal Court in Brooklyn yesterday, as arrest warrants for three of them were issued in Los Angeles, charging them with two murders last year in Torrance, Calif.
The three men charged in both cases were identified as Gary Friedman, 39, a lawyer who lives at 7-27 152d Street in Whitestone, Queens; his 36-year-old brother, Kenneth, who is serving a sentence in a New York State prison on burglary and weapons convictions, and Ruben Hernandez, of 91-12 Vanderveer Street in Queens.


Plague's Origins A Mystery
Six months after pneumonic plague struck the western Indian city of Surat, top officials from the World Health Organization and the Indian Government said today that they were still baffled by the geographical origin of the disease.
"That is still not known," the Director General of the World Health Organization, Hiroshi Nakajima, told reporters here.
Poor research laboratories and an initial panic among medical workers probably resulted in the destruction of valuable bacteria and other samples that could have helped later investigators, Dr.
Nakajima said.


Tell It to the High Court: Justices Seek Comment on Proposed Rule Changes
The Supreme Court today took the unusual step of reaching out to the public for advice and comment on proposed revisions to its rules.
The Justices issued the 79-page draft both in print form and through the various computer information services that carry the Court's decisions, inviting the public to make comments through April 28 on the rules that govern the technical aspects of how cases are filed and processed.


Erroneous College Admission Letter Brings Threat of Lawsuit
Every high school senior knows the rules.
A fat envelope means you got in.
A thin envelope means you did not.
Only it did not turn out that way for Elizabeth Mikus of Norwell, Mass.
Her family is threatening to sue Cornell University because the admissions office sent her what she took to be an early-acceptance letter, and then told her it had been a mistake.


CHRONICLE
Dr.
CARL SAGAN, the astronomer, has taken a leave of absence from Cornell University in Ithaca, N.Y., to be treated for a rare bone-marrow disease, the university announced yesterday.
The leave takes effect immediately, but Dr.
Sagan, 60, said, "I fully expect to be back at Cornell by next semester." He is the David Duncan professor of astrononmy and space sciences and the director of the Laboratory for Planetary Studies.


New Bloodshed in Bosnia


American Launched On Soyuz
When Norman E. Thagard lifts off from the same space pad here that launched Sputnik and the space race almost 40 years ago, he will become the first American crew member sent aloft on a Russian spacecraft.
Dr.
Thagard has spent a year in Russia preparing for a three-month mission on the Mir space station.
He was scheduled to lift off aboard a Soyuz spacecraft from this immense, majestically barren space center at 11:11 A.M.
Tuesday (1:13 A.M. Eastern standard time).
The crew is commanded by Lieut.
Col.
Vladimir N. Dezhurov and also includes Gennady M. Strekalov, the flight engineer.


Oracle in Talks to Offer Video News Service
The Oracle Corporation, a leading maker of software for managing large computer data bases, is in discussions with several telephone, computer and news organizations to create a nationwide digital video service that would let users of personal computers customize their own video newscasts or conduct on-line research from video news archives.
The discussions, which are not complete, have involved the long-distance carriers AT&amp;T and MCI Communications, the chip maker Intel and the news organizations CNN and Reuters, among other companies, according to people familiar with the plans.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Mar. 10
Mar. 3
Mar. 11
1995
1995
1994
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
7.4
6.9
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.2
3.2
Gasoline stocks
221.8
221.6
225.7
Distillate stocks
119.9
121.9
103.0
Crude imports, daily
8.2
6.2
5.7
Product imports, daily
1.8
1.4
2.5
Crude stocks
326.0
324.6
328.9
Crude production, daily
6.6
6.7
6.6
Refinery utilization (%)
91.7
91.0
87.3
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Nuclear Trail -- A special report.; A Vast Smuggling Network Feeds Iran's Arms Program
The tiny Hartenholm civilian airport here, with its fleet of a dozen aging Cessnas, small wooden building for the local parachute club, snack bar, nine warehouses and red and white checkered control tower, appears to be the idyllic home for weekend and business fliers.
But the airport, which because of its size operates largely beyond the scrutiny of the customs authorities, is believed to be one of dozens of transit points used by the Iranian Government to smuggle, from Europe to Iran, weapons parts and advanced technology used to develop nuclear weapons, Western intelligence officials say.


Book Notes
Off and Writing
In an age of televised town halls, glitzy commercials and Oprah, campaigning by book might seem outmoded.
Except, of course, for the fact that few Presidential hopefuls can resist a format that offers uninterrupted pontificating.
And unlike commercials, books are handy speech props.
In 1992, Ross Perot became one of the most visible book-toting candidates with his best-selling "United We Stand." Al Gore's environmental treatise, "Earth in the Balance," was also a best seller, as was his book with Bill Clinton, "Putting People First."


Detective Holds His Own Against Lawyer
F.
Lee Bailey, the legal legend reborn in the O. J. Simpson case, hammered away further today at Detective Mark Fuhrman, the officer whom the defense deems the Achilles' heel of the prosecution.
But despite suggestions that he was a bigot and a liar, Mr.
Fuhrman again held his own, returning Mr.
Bailey's slams with gentle, soft-spoken lobs.
Once more, Mr.
Bailey steered clear of stating explicitly that Mr.
Fuhrman planted the glove he has said he found behind Mr.
Simpson's house.
The defense lawyer relied instead on suggestion, painting Mr.
Fuhrman as suspiciously overeager and foolhardy and saying his discovery of the glove when he was suspiciously by himself made him indispensible to the case.


Time Warner and Turner Talks Said to Hit Snags
Talks over the proposed sale of Time Warner Inc.'s 19.4 percent stake in Turner Broadcasting to Turner ran into snags yesterday, people close to the discussions said.
There had been recent rumors that the two companies were close to a deal, but Turner executives left the meetings in New York yesterday to return to Atlanta without a final agreement.


Peter Brook Charts Twists and Turns Of the Human Mind
Running a mere 100 minutes and played without an intermission, Peter Brook's hypnotizing new theatrical work, "The Man Who," would seem to be as spare and tightly constructed as his 10-hour "Mahabharata" was winding and discursive.
Yet "The Man Who" is no less an epic.
It's as vast and mysterious as the human imagination, and as commonplace as the image of a man trying to shave himself, but failing.
The work was inspired by, but is in no way a conventional stage adaptation of, "The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat," Oliver Sacks's best-selling collection of case histories about the neurologically impaired.
Performed by a superb ensemble of four actors and one musician, this series of fables is an adventurous journey through the mind, as well as a demonstration of a very rare kind of dedicated theater craft.


Robert Freeman, 82, Ex-C.I.A. Official
Robert Belmont Freeman, a retired official of the Central Intelligence Agency, died on March 5 at his home in Scientists Cliffs, Md.
He was 82 and also had a residence in Arlington, Va.
The cause was a stroke, his family said.


HOUSE COMMITTEE SUPPORTS TAX CUT
The House Ways and Means Committee approved a bill today to reduce taxes by almost $200 billion over the next five years, a cornerstone of the Republicans' Contract With America.
But the action was tempered by the first signs of trouble in the Republicans' promise to cut spending to compensate for the loss of tax money.
Party leaders had to concede that they were hard pressed to win support for even a modest first round of spending reductions.


A Dickens Revival in Comparable Times
The word is Dickensian.
Laden with overtones of social inequities, it has resurfaced with a vengeance in the last decade or so as homeless people drifted onto the nation's streets and census reports confirmed that the rich were indeed getting richer and the poor poorer.
The time for a Charles Dickens revival is obviously ripe, and television, long committed to the obvious, is clearly eager to play its part.
On Sunday, a four-hour production of "The Old Curiosity Shop" gets under way at 7 P.M. on the Disney Channel; the second half will be shown on Monday at 8 P.M.
The following Sunday on public television, "Masterpiece Theater" begins a five-part dramatization of "Martin Chuzzlewit." Greed and selfishness have rarely been so deliciously dissected in prime time.


Excerpt From Reno's Letter on Cisneros
Following is an excerpt from the letter by Attorney General Janet Reno asking the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit to appoint an independent counsel to investigate Housing Secretary Henry G. Cisneros.
On Sept. 14, 1994, the Department of Justice received press reports concerning Secretary Cisneros and a woman with whom he had a prior relationship, Linda Medlar.
According to the reports, Medlar alleged that Secretary Cisneros had lied to the F.B.I. in the course of an interview conducted during his background investigation, concerning the amounts of payments Cisneros had made to her.
The allegations were supported in part by transcripts of telephone conversations between Medlar and Secretary Cisneros, taped surreptitiously by Medlar over a period of almost four years.


Angelica Corp.(AGL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Resorts Intl.(RT,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Eagle Hardware &amp; Garden Inc.(EAGL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 27


A Subway Rider, 50, Disarms And Subdues Two Attackers
A Brooklyn man fought off two teen-agers inside a subway car early yesterday, disarming one of the youths, then slashing both with their own weapon, a box cutter, the police said.
The teen-agers apparently tried to rob the man, Willie Bellmon, 50, a janitor from Crown Heights, as he was on his way home from work on a D train, said Albert W. O'Leary, a spokesman for the transit police.


Islanders Start Fast, Then Lose in a Hurry
The Islanders can only wonder how much worse this season can get.
"You can lose 50 in a row," Ray Ferraro said after the Islanders had squandered a 3-0 lead and lost to the Hartford Whalers, 6-4, tonight at the Civic Center.
"It can get lower."


Oshkosh B'Gosh Inc.(GOSHA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Some States Trying to Stop Gay Marriages Before They Start
A battle over the very definition of marriage, which began two years ago in Hawaii, is spreading through Western states as lawmakers hasten to foreclose any possible legalization of homosexual matrimony.
Homosexual marriages are not now legally recognized anywhere in the nation, but commitment ceremonies have become an increasingly common feature of gay life.


The G.O.P.'s Contract Makes Government More Responsible; A 20 Percent Mandate
To the Editor:
Stanley Greenberg's "Mistaking a Moment for a Mandate" (Op-Ed, March 9) makes important points.
One is missing: The 52 percent majority for Republican House candidates came in a turnout of about 39 percent of eligible voters.


Murderer Says Victim Was Witch
In an eerie monologue before his sentencing yesterday, the man convicted of fatally stabbing a former Rockette four years ago as she walked her dogs near Central Park told a court in Manhattan that his victim may have been a witch and had been "making noises" at him that disrupted his life.
Kevin McKiever, 38, a once-promising performing arts student who drifted in and out of mental institutions over a dozen years, asked Supreme Court Justice Franklyn R. Weissberg to send him to prison rather than a mental hospital.


Cowens Coming Back?
DAVE COWENS, a Hall of Fame center, may make another comeback from retirement and join the San Antonio roster for the playoffs, Spurs Coach BOB HILL says.
Cowens, 46, is a Spurs assistant coach. (AP)


Tito Puente Takes His Place On His Music's Time Line
"The Latin Tinge: Jazz Music and the Influence of Latin Rhythms," a concert featuring the music of Tito Puente presented by Jazz at Lincoln Center, was a fine idea.
Mr.
Puente, a percussionist, band leader, composer and arranger, recorded an extraordinary series of performances during the 1950's and 60's.
A legacy of synthesists like Dizzy Gillespie, Machito, Mario Bauza and others, the music drew from jazz's big bands and from Afro-Cuba's disciplined percussion sections, and it was visionary.
But Mr.
Puente, who with Celia Cruz is still the biggest draw in Afro-Cuban music, doesn't seem to have adapted to the idea of being a historical figure.
At Alice Tully Hall on Friday night, the show fell apart for several reasons.
Though Mr.
Puente seemed genuinely happy to air out the music, he performed lesser work from a new album, told jokes and gave long monologues.
And he brought out dancers.
There was a tension in the presentation that suggested a lack of ease.


Bowe Calls the Garden
ROCK NEWMAN, RIDDICK BOWE's manager, will meet today with DAVE CHECKETTS, the president of Madison Square Garden, to discuss staging a heavyweight fight between Bowe and MIKE TYSON.
"Rock called here, and we're exploring boxing, so we should talk," said JOHN CIRILLO, a Garden spokesman.


Eric Richards Rippel; Executive, 60
Eric Richards Rippel, a New Jersey executive, died on Thursday in a car accident in Alexandria Township, N.J.
He was 60 and lived in Alexandria Township.
He had suffered a massive heart attack, according to the Douglas D. Martin Funeral Home in Clinton, N.J.


Home, Sweet Home
To The Living Section:
I can certainly relate to "When Doing Without Just Won't Do"  [ by Mary Ann Castronovo Fusco, Feb. 22 ] .
Although I've lived in New York or Connecticut for over 30 years, I was born and raised in Mississippi.
And I still import -- by any means necessary -- Shady Nook barbecue sauce from Clarksdale, Miss.
It's been made there for over 50 years and is absolutely wonderful!
I order fig preserves (by the case, because that's the only amount the company will ship!) from Braswell's in Georgia.
My grandmother made her own and always sent me a jar or two.
Braswell's is the closest to her homemade that I have found.
BETSY SCOTT  Brookfield, Conn.


The Victorious Appeal Of a Dish Low in Meat
IT is a victory of sorts when a meat-and-potatoes man praises a meal with only four ounces of lamb and even has seconds on the spinach with oranges.
To speed up the preparation, look for ready-to-use vegetables.
Recently, I found baby spinach leaves in a plastic bag.
They needed no trimming and only a quick rinse.
Lamb With Vegetables and Yogurt Sauce in a Pita
8 ounces boneless leg of lamb  1 tablespoon balsamic vinegar  1 teaspoon olive oil  1 large clove garlic  1 cup plain, nonfat yogurt  1 tablespoon lemon juice  1 or 2 sprigs fresh mint to yield 1 tablespoon minced  2 small Kirby cucumbers, about 6 ounces  2 small ripe tomatoes or 15 or 20 cherry tomatoes, depending on the size  4 ounces red onion  2 large or 4 small whole-wheat pitas.
1.
Turn on toaster oven or oven.
If using broiler, turn on and cover pan with aluminum foil.
2.
Trim the lamb of fat, and marinate in a small bowl with a mixture of vinegar and oil until ready to cook.
3. Mince the garlic, and combine with the yogurt and lemon juice.
4. Wash, dry and mince the mint, and add to the yogurt.
5.
Wash and trim the ends from the cucumbers, and slice very thinly.
Wash, trim and slice the tomatoes; then, slice the onion thinly.
6.
Prepare stove-top grill, if using.
Broil or grill lamb 5 to 7 minutes, turning once, until it is rare.
7. Wrap pitas in foil and heat for about 3 minutes, until they are hot and soft.
8. Slice lamb.
9.
Slice pitas open.
If using large ones, cut in half; fill each half with sauce, lamb, cucumbers, tomatoes and onion, then serve.
Keep remaining pitas hot.
Repeat with remaining halves or whole small pitas.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 445 calories, 10 grams fat, 60 milligrams cholesterol, 480 milligrams sodium, 35 grams protein, 60 grams carbohydrate.
Spinach with Oranges
10 ounces spinach  1 large clove garlic  2 oranges  1/8 teaspoon salt  Freshly ground black pepper.
1. Wash spinach, and trim.
2. Mince garlic.
3.
Heat nonstick pot.
Saute garlic about 30 seconds, add spinach and cover.
Cook until spinach wilts, about 1 or 2 minutes.
4.
Peel oranges, and cut each segment in half.
Stir into spinach, season with salt and pepper, and serve.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 95 calories, 1 gram fat, 0 milligrams cholesterol, 210 milligrams sodium, 5 grams protein, 20 grams carbohydrate.
Game Plan  Prepare lamb dish through Step 6.
Prepare spinach through Step 3.
Finish lamb.
Finish spinach.


CHRONICLE
Twelve years after winning the Nobel Peace Prize for his struggles for workers' rights, President LECH WALESA of Poland finally got to Norway yesterday to start a three-day visit, The Associated Press reported.
His wife, DANUTA, picked up the award for him at ceremonies in Oslo in 1983.
He didn't make the trip because he feared that the Communist regime then in control of Poland would bar him from returning.
NADINE BROZAN


Marshall Industries(MI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Tempest in the Kitchen
SOME of the most highly praised and expensive restaurants in New York City, including Lespinasse in the St.
Regis Hotel, Les Celebrites in the the Essex House Nikko Hotel and Le Regence in the Hotel Plaza-Athenee, lost money last year.
Like virtually all hotel restaurants in New York -- more than 100 -- they employ unionized workers.
Hotel executives blame Local 6 of the Hotel Trades Council for their losses, saying the salaries are too high and the work rules too restrictive.
The union blames the restaurants' lack of profits on overstaffed and overpaid management.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
I was recently cast in a role for the NBC-TV soap opera "Another World." To get from my Manhattan apartment to the Brooklyn studio early in the morning, I was told by the production office to meet a car at a midtown corner where two other actors would be waiting to share my ride.
When the car was 15 minutes late, I became anxious.
A couple approached me, looking equally anxious.
Assuming these were my fellow actors, I said "Excuse me, but are you from 'Another World?' " The woman, speaking in heavily accented English, said, "Yes, we are." The man, with an even heavier accent, said, "We are from Europe."


Weak Retail Sales Cheer Markets, Sending Stocks Up
It was a surprisingly good day on Wall Street yesterday, although the dollar remained under pressure.
The spark came from the new report on retail sales, which declined in February for the first time in almost a year.
The five-tenths of 1 percent drop signaled that the economy might be slowing, thus encouraging traders and investors into believing that the Federal Reserve will not raise interest rates soon.  [ Page D2. ]


Firefighters Hurt in Collapse
Five Newark firefighters are lucky that they did not have to spend last night in the hospital after being injured in a fire that investigators said was arson.


Gulf War General Is Named as Senior Marine
President Clinton today nominated a veteran of the Persian Gulf war and son of a Marine Corps general to be the next Commandant of the Marines.
The officer, Lieut.
Gen.
Charles C. Krulak, 53, would succeed Gen.
Carl E. Mundy Jr., who is retiring on July 1, as the senior marine in a 174,000-member corps that has been increasingly taxed by operations in Somalia, Haiti and Rwanda.
As Commandant, General Krulak would serve on the Joint Chiefs of Staff.


Chief of Nuclear Panel Quits To Build Gas-Run Generators
The chairman of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission said this morning that he would quit his job on July 1, a year before his term ends, to go into business in Asia building electric power plants that burn natural gas.
The chairman, Ivan Selin, who is 57, said that in his four-year tenure, the commission had completed the overhaul of the licensing process for new plants, so that if any more are ordered, which has not happened in nearly 20 years, they could fairly compete with other kinds of generating stations.
He did not say any more orders were likely.


Life Re Corp.(LRE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Arrest in Motel Room Strangling
A man accused of strangling his girlfriend in a North Bergen motel room on Sunday was arrested yesterday in Miami.
Prosecutors said that Carlos Cevallos, 22, of West New York, caught a bus south shortly after killing Irma Sanchez, 29, of Jersey City.


N.L.R.B. Cites Baseball's Owners Again
For the third time in three months, the general counsel of the National Labor Relations Board said he has found reason to issue a complaint against baseball's club owners, charging them with violating labor laws.
For at least the second time, the owners, nevertheless, claimed victory.
The owners also accused the union of continuing to stall at the bargaining table -- "The union is caught up in this surreal game of Chutes and Ladders," said Stan Kasten of Atlanta -- but they left this Walt Disney World site just as union officials were arriving for a meeting with a high-profile group of players a few miles away in Orlando.


Corrections
A list of credits last Wednesday with a review of the 10-part television show "The History of Rock 'n' Roll" omitted the name of the producer, writer and director of "Plugging In," an episode discussed in the review.
She is Susan Steinberg.


Accounts
*
Lotto World Inc., Naples, Fla., to Emmerling Post, New York, to introduce nationally Lotto World magazine.
The billings were estimated at $2 million the first year and $4 million the second year. *
Federal National Mortgage Corp., better known as Fannie Mae, Washington, to Sidall, Matus &amp; Coughter, Richmond, to handle its business-to-business advertising, previously handled by McKinney &amp; Silver, Raleigh, N.C.
The billings were estimated at $2 million.


TV Bonanza for U.S. Team
In a follow-up to the television success of last year's World Cup, four television networks will broadcast 84 games to be played by the United States national soccer teams through 1997.
ABC will show 10 games, ESPN 28, ESPN2 24, and the Prime Network 22.
Univision will broadcast at least 40 Spanish-language games.
Coverage of the games begins March 25 on ESPN with the United States men's team playing Uruguay.
From June 6-18, five women's World Cup games from Sweden will be broadcast on ESPN2 with the final appearing on ESPN.
United States Cup '95 starts June 11 with United States-Nigeria game and ends with June 25 with the United States-Colombia game on ABC.


Wanted: Novelty Acts


Samuel J. Meer, 75; Taught Psychologists
Samuel J. Meer, a psychologist who helped train school psychologists to recognize learning disabilities, died on March 7 at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 75 and lived in Mount Vernon, N.Y.
The cause was prostate cancer, said a son, David Meer.


Fixing Charges Leads To Arrest of 3 Players
The police arrested three prominent soccer players in Britain today on suspicion of fixing games, plunging the sport into the worst scandal to afflict it in this country in decades.
The police staged coordinated early morning raids on the homes of two goalkeepers -- Bruce Grobbelaar, who plays for Southampton, and Hans Segers, who plays for Wimbledon -- taking them into custody and seizing unspecified materials.
A few hours later, the police also arrested John Fashanu, a striker for Aston Villa and the host of a popular television game show.


METRO DIGEST
YALE RETURNS $20 MILLION TO PATRON
Four years after giving $20 million to Yale University to expand its Western civilization curriculum, Lee M. Bass, a billionaire alumnus, has requested that the money be returned because Yale never instituted the courses.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


Indian Premier Faces Criticism for State Losses
Hindu right-wing governments took office today in the industrially developed Western states of Maharashtra and Gujarat, redrawing India's political map and underlining the growing isolation of Prime Minister P.V.
Narasimha Rao's Congress Party.
With the militant Shiv Sena taking power in Maharashtra and the Bharatiya Janata Party in Gujarat, a vast belt of India stretching from the northwest to the south and from the west to the east is now dominated by Mr.
Rao's political foes.


SUNY Trustees Plan Cuts Under Pataki's Budget Plan
Trustees of the State University of New York said today for the first time that they would close or merge eight campuses or hospitals and raise tuition $1,600 a year, to $4,250, if Gov.
George E. Pataki's budget cuts were approved.
But Mr.
Pataki and leaders in the Republican Senate accused the university officials of engaging in scare tactics over what is a sensitive issue for Republicans.
They oppose closing any of the university's 34 campuses, nearly all of which are in Republican districts and are highly prized for the local jobs they bring.


'John Doe' Is Fighting 'Megan'
Lots of people have questions about Megan's Law, the measure permitting prosecutors to warn neighborhoods when sex offenders move in.
And the State Supreme Court pledged yesterday to try to come up with answers as soon as possible.
Saying it would hear appeals on an emergency basis, the court scheduled arguments for May 2 in the case of a Burlington County man, identified only as John Doe, who filed suit because he does not want to register with the police.


Taylor Is Starting Back On Road to the Stadium
Brien Taylor leads a lonely existence in the chaotic world of baseball.
It is the existence of a 23-year-old prospect trying to make a comeback from a serious shoulder injury before ever unleashing one pitch in a major league game.
Alone, he is trying to regain what he lost.
Fifteen months after Taylor injured himself during a fight near his home in Beaufort, N.C., his fastball is still not back.
The pitch made him a high school legend, made the Yankees pay him a signing bonus of $1.55 million as the No. 1 draft choice in 1991 and seemingly made his future glisten.


Britain Pulling 400 Troops Out of Ulster, Citing Cease-Fire
In a move that could speed up peace talks in Northern Ireland, Britain announced today that it is withdrawing a regiment of 400 men, the largest reduction of British troops in the province in a decade.
The Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, Sir Patrick Mayhew, said the Fifth Regiment Royal Artillery would be relocated within the next two weeks to the British mainland.
This would leave about 18,000 British troops in Northern Ireland.


Paychex Inc.(PAYX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Remorseful Killer Draws Stiff Term
Expressing regret for killing the couple that had moved into his boyhood home, a Larchmont man broke down in tears before drawing the maximum sentence of 16 2/3 to 50 years in prison.


Floods' Effect on Food Prices
THIS week's flooding in California will affect the price of produce that consumers buy in coming weeks, but the increases may be only short term and may not go into effect in all stores immediately.
Some wholesales prices have already gone up.
Prices for lettuce from California's Central Valley, inundated in that region's worst storm of this century, have increased from $6 a carton last Friday to $9 yesterday.
Prices for broccoli have about doubled, from $8 a carton to between $14 and $18.


CHRONICLE
Birds of different feathers flocked together Monday night to hear readings from essays that celebrate the nation's open spaces and frequently bemoan their shrinkage.
Conservationists and real estate investors, bankers and lawyers, writers and agents gathered in the Upper East Side home of MAUREEN WHITE and her husband, STEVEN RATTNER, a partner at Lazard Freres and an impassioned outdoorsman.
Almost more than they talked, they listened.
The passages were from "Heart of the Land: Essays on Last Great Places," an anthology published by Pantheon and assembled by the Nature Conservancy, which will get part of the proceeds.
Readers included Claire Bloom, Charles Kuralt and six of the authors in the book.


Sanders to Stand Trial
Cincinnati Reds outfielder DEION SANDERS will have to stand trial on misdemeanor charges stemming from a confrontation with a police officer at Riverfront Stadium.
Yesterday, Judge DAVID DAVIS of Hamilton County Municipal Court set a trial date of May 15. (AP)


The G.O.P.'s Contract Makes Government More Responsible
To the Editor:
In "Mistaking a Moment for a Mandate" (Op-Ed, March 9), the pollster Stanley B. Greenberg resorted to the same type of hollow distortions that left the Democratic Party high and dry last November.


FEDERAL EXPRESS CORP. (FDX,N)
The Federal Express Corporation said yesterday that its fiscal third-quarter profit more than doubled, exceeding analyst expectations, on improved international business.
The package delivery service, which is based in Memphis, said net income for the quarter ended Feb. 28 rose to $63.1 million, or $1.12 a share, from $31.2 million, or 55 cents, a year earlier.


Alumnus Expands Love Affair With Harvard by Offering a Monumental Gift
As a transfer student to Harvard in 1921, John L. Loeb did not stand out in any special way.
But as an alumnus, he has been truly spectacular.
A former member of Harvard's governing body and of more than a dozen of its visiting committees, he has helped lead more than half a dozen fund-raising drives and has given Harvard nearly $20 million.


Pamida Holdings Corp.(PAM,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Pat Robertson Gives Focus to Our Disaffection; Attack on Freemasons
To the Editor:
The controversy stirred by Pat Robertson's 1991 best-selling book, "The New World Order," cannot be laid to rest solely on his softened interpretation of inflammatory code words, such as "European bankers" ("Pat Robertson Says He Intended No Anti-Semitism in Book He Wrote Four Years Ago," news article, March 4; letter by Mr. Robertson, "Our Foreign Policy Should Put U.S. First," March 5).


Intelligence Panel Chairman Withholds Endorsement of C.I.A. Nominee


Puritan-Bennett Corp.(PBEN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Yale Returns $20 Million to an Unhappy Patron
Four years after giving $20 million to Yale University to expand its Western civilization curriculum, Lee M. Bass, a billionaire alumnus, has requested that the money be returned because Yale never instituted the courses.
The university -- which in recent weeks had been scrambling to devise a curriculum to satisfy Mr.
Bass -- announced yesterday that it had agreed to give back the $20 million after concluding it could not accept his conditions.
The most troublesome of these, Yale officials said, was Mr.
Bass's recent request that he be allowed to approve the faculty members for the courses.


More Rainfall in California Raises Fears of New Floods
A new storm moved into Northern California today, causing fears of more flooding as already swollen lakes and rivers rose to dangerous levels in some areas.
Farther south, a slackening of winds and torrential rain allowed emergency work crews to gain some advantage in reopening roads and bridges in the Central Valley and Monterey County.
As the waters receded, the cost of nearly a week of calamitous storms began to emerge in greater detail.


Unconventional History Of the Paris Commune
PARIS BABYLON The Story of the Paris Commune  By Rupert Christiansen  Illustrated. 435 pages.
Viking. $23.95
In May 1871, while Paris was under that short-lived experiment in utopian radicalism known as the Commune, somebody poking around in the crypt of the Church of St.
Laurent on the Boulevard Magenta uncovered 14 skeletons, and caused a brief, lurid sensation.


Investigator Seeks Control of Javits Center Hiring
A special investigator is seeking court permission to take control of hiring for the lucrative carpenters' jobs at the Jacobs K. Javits Convention Center and accusing the president of the carpenters' union of allowing organized crime to persist at the center.
Kenneth Conboy, the investigator appointed by a Federal judge to monitor the 30,000-member New York District Council of the United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners, charged in a report yesterday that the union's president, Frederick W. Devine, had ignored a court order that requires him to stop the awarding of jobs to mob-connected union members and make them available to all members.


Baker (J.) Inc.(JBAK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Foreign Affairs; New Mexico
Ricarda Martinez, a 60-year-old Mexican peasant living in a tumbledown shack on the edge of Mexico City, says she's never heard of Wall Street and doesn't know anything about dollar-linked peso bonds, George Soros or Merrill Lynch's emerging markets fund.
Peeling cactus from her garden, she insists that none of those strange-sounding names could possibly explain what she does know, which is that she can't afford to buy meat anymore, and that "Mexico is now different -- now we are poor."
Mrs.
Martinez is right.
Mexico today is different, but it is because Mexico has been hit with a financial neutron bomb, launched by the very forces Mrs.
Martinez has never heard of.
As with any neutron bomb, all the buildings have been left standing but the people have been financially devastated.
Overnight, the Mexican economy has shrunk from a size large to a size small, without ever stopping at medium.


A Space First: Russians Launch American
Streaking through the icy atmosphere in a spacecraft that until recently he would have had to risk his life just to see, Norman E. Thagard today became the first American to enter space aboard a Russian rocket.
The Soyuz spacecraft carrying Dr.
Thagard and his crewmates, Lieut.
Col.
Vladimir N. Dezhurov and Gennady M. Strekalov, a flight engineer, burst above the frozen plains here exactly as planned, at 11:11 a.m.
There was no countdown -- there never is in Russia -- but dozens of freezing guests watched with wonder as the rocket eased off its pad in a plume of brilliant flames and edged toward the heavens.


Seat-Back Translations At the Met Next Fall
The Metropolitan Opera is to introduce its new seat-back translation system -- called Met Titles instead of the more common supertitles -- at an Oct. 2 performance of Verdi's "Otello," which will open the 1995-96 season.
The system, which the Met has been working on for nearly two years, uses small electronic screens attached to the backs of the seats.
The screens have individual controls, so operagoers who do not want to use them can turn them off.
They also have filters that make their texts invisible to viewers in adjacent seats.
The Met said that producing and installing the system would cost about $2 million.


Franciszek Gajowniczek Dead; Priest Died for Him at Auschwitz
Franciszek Gajowniczek, the Polish army sergeant whose life was spared when a Franciscan monk took his death sentence at Auschwitz 53 years ago, died on Monday in the Polish city of Brzeg.
He was 94.
Mr.
Gajowniczek, one of several prisoners selected by the Nazis to die by starvation in a dungeon at Auschwitz called the "hunger bunker," survived because the Rev.
Maksymilian Kolbe volunteered to take his place.


Eagle-Picher Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.94
5.96
3.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.75
5.76
3.55
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.89
5.92
3.81
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.10
7.17
6.44
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.36
7.45
6.89
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.21
8.32
7.75
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.35
6.41
6.04
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


A Likely Next Company For a Board Room Coup
General Motors. I.B.M. Westinghouse. Eastman Kodak. Is Kmart next?
Take one look at the once powerful discount chain, and it is easy to see why Joseph E. Antonini, Kmart's chief executive, might soon become the next corporate chieftain to be ejected in a board room coup.
All over the country -- everywhere the company's relentless archrival, Wal-Mart, has gone -- Kmart has lost ground.


American Express Pact
American Express Travel Services Group said yesterday that Allied Signal Inc. had chosen it to provide business travel services, the corporate card and the corporate purchasing card.
The five-year agreement, expected to be signed soon, will consolidate $350 million in annual travel and purchases through American Express.


Lemaire's Lethargic Troops Get A Victory
Devils Coach Jacques Lemaire left Byrne Meadowlands Arena tonight not sure what to do with his team after another low-energy performance.
Luckily for the Devils, tonight's game was against the Ottawa Senators, the worst team in the National Hockey League, and the Devils were able to salvage a 4-2 victory while on cruise control.
Ottawa has scored more than three goals in a game only twice this season, never in the last nine games, and has won only once in that span.
No wonder the team is the league doormat with a record of 3-16-4.


Iwo Jima Journal; A Pacific Isle That Can't Quite Rest in Peace.
They traded war stories, visited battle sites and stood uneasily next to men they had tried their hardest to kill.
Half a century after the battle of Iwo Jima, one of the ghastliest in World War II, American and Japanese veterans returned today to commemorate the struggle for an island that had once seemed so important that it had absorbed tens of thousands of lives.
These days, it has no permanent residents.


American Israeli Paper Mills Ltd.(AIP,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Waiver Sought in Carjack Case
Attempted murder, assault, carjacking, weapons possession and robbery.
With charges like these against a 17-year-old Montclair youth, officials want to try him as an adult in the shooting of a woman in her West Caldwell driveway.
The Essex County Prosecutor, Clifford J. Minor, filed a request yesterday to waive juvenile status for the youth.


Clinton Shouldn't Meddle in Irish Matters
To the Editor:
Re "Clinton to Permit Fund-Raising in the U.S. by Top I.R.A. Figure" (news article, March 10): As usual, Mr.
Clinton failed to look before he leaped in announcing that not only will he greet Gerry Adams, but will allow him to raise funds.


An Irish Judge Fuels Debate Over Abortion
The already emotional debate over Ireland's constitutional ban on abortion accelerated today as the man imprisoned in a landmark 1992 case had his sentence reduced.
In the case, a 14-year-old had sought an abortion in Britain, saying that the father of a friend had made her pregnant.
The Government ordered her not to have the abortion.
The Supreme Court overruled the Government, and last June the man, who has never been identified, was convicted of unlawful carnal knowledge and indecent assault, and sentenced to 14 years in prison.


Having a World Title Is Fine, But Jones Still Yearns for More
The diamond and ruby ring proclaims him the world supermiddleweight champion.
But for Roy Jones Jr., there is a time-honored and mythical title he is after: best fighter, pound for pound.
He will do it his way, though, just as he does everything else.


Broad Group Visits President On Affirmative Action's Future
Hoping for help in defusing a political bomb, President Clinton summoned a bipartisan, interracial group of civil rights leaders and academics to the White House on Monday night, part of the Administration's review of Federal affirmative action programs in the face of Republican demands to scale them back.
In a freewheeling four-and-one-half-hour discussion over dinner in the Green Room, Mr.
Clinton sought the advice of about two dozen people with experience on the topic, from the retired Federal appeals judge A. Leon Higginbotham Jr. to the Rev.
Theodore M. Hesburgh, president emeritus of the University of Notre Dame, to Elliot L. Richardson, an Attorney General in the Nixon Administration.
Participants said the President had suggested that he feared that Republicans would use the issue to splinter the country in next year's elections.


Big Investor Relations Task: Selling Mexico to Wall St.
Mexico, the prodigal son of the financial markets, has a lot to do if it is to repair its credibility with Wall Street and international investors, who poured billions of dollars into Mexico and were badly scalded by the recent 48 percent devaluation of the Mexican peso.
Finance Minister Guillermo Ortiz came to New York again yesterday to explain Mexico's second economic plan and to tackle this huge investor relations task.
With the skill of the quintessential technocrat and Stanford-trained economist that he is, Mr.
Ortiz smoothly rattled off projections and answers to journalists and investors in back-to-back meetings at the St.
Regis Hotel.
At times, though, he looked nervous as he tried to convince wary listeners that this time Mexico had hit on a workable plan.
Indeed, the Mexican Government's confidence, even arrogance, of a year ago has turned to anxiety.


COMPANY BRIEFS
UNITED STATES SHOE CORP., Cincinnati, will eliminate about 40 positions and consolidate its footwear division, Selby &amp; Co., to save about $4 million a year.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL: Top Rung Is Always a Bit Shaky; This Time, No. 1 U.C.L.A. Hopes to Survive the First Round
The same people who disowned the U.C.L.A.
Bruins one tournament ago -- Bill Walton to name one -- are massaging them now.
The view from the top is breathtaking, but this U.C.L.A. team knows the traction at No. 1 is not firm.
"The way I see it," said forward Charles O'Bannon, "if we lose, everyone's asking for our head again."
They are 25-2, but still hounded by a game from another calendar year.
Last March, the Bruins thought Tulsa was somewhere in Arkansas, until Tulsa was ahead by 20 points somewhere in the first half.
Losing in the first round of the N.C.A.A. tournament is no disgrace if you are Stetson, but when Kareem Abdul-Jabbar's alma mater goes down in the Round of 64, people talk.


4 Arrested After Wild Chase Across Hudson
What began as an early-morning traffic check in Harlem turned into a high-speed, bullet-punctuated chase across the George Washington Bridge and into New Jersey yesterday.
By the time it was over, four men were in custody and dozens of police officers had felt a career's worth of adrenaline in part of one night's shift.
At times, the 22-mile pursuit reached speeds of 110 miles an hour across the lower level of the bridge.
The chase, which involved up to eight cars from a half-dozen police agencies on both sides of the Hudson River, took on near-comic but potentially deadly overtones as the car traveled in the wrong lanes of Route 80 and Route 17 for several miles.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Named Bill Wood consultant and scout.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Signed Jim Poole, pitcher, to a minor-league contract.
Northern League
DULUTH-SUPERIOR DUKES -- Signed Sean Carroll, pitcher.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  LOS ANGELES LAKERS -- Signed Lloyd Daniels and Randolph Keys, forwards, for the rest of the season.
PHOENIX SUNS -- Activated Richard Dumas, guard-forward.
Placed Wayman Tisdale, forward, on the injured list.
United States Basketball League  USBL -- Announced the Mississippi Coast Gamblers franchise will relocate to Jackson, Tenn. for the 1995 season.
JACKSON -- Named Robert Spencer general manager.
Football  National Football League  JACKSONVILLE JAGUARS -- Signed Mickey Washington, cornerback.
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Released Carl Lee, defensive back.
Canadian Football League  BIRMINGHAM -- Announced the team will be called the Barracudas.
Signed Reggie Slack, quarterback.
SHREVEPORT PIRATES -- Signed Fernando Evans, wide receiver.
Hockey  National Hockey League  FLORIDA PANTHERS -- Signed Magnus Svensson, defenseman.
NEW JERSEY DEVILS -- Acquired Shawn Chambers, defenseman, and Danton Cole, right wing, from the Tampa Bay Lightning for Alexander Semak, center, and Ben Hankinson, right wing.
Sent Jaroslav Modry, defenseman, to Albany of the American Hockey League.
Recalled Kevin Dean, defenseman, and Sergei Brylin, center, from Albany.
WINNIPEG JETS -- Recalled Michal Grosek, left wing, from Springfield of the American Hockey League.
American Hockey League  SYRACUSE CRUNCH -- Assigned Cam Danyluk, left wing, to South Carolina of the East Coast Hockey League.
Released Larry Empey, defenseman.
East Coast Hockey League  ERIE PANTHERS -- Placed Eric Bellerose, left wing, on injured reserve.
Horse Racing
HIALEAH PARK -- Named Aggie Anderson director of publicity; Leslie Brown general superintendent; and Ed Mackey director of mutuels.
College
ARMY -- Named Mike Dietzel split ends and tight ends coach, Andre Powell running backs coach, Mike Sullivan defensive backs coach and part-time assistant coach.
BALL STATE -- Named Ted Huber assistant head coach and defensive tackles coach, Curt Mallory linebackers coach, Shannon Griffith quarterbacks coach, Keith Otterbein running backs coach and recruiting coordinator and Dennis Springer wide receivers coach.
INDIANA STATE -- Announced the resignation of Kay Riek, women's basketball coach.
JOHNSON C. SMITH -- Named Daryl McNeill football coach and Stephen Wayne Joyner athletic director.
KENTUCKY -- Named Bernadette Locke-Mattox women's basketball coach.
ROBERT MORRIS -- Named Shawn Westerlund offensive line coach.
SE LOUISIANA -- Named Kim Stewart women's soccer coach.
SOUTHEASTERN LOUISIANA -- Named Kim Stewart women's soccer coach.
ST.
BONAVENTURE -- Named Peter Pilling associate athletic director for external relations.


Aron Pressman, 97, Professor of Russian
Aron Pressman, a former head of the Russian department at New York University, died on Thursday at a nursing home in Sunderland, Mass.
A former resident of Manhattan, he was 97 and had lived in Amherst, Mass., since moving from Manhattan in the 1960's.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


Corrections
A report in the Patterns column on the Fashion page yesterday about a plan by a group of French fashion editors to single out a late-starting show for a walkout misspelled the name of the fashion editor of Le Figaro.
She is Janie Samet.
Because of an editing error the report also misstated the home country of Le Figaro.
It is a French daily, not Italian.


Kirby Corp.(KEX,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Fallout Risks Near Atom Tests Were Known, Documents Show
The United States military knew there were serious health risks of radioactive fallout from nuclear bomb testing in 1951 and, though a safer site was available, chose to explode weapons near populated areas in Nevada to get better data on where the fallout would go, according to documents uncovered by the President's Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments.
The documents, obtained from the files of the Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico, show that when military officials were planning a series of ground tests of nuclear bombs in the early 1950's, they debated extensively about whether it was safe for people who lived near the test sites in Nevada.


Didn't Hear That Plea for Cash
First the sound, then the fury.
Representative Rodney P. Frelinghuysen, a Morristown Republican, is unhappy with how the head of the Federal Aviation Administration is handling an airplane noise problem in northern New Jersey.
When David Hinson, the F.A.A. administrator, appeared at a hearing to explain his agency's budget request, Mr.
Frelinghuysen told him that as long as his constituents have problems with noise, the Congressman is going to have problems with the F.A.A. request for $8.4 billion.


Suit Seeks Results of Babies' AIDS Tests
In the continuing battle over whether newborns should be tested for the AIDS virus and their mothers told the results, a New York City advocacy group for children filed suit yesterday to force New York State to do so.
A bill that would require such testing and disclosure is expected to go to the Senate floor within weeks after being approved by a health committee yesterday.
It is supported by Gov.
George E. Pataki.


Great Atlantic &amp; Pacific Tea Co.(GAP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 25


Food Notes
Times Square Tastes
The second annual Taste of Times Square, with food samples served by more than 30 restaurants, will be held on Monday from 6 to 9 P.M. at the Holiday Inn Crowne Plaza, 1605 Broadway (48th Street).
Tickets are $30 at the door or $25 if purchased in advance by calling (212) 307-6216.
The event will celebrate the publication of this year's Times Square Restaurant Guide, listing more than 200 restaurants from Sixth Avenue to Eighth and 40th Street to 53d, and including 46th Street between Eighth and Ninth avenues.


Policies To Bar Guns In School Vary Widely
Around the country, many school districts are rushing to respond to a new Federal education law that threatens them with the loss of Government money if they do not impose a suspension of at least a year on students who carry guns to school.
But the reaction to the law, enacted last year, has hardly been uniform.
Some districts, frustrated by provisions that they regard as ineffective or confusing, have instead been awaiting a Supreme Court ruling on the constitutionality of a similar 1990 Federal statute, to which they long ago responded with restrictions that were mostly milder but in some cases far tougher.


Simms Close to a Deal
PHIL SIMMS, the former Giants quarterback who was cut from the team last year, is believed to be close to cutting a comeback deal with the Cleveland Browns.
The dollars being discussed would make the 39-year-old Simms the highest-paid backup quarterback in the National Football League.


Market Place; Heady days for drug makers, especially so at SmithKline.
THE big drug companies are pleasing investors again, after singing the blues for nearly three years.
Sales and profits are stronger at most companies, but the improved results are especially sweet for SmithKline Beecham P.L.C., the British-American company based in London that is emerging from difficult times.
After the patent expired last year on Tagamet, SmithKline's strong-selling ulcer treatment, low-priced generic versions invaded the market.
As a result of the increased competition, analysts projected flat or lower earnings in the fourth quarter.
But SmithKline surprised them, reporting that overall sales rose 12 percent with the help of a raft of new products and that earnings per share were up 6 percent.


Doing the twist with Woody Harrelson: C3


Bates Worldwide To Cut 150 Positions
Less than a month after the loss of its important Mars Inc. account, with billings estimated at $400 million, Bates Worldwide is laying off 3 percent, or about 150, of its 5,000 employees worldwide.
Judy Torello, a spokeswoman for Bates in New York, confirmed reports of the dismissals this week in Advertising Age and Adweek.
She said yesterday that the layoffs would begin this week, but it had not been decided from which offices they would be made; the Canadian trade publication Marketing Magazine reported last week that Bates Canada in Toronto was expected to dismiss about a dozen employees.


Hillary Clinton Asks U.N. to Do More for Women
Today, for the second time in a week, Hillary Rodham Clinton came to speak to a United Nations gathering, this time about the condition of women's lives within this organization as much as in the world at large.
But this time, invoking the spirit of Eleanor Roosevelt, who was a delegate to the General Assembly, Mrs.
Clinton offered the most spirited American defense of the United Nations that this gloomy headquarters has heard from Washington in a long time.
Today's conference, "Women and the United Nations," was dedicated to Mrs.
Roosevelt's memory.


Christopher Persuades Syria and Israel to Resume Direct Talks
Syria agreed today to meet face to face with Israel once again in a drive to find a formula for peace, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said in Damascus.
The talks will begin in Washington in the next several days between the Israeli Ambassador, Itamar Rabinovich, and the Syrian Ambassador, Walid Moallem, and the United States will take part.
Soon afterward, military experts from both sides will join in, and eventually the army Chiefs of Staff of both countries will meet, Mr.
Christopher added.


Devils Trade For Defense
The Devils traded center Aleksandr Semak and right wing Ben Hankinson to the Tampa Bay Lightning today for defenseman Shawn Chambers and right wing Danton Cole.
Chambers and Cole did not arrive in time for tonight's game against Ottawa.


Business Travel; As U.S. hotel companies rush to get ready to enter Cuba, Days Inns appears to be a step ahead.
AMERICAN hotel companies have made no secret of their intention to expand into Cuba if and when Washington lifts its economic embargo, but the company that appears positioned to move the quickest boasts neither luxury resorts nor a reputation as a hotel for business travelers.
It is Days Inns of America Inc., a chain of 1,600 economy hotels.
"We've identified about 12 properties we consider suitable to carry our banner," said John Russell, president of Days Inns, "and once relations are normalized between the U.S. and Cuba we'd be ready to go."


Texans Fight Concealed Weapons Bill
To the Editor:
You note that in Florida 266,000 permits to carry concealed handguns have been issued ("States Seek to Let Citizens Carry Concealed Weapons," news article, March 6).
However, only 150,000 Floridians have permits now.
For some reason, 116,000 citizens obtained permits but then let them lapse during the eight years the law has been in effect.


President of Toyota Ill
The Toyota Motor Corporation said yesterday that its president, Tatsuro Toyoda, 65, had been hospitalized with high blood pressure and would be away from work until the summer.
Toyota said it would be run in the meantime by its chairman, Shoichiro Toyoda, and five executive vice presidents.
The company's president, Tatsuro Toyoda, was taken by ambulance to a hospital on Feb. 24, and Toyota had said very little about his prognosis until yesterday.
In addition to being president of Toyota, Mr.
Toyoda is chairman of the Japan Automobile Manufacturers Association.


Nuclear Arms Cleanup Plan Is Impossible, Senators Say
The ranking members of the Senate Energy Committee said today that an agreement between the Federal Government and the State of Washington to clean up a nuclear weapons plant was impossible to carry out and that Congress should rewrite the laws concerning such projects.
The senators said the program to clean up the Hanford Nuclear Reservation, the costliest and most complex of several agreements reached with many states under Federal pollution laws, could not achieve its goals under any conceivable budget or timetable and would have to be scrapped.


G.O.P. Chief Resigns Post Under Pressure
The longtime chairman of the Westchester County Republican Party is resigning under pressure from Gov.
George E. Pataki and his Republican allies in the county.
The decision by the chairman, Anthony S. Colavita, underscores Mr.
Pataki's efforts to assert his control over the party statewide.
Mr.
Colavita is expected to be replaced by State Senator Nicholas Spano, who unlike Mr.
Colavita endorsed Mr.
Pataki early in last year's campaign.


Corrections
A brief announcement in some copies of Business Day yesterday about the omission of the foreign stocks table misidentified the table's source.
It is Bloomberg Financial Markets, not Tribune Media Services.


G.M. Honored In Reggie Awards
A promotion marketing campaign for the Saturn Corporation unit of General Motors, took top honors yesterday at the Promotion Marketing Association of America's 12th annual Reggie Awards ceremony in Chicago.
The Saturn promotion that captured the Super Reggie, called "A Saturn Homecoming," involved the visits of more than 40,000 Saturn owners to the company's plant in Spring Hill, Tenn., and the visits of close to 100,000 owners to local dealerships nationwide.
The campaign, created by an in-house team, was selected from among nine other Reggie winners.


Swim Medals Spiced by a Family Reunion
Cristina Teuscher was ecstatic when she learned that the 1995 Pan American Games would be held in Argentina.
Her parents were born in Buenos Aires.
Her grandparents still live there.
This would be a great opportunity to compete in front of her relatives.
Then she thought again.
She was a swimmer, and Argentina appeared to be a country without any pools.
"When I was 9 or 10 and we visited, it was hard to find a pool," said the 17-year-old Teuscher, a junior at New Rochelle High School in Westchester County.
"We ended up not training."


Bumper to Bumper to Bumper
Diminished services and increased fares.
That was the prospect held out by Senator Frank R. Lautenberg and former Gov.
Jim Florio if the Federal Government goes ahead with proposed cuts in mass transit aid.
Speaking to an American Public Transit Association conference, Mr.
Lautenberg and Mr.
Florio, both Democrats, said that those consequences would put more drivers on the road in New Jersey, the nation's most densely populated state.


Procter &amp; Gamble Chooses Its New Chief
Ending months of speculation about Procter &amp; Gamble's corporate succession, the company's board yesterday named John E. Pepper, 56, a gentlemanly consensus-builder who is a 32-year veteran of the company, to be chairman and chief executive beginning July 1.
He will succeed Edwin L. Artzt, Procter's autocratic leader for the last five years, whose departure had been expected.
The board of the consumer-products giant appeared to be naming not only the heir apparent but also an heir apparent to him: Durk I. Jager, a highly competitive, 51-year-old strategist with an impatient streak, will replace Mr.
Pepper as president and assume the newly created position of chief operating officer.


J. R. Pennock, 89, Political Professor, Theorist and Author
J.
Roland Pennock, a political scientist who made his mark in legal and political theory, died on Feb. 19 at Bryn Mawr Hospital in Bryn Mawr, Pa.
He was 89 and lived in Haverstraw, Pa.
The cause was an acute infection, his family said.


At Towing Trial, a Hook Shot
The defense got its chance yesterday to go after a witness against two Councilmen on trial for bribery, portraying him as a man who betrayed their trust and exaggerated his political connections while skimming funds from his partners in a towing company seeking a city contract.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Conoco Drops Iran Pact As U.S. Moves to Block Deal
Conoco said it would back out of its deal announced last week to develop two offshore oilfields for Iran after the White House said that President Clinton would issue a directive barring all such transactions.


F.A.A. Orders Checks of Rudder on 737's
Following reports that two particular rudder power control units had malfunctioned, the Federal Aviation Administration yesterday ordered all airlines that use Boeing 737's to inspect the devices.
The agency said it suspected that the problem was confined to only 36 rudder units that were recently modified by Aero Controls Inc., a repair station in Auburn, Wash.
Testing of two units found that a screw that retained a spring had not been properly tightened by the repair station.


An Expanded Business Day
In today's issue of Business Day, reporters take a hard look behind the scenes at the discount giant, Kmart, where a tumbling stock price and a split on the board threaten the future of the discount retailing chain's chief executive, Joseph E. Antonini.
Business Day, Section D


Reneging on AmeriCorps
The House will decide as early as today whether to take back two-thirds of the money it previously voted to spend this year on AmeriCorps, President Clinton's national service program.
The slashing attack on a worthy program can only be interpreted as an effort to humiliate the President.
In its first year, AmeriCorps has placed 20,000 participants -- more than the Peace Corps at its peak -- with nonprofit organizations to do valuable community work.
With minimal bureaucracy and overhead, participants have cleared crack houses, taught ghetto children and built low-cost housing.


Study Sees a Sugar-Adrenaline Link in Children
ALTHOUGH parents commonly complain that their children become wild and inattentive after eating a lot of sweets, most researchers have steadfastly insisted that the effects of sugar on children are negligible, if they exist at all.
But now a new study by pediatric researchers at Yale University School of Medicine suggests that the parents' observations may be correct.
The study showed that within hours after normal, healthy children are given a lot of sugar on an empty stomach, their bodies release large amounts of the hormone adrenaline, which causes symptoms like shakiness, anxiety, excitement and concentration problems.
The children were more likely to report or exhibit these symptoms, and an examination of their brain waves revealed significant changes in their ability to pay attention.


Real Estate; Development, including luxury apartments, is stirring in a business park near Orlando, Fla.
DEVELOPMENT in the largest business park in the metropolitan region here, which had virtually ground to a halt in recent years, is off to a fast start this year with two new projects.
Two tracts have been sold in the Summit, part of the Maitland Center, a 3.8-million-square-foot business park north of Orlando.
The tracts will be developed as an office building and a luxury apartment complex.


Why a Fez Is a Sensation at Israel's Book Fair
Even though he was only taking books out of boxes and putting them on shelves, Nghimi Filali caused a small sensation in his fez and long robe.
Moroccan visitors to Israel are few.
Representatives of Moroccan publishing houses are almost unheard of.


The Iran Exception; U.S. Will Deal With Other Old Foes But Still Sees Teheran as an Outlaw
If American business has received a single clear message from the Clinton Administration during the last year, here it is: Join the age of "economic engagement," by helping the United States win over the souls of authoritarian regimes through greater access to American capital and investment.


Magic Loses At Home To Hot Jazz
Jazz 107, Magic 95
Karl Malone scored 27 points and John Stockton keyed a 15-3 spurt in the last three minutes last night as the Utah Jazz beat the Magic at Orlando, Fla., 107-95, for its ninth consecutive victory.


'Workforce' vs. Welfare
ORGANIZATION
New York Republican State Committee. PRODUCER
Russo, Marsh &amp; Associates, Alexandria, Va., and Sacramento, Calif. VISUAL
The advertisement begins with the words "workfare or welfare" flashed in white letters on a black screen.
For most of the rest of the ad, half the screen is filled with a black-and-white photograph of the Assembly Democrat who is under attack, as the script scrolls up the other half.
When the narrator mentions Gov.
George E. Pataki's support for workfare, a color photograph of the smiling Governor appears.
SCRIPT
Announcer: "Workfare or welfare. It's up to Assembly member John/Jane Doe. You want workfare. So does Gov. George Pataki. Tell Democratic Assembly member Doe welfare doesn't work and to stop wasting our tax dollars. This month, John/Jane Doe will cast a crucial vote to keep welfare or create workfare. Tell him/her you want workfare, not welfare. Tell him/her to vote for Gov. George Pataki's budget plan for change." ACCURACY
There is nothing patently inaccurate in the ad except for the implicit suggestion that the Assembly Democrats oppose workfare.
In fact, Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, the Democratic leader, maintains that every member of his conference supports the notion that able-bodied welfare recipients should work for their benefits.
Where the parties differ is over how to make that happen.
Mr.
Pataki has proposed a 90-day limit on employable recipients of the welfare program known as Home Relief, most of whom are single, childless adults.
During that 90-day period, he would force welfare recipients to work in public-service jobs.
Mr.
Silver has said he can support the notion of time limits as long as the state provides job-training programs to prepare welfare recipients for the realities of New York's tough job market.
SCORECARD
The strategy is to paint Republicans as the agents of change and Democrats as the defenders of the status quo.
Few issues help make that case more effectively than welfare.
The ground for this mesage is particularly fertile in the upstate and Long Island districts where this ad is running.
Like most political advertising, the ad simplifies the debate.
Mr.
Pataki's budget is about far more than workfare, and it includes deep spending cuts that may be anathema even to those who support welfare reform.
But personalizing the budget debate may prove effective.
Every campaign, after all, needs an enemy.
KEVIN SACK


Company-Backed Juice Study Sets Off a Dispute on Ethics
A RELATIVELY minor study published this month in a pediatrics journal has touched off a major marketing campaign and a dispute over the role of corporations in sponsoring scientific studies.
The study, financed by Welch Foods Inc., the country's leading grape juice manufacturer, compared how well babies and toddlers absorbed apple and grape juice.
The advertising campaign suggests that the results show that white grape juice is better than apple juice for very young children.
But several prominent pediatricians, including the editor of the journal that published the study, say that this message is misleading and that it raises disturbing questions about the power that corporations wield over health information in an age when medical research is growing increasingly dependent on their donations.


Taking to Airwaves for (or Against) Budget
Applying the tactics of campaign warfare to New York's budget battle, both Republicans and Democrats began flooding the airwaves today with advertisements designed to build pressure for and against Gov.
George E. Pataki's spending cuts.
Officials with both parties said such heavy use of television and radio advertising by political organizations was highly unusual in New York's budget process.
But they said it reflected the high stakes in this year's budget fight, as well as the increasing role of advertising.


Eating Well; Crackle, Pop, Compare
A MAN picked up a box of cereal in a supermarket recently, put it down and picked up another, then another and another, returning each of them to the shelf.
Before turning away, he shook his head and said to no one in particular, "So expensive!"
The disgruntled shopper had a cheaper alternative: store-brand cereals.
The store brands' packaging may not be as spiffy as that of the national brands, and the store brands don't come with special offers.
But they certainly are cheaper, and they did remarkably well in a taste test by The New York Times.


The Albany Budget Games Begin
In a bipartisan display of fantasy and procrastination, New York State legislators are already looking to save favored programs from devastating budget cuts while carrying out Gov.
George Pataki's proposed tax reductions without the money to pay for them.
Albany has long been famous for the way governors and legislatures employ imaginative bookkeeping to overestimate revenues or shove the cost of programs and tax reductions into future years.
Their shenanigans have left the state with one of the poorest credit ratings in the country.
This year the pressure to find painless gimmickry is extraordinary because of the outcry over Mr.
Pataki's slash-and-burn approach and the desire in all quarters to give New Yorkers some tax relief.


In Rwanda, Long-Delayed Last Respects


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Striking baseball players still striking it rich on Madison Avenue.
THE strike against Major League Baseball is keeping familiar players from spring training.
And there doesn't seem to be much likelihood that they will be in uniform come Opening Day.
But somewhere, stars like Jeff Bagwell, Will Clark, Ken Griffey Jr., Don Mattingly, Cal Ripken Jr. and Frank Thomas are still making amazing catches, hitting towering home runs and playing as if every game were the World Series.


Burglaries Show Big Decline in New York City
Police Officer Roger Smith remembers when he began to lift fingerprints in downtown Brooklyn and surrounding neighborhoods in 1986: He would typically face an urgent bunch of 20 or more fresh burglary cases after his weekend off.
"I'd run around like a chicken without a head," he recalled.
But burglaries in his precinct, covering Brooklyn Heights, Boerum Hill and the Fulton Street Mall, have decreased to fewer than two a day on average.
Some days, he said, he feels like the repairman in a Maytag commercial.


Ross Stores Inc.(ROST,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Berlitz Intl.(BTZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Phillips-Van Heusen Corp.(PVH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Coventry Corp.(CVTY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Knicks Meet the Enemy; It May Be Themselves
A sideline disagreement between Coach Pat Riley and Anthony Mason, which led to Mason briefly leaving the bench during the game, overshadowed New York's 94-74 victory over the Denver Nuggets last night.
The incident occurred during a timeout with 8 minutes 29 seconds left in the third quarter.
Riley was upset with Mason for some reason, and the coach began talking to the Knick forward in an animated fashion as Mason sat at the end of the bench.


The American Is Coming


In Gesture to Rebels, Mexico Will Pull Back Its Troops
Hoping to entice peasant rebels in the southern state of Chiapas to join new peace talks, the Mexican Government said today that it would move army troops out of villages within the territory formerly controlled by the insurgents.
A spokesman for the Interior Ministry said the Government would also formally suspend arrest warrants that were issued last month against six accused leaders of the rebel Zapatista National Liberation Army.


Nets' Defense Is Sound Against a Shaq Attack
Two seasons ago, in a forest of National Basketball Association trees, the 7-foot-2 reserve center Dwayne Schintzius was guarding the 7-1 man-child, Shaquille O'Neal.
Schintzius played his way onto all the cable sports shows that evening -- with a little help from Shaq.
Schintzius was the unfortunate soul O'Neal dunked so ferociously hard over that the shot not only brought down the backboard support at Byrne Meadowlands Arena but also gave hip-hop songwriters whole new inspiration.


Man in the News: Norman Earl Thagard; The Space Comrade From Florida
Norman E. Thagard was trained to kill Communists.
In the Marine Corps, he labored in one of the hottest theaters of the cold war, flying 163 combat missions in Vietnam, winning awards for bravery and succeeding in coming home alive to his family.
Now, 25 years later, he has become the first American to ride into space aboard a Russian rocket, helping fashion a new era in which former foes work together as partners in space.


Celebrities Take Art's Case to Congress
Most days, Garth Brooks is a chart-topping country singer and international celebrity.
Today he was a political lobbyist, pounding shoe leather along the Capitol's tiled hallways, trying to argue a suddenly pinchpenny Congress out of its determination to cut Federal subsidies to the arts.
So were some 350 cultural leaders, heartthrob musicians, actors and other artists, famous and anonymous.
It was not at all clear that they made much headway.


A Study Calls Household Materials Especially Toxic
Chemicals found in everyday products like carpeting and particleboard may pose greater long-term environmental hazards than industrial chemical wastes, a study conducted for the influential environmental group Inform has concluded.
One result may be increased pressure on manufacturers, particularly in the chemical industry, to reduce the use of substances suspected of causing cancer or reproductive problems; more paperwork requirements could follow, too.


Gulls on Approach to Kennedy
THE laughing gulls are on their way to their spring and summer roosts at the edge of Kennedy International Airport, and the 18 men who keep the birds away from the runways and the jets are worried.
"We can't shoot them this year," said Charles Zeilfelder, a supervisor of the Port Authority animal-management unit and a 12-year veteran of the efforts to keep the Kennedy birds in their place.


The Right Way to Help Pakistan
Violence is running out of control in Pakistan's port city of Karachi.
More than 1,000 Pakistani lives have been lost in a year of disorder.
Last week two American consular employees were killed and a third wounded when their van was ambushed on the city's main thoroughfare.
There are domestic causes behind the unrest, like ethnic and religious conflicts, political rivalries and drug-turf battles.
But Pakistan's troubled relations with the United States are also a factor.


AT WORK WITH: Alexander C. Sanger; In His Grandmother's Footsteps
WHEN her son Grant had six children, Margaret Sanger should not have been surprised.
In the annals of passive aggression, it is a classic.
"It sure is," agrees her grandson Alexander.
"My grandmother very strongly believed that two, at the outside three, was the right number of children to have. So when my mother was pregnant with me, No. 4, she and my father flipped a coin over who would call Margaret Sanger to tell her. You know what she said? 'You've disgraced me. I'm going to Europe.' "


INSIDE
Syria Agrees to Meet Israel
Syria has agreed to meet with Israel in a drive to find a formula for peace, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said in Damascus.
The United States will participate.
Page A9.
Limits on Court Secrecy
The judges who make policy for the Federal courts, in a closed-door meeting, rejected a proposal that would have made it easier to seal court records in civil cases.
Page B9.
Burglaries on the Wane
In one of the most pronounced crime trends in New York City and its suburbs, burglary is becoming more unusual every year.
Page B1.
Floods Press Farm Workers
Driven from their trailers and fields by flood waters, California's migrant farm laborers faced the prospect of having to move on.
Page A18.


CHRONICLE
JACK MILES has tackled an even loftier topic in his new book, "God: A Biography," which will be published next month by Knopf.
Turning the Deity into a biographical subject was not an insurmountable task, Mr.
Miles said yesterday.
"I have always been fascinated by the person of God," he said, "and drawn to think about Him as one would the protagonist in any great literary work," in this case the Old Testament.


Foot Behind Head, Woody Harrelson Goes Positively Yogic
WE were entering the fourth chakra, the chakra of love.
So where was Woody?


Elizabeth Futas, 50; Led Library School
Elizabeth Dorothy Futas, the director of the University of Rhode Island's Graduate School of Library and Information Studies, died on Feb. 6 in Philadelphia.
She was 50 and lived in Wakefield, R.I.
The cause has not been reported, according to the American Library Association in Chicago.
Dr.
Futas, a member of its governing council, was attending the association's midwinter meeting at the Pennsylvania Convention Center at the time.


February Retail Sales Had Surprising Slide
The Government reported today that retail sales fell five-tenths of 1 percent in February, a surprising decline that was the first in almost a year.
"Consumers are keeping their wallets shut," said Bruce Steinberg, a senior economist at Merrill Lynch.
"The retail sales report provides more evidence to support our view that the economy is slowing significantly."


Effort to Preserve a Political Dynasty in East Harlem Fails by a Wide Margin
William Del Toro's attempt to win his brother's State Assembly seat in East Harlem ended in a crushing upset last night at the hands of Francisco Diaz Jr., the manager of Community Board 11 and a neighborhood political organizer.
The 68th Assembly District seat had been held for 20 years by Angelo Del Toro, a Democrat and former head of the Assembly's Education Committee, before his death in December from a heart attack.


A Better Plan for X-Rated Shops
Showing refreshing flexibility, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has reached a reasonable agreement with the New York City Council on strict zoning rules to limit the spread of X-rated video stores and topless bars in midtown Manhattan and residential neighborhoods like Chelsea and Forest Hills, Queens.
Courts have permitted municipalities to regulate the location and concentration of sex-oriented adult businesses if their presence undermines the economy and public safety.
But such zoning laws must be drawn with utmost care.
Sexually explicit videos, books and dancing are forms of constitutionally protected free expression.


Hills Stores Co.(HDS,N) reports earnings for 13wks to Jan 28


Moe Ginsburg Narrows Review
Moe Ginsburg, Men's Better Clothing Inc., in New York, said yesterday that it had narrowed the review on the creative portion of its account to 4 agencies from 31.
The account, with billings estimated at $1 million, had been at Lipman, Richmond, Greene in New York for the last seven years until that agency was dismissed early last month.
Martin Weissberg, president of the Media and Marketing Group in Boca Raton, Fla., which handles the media portion of the account and is advising the review, identified the finalists, all based in New York, as Beaver Reitzfeld Inc., Calderhead &amp; Phin, Castle Underwood and Follis Advertising Inc.
A decision is expected by April 1, he added.


Rams Still Waiting For N.F.L. Approval
The National Football League owners discussed the Los Angeles Rams' proposed moved to St.
Louis for more five hours today without reaching a decision.
Their annual meeting will resume on Wednesday, and the owners indicated that a vote might not be taken until Thursday.
The Rams have already negotiated a deal with St.
Louis and are seeking the owners' approval to begin play there during the 1995 season.
Twenty-three of the owners' 30 votes are needed for approval.


Yesterday in Washington
THE TAX CUT: The House Ways and Means Committee approved the Republicans' tax-cut bill, a cornerstone of their Contract With America, which would lower taxes by almost $200 billion over the next five years.
But the action was tempered by the first signs of trouble in the Republicans' promise to compensate for the tax cuts by cutting spending.
Party leaders had to concede that they were hard pressed to win support for even a first modest round of reductions.
Republicans have insisted that they would pay for the tax cuts with equivalent reductions in spending so the deficit would not be worsened; they have not specified how they would do so.
LOBBYING FOR THE ARTS: The country singer Garth Brooks was among 350 musicians, actors, artists and cultural leaders who lobbied in the Capitol to divert Congress from its determination to cut Federal subsidies to the arts.
Arts Advocacy Day was sponsored by the nonprofit American Council for the Arts and financed by corporate donations.
The council has conducted similar annual expeditions over the last 14 years, usually with some assurance that a Democratic-run Congress would protect both its interests and its financing.
That changed when the last election swept fiscal and social conservatives into power.


Rabbi L. J. Bernstein, 67, Orthodox Jewish Leader
Rabbi Louis J. Bernstein, president of the 1,000-member Rabbinical Council of America and a major spokesman for modern Orthodox Jewry for three decades, died on Sunday at his home in Bayside, Queens.
He was 67.
The cause was brain cancer, according to family members.


Corrections
A chart on Sunday with statistics about New York City services from Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's annual Management Report overstated the number of slashing incidents in the city's jails.
In 1993 there were 0.27 slashings per 100 inmates, not 27 slashings; in 1994 there were 0.52, not 52.


In Wake of Death, Rowland Vows to Help Children in Troubled Families
Gov.
John G. Rowland said today that Connecticut would be more aggressive in taking children from troubled families.
He spoke after the death of a 9-month-old who the police say was sexually assaulted by her mother's boyfriend.
Mr.
Rowland said that a state social worker was assigned to monitor the family in 1991 and that the infant, Emily Hernandez, was treated for a broken leg three weeks ago.
The Department of Children and Families accepted the mother's explanation then that the injury was accidental, according to state records.


C.I.A. Report Misleads on Bosnia War Crimes
To the Editor:
"C.I.A. Report on Bosnia Blames Serbs for 90% of the War Crimes," your March 9 news article, reveals a factual error on the part of the C.I.A.


Flood May Carry Away Immigrants' Farm Jobs
Driven from their trailers by the same flood waters that lay brown and still over the Salinas Valley's fertile strawberry and lettuce fields, immigrant farm workers, desperate for jobs, faced the prospect today of having to join a new migration.
With their homes and possessions soaked in mud and sewage, many workers camped temporarily today in Watsonville on the other side of the flooded Pajaro River, with relatives or in a Red Cross shelter.
Local officials said they would not be allowed to return until Pajaro was dry and until they had received tetanus shots to ward off disease.
But after that, their futures loomed as uncertain as ever.


Coach of 'the Mount' Is the Man of the Hour
The outdoor basketball hoops on the Mount St.
Mary's College campus here have been uprooted.
Poles with plywood backboards and rusty rims lie on their sides, strewn about and awaiting replacements.
Indoors, though, basketball could not be in better shape: Jim Phelan, the coach here for 41 years, is dealing with a news media blitz on the eve of his Mountaineers' first trip to the N.C.A.A. tournament.
And the women's team is 1 of the final 64 in its national tournament for the second consecutive year.


Concluding That Cisneros Lied, Reno Urges a Special Prosecutor
Attorney General Janet Reno has concluded that Housing Secretary Henry G. Cisneros misled Federal agents about payments he made to a former mistress and has asked a judicial panel to appoint an independent counsel to investigate the matter, according to court papers unsealed today.
In effect, Ms.
Reno said Mr.
Cisneros lied to investigators before his appointment in 1993, significantly understating how much money he had given to Linda Medlar, his former mistress.
While Mr.
Cisneros had earlier acknowledged making such payments, he told F.B.I. agents that he had never paid her more than $10,000 a year.
In fact, Ms.
Reno said, he paid her $42,000 to $60,000 a year.


No Headline
"In my old age, it occurred to me that we could make a difference to our country, and do it with an institution that had staying power and that I was familiar with. After all, Harvard has been around more than 300 years. JOHN L. LOEB, after he and his wife gave Harvard $70.5 million.  [ B11:5. ]


N.F.L.: Sapp Did Not Test Positive for Cocaine
The National Football League labeled as "inaccurate" a report in The New York Times yesterday that Warren Sapp had tested positive for cocaine.
Sapp, the former Miami defensive lineman, is a potential No. 1 pick in next month's N.F.L. draft, and the player's attorney, Drew Rosenhaus, said he was "wrongly accused."
"The report today that Warren Sapp of the University of Miami tested positive for cocaine at the Scouting Combine in Indianapolis is inaccurate," the league said in a statement yesterday.
"The same story reported that James Stewart of the University of Miami tested positive for marijuana at the same Combine. This is also inaccurate. Stewart did not test positive for any illegal substance."


Salinas, in New York, Denies Being Asked to Quit Mexico
Carlos Salinas de Gortari, the former President of Mexico who was said to have been forced into virtual exile over the weekend by his successor, popped up on Manhattan's East Side yesterday, eager to dismiss that version of events.
"Can I return to Mexico?" Mr.
Salinas said in an interview.
"At any moment! Yes!" He paused, then added, "But I don't have plans now to do so."


Canadian's Debut in 'Figaro'
The New York City Opera's current production of "The Marriage of Figaro" is unremarkable but more than adequate; it lets the opera speak for itself.
Carl Toms's sets and costumes tend toward plainness, allowing room for the singers to move and the audience to imagine.
The only serious complaint one could make is that the colors are more drab than bright; Hans Sondheimer's generally dim lighting may be to blame.
The spring run of "Figaro" has brought the City Opera debut of Wendy Nielsen, a Canadian soprano singing the Countess.
She has the proper noble bearing for the role, and her voice is essentially warm and full.
On Sunday afternoon, however, she ran into trouble, struggling early on to reach a few high notes and displaying an uncomfortably wide vibrato.
She sounded weary toward the end of her "Dove sono," wavering in pitch and tone quality.
This may simply have been an off night.


Solomon Seidman, Bridge Official, 85
Solomon Seidman, a prominent official in tournament bridge, died on March 5 at St.
Barnabas Hospital in Livingston, N.J.
He was 85.
The cause of death was pneumonia, his sister, Gertrude White of Springfield, N.J., said.


Boeing Is Victor In S.A.S. Deal With a Value Of $1.16 Billion
In a big victory for the Boeing Company and a serious setback for the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, the Scandinavian Airlines System said today that it would purchase 35 new Boeing 737 jetliners, valued at $1.16 billion, and take options on another 35 planes.
McDonnell Douglas had been counting on S.A.S., the flagship carrier of Sweden, Norway and Denmark, to be the so-called launching customer that would justify beginning production of the company's new 100-seat MD-95 aircraft.


Bella Fishko; Gallery Founder, 81
Bella Fishko, an art dealer and founder of the Forum Gallery, died on Monday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 81.
The cause was heart failure, said her son, Robert, of Manhattan.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  CONOCO DROPS IRAN DEAL  Conoco will not proceed with its agreement to develop two offshore oilfields for Iran after the White House announced that President Clinton would issue a directive barring all such transactions.
A1  CARLOS SALINAS'S SIDE  Carlos Salinas, the Mexican ex-President said to have been forced into exile by his successor, has popped up in New York, eager to dismiss that version of events.
A1


Sports of The Times; Don't Use Jordan As a Pawn
IT was an embarrassment of riches for Jerry Reinsdorf, who owns both the Chicago Bulls and the Chicago White Sox.
Not only did Reinsdorf suddenly have Michael Jordan considering a return to the Bulls, which would make them formidable opponents in the playoffs, but he could also deliver a hit in the baseball labor negotiations.
This is what Jerry Reinsdorf said: "What Donald Fehr did was make it impossible for Michael to play in exhibition games, which retarded his progress to the point where Michael felt it wasn't worth it."


Judges Urge Easing of Nynex Regulations
Endorsing a drastic loosening of telephone regulations in New York, two administrative law judges recommended yesterday that the state's Public Service Commission free the Nynex Corporation to earn unregulated profits in return for a reduction in local phone rates.
The judges, J. Michael Harrison and Joel A. Linsider, gave conditional approval to a proposal by Nynex and the Public Service Commission staff that would reduce basic phone rates for Nynex customers in New York State by $375 million over the first five years of a seven-year plan.
Nynex, in turn, would be allowed to boost its profits by cutting costs and selling a broad range of new communications services.


Broadway StoresInc.(BWY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Judicial Conference Rejects More Secrecy in Civil Court
Expressing concern about court secrecy, the judges who make policy for the Federal courts voted today to reject a proposal that would have made the sealing of court records nearly automatic in civil cases as long as the two sides agreed.
The vote by the 27-member Judicial Conference of the United States, in a closed-door meeting at the Supreme Court, was a surprise after a week of mounting controversy over the proposal to amend the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.


OIL CONCERN ENDS A DEAL WITH IRAN AS PRESIDENT ACTS
A big American oil company said today that it would not proceed with its agreement to develop two large offshore oilfields for Iran after the White House announced that President Clinton would issue a directive barring all such transactions.
The step by Conoco Inc. ended an energy deal that would have been the first involving Iran and the United States since Washington severed relations with Teheran in 1980.
It came after eight days of debate within the Administration about how and whether to block an agreement that top deputies to Mr.
Clinton acknowledged was legal but said could undermine American efforts to isolate Iran.


Next Messier Confronts the Current One
When Eric Lindros was a teen-ager in junior hockey, he used to keep a Mark Messier hockey card on his locker shelf as if it were some sort of religious totem.
Now that Lindros is 22 years old and a third-year veteran, he no longer displays a Messier picture in the dressing room.
He simply plays like a young Messier on the ice.
Coming into tonight's game between Messier's Rangers and Lindros's Flyers at Madison Square Garden, Lindros is tied for second in the National Hockey League in scoring with 34 points on 12 goals and 22 assists.
More important, he's the leader of a rapidly improving team that is challenging for first place in the Atlantic Division.


Big B Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Tragedy Casts Harsh Light on Volunteer Ambulance Units
They are a familiar blur as they rush through the city's incident-prone streets, sirens screaming, responding to calls from the stricken.
On board are crews of "weekend warriors" -- accountants, electricians, truck drivers, plumbers -- animated by do-goodism and accompanied by city ambulance workers who say they want to rescue lives in the off-hours as well.
Forty-eight volunteer ambulance services operate in New York City, grass-roots groups supported by bake sales and raffles, usually with no more than a single vehicle and a two-way radio.
The crews, often trained in cardiopulmonary resuscitation and first aid, are neighbors of the very people they save.


Mitchell Energy &amp; Development Corp.(MND.A,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


OfficeMax Inc.(OMX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 21


Wine Talk
WITH uncharacteristic hubris, a prominent Bordeaux chateau owner predicted in the late 1980's that henceforth there would be no more bad vintages of Bordeaux wine.
Ego is a persistent Bordeaux problem; hubris is not.
Bordeaux was part of England for 300 years, and the Bordelais pride themselves as much for their sang-froid as for their Savile Row suits.
But perhaps this fellow, who remains nameless because he only said what most of his colleagues were thinking, can be excused.


Pat Robertson Gives Focus to Our Disaffection
To the Editor:
The intemperance of Frank Rich's attack on Pat Robertson (column, March 9) was revealing, particularly in light of its being the second occasion Mr.
Rich has adopted the disruptive strategy of shouting, name-calling and personal insult calculated to discourage debate on what has become an increasingly interesting public issue.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Sabres Beat the Panthers  Yuri Khmylev had an assist and scored the game-winning goal 54 seconds into overtime to lift Buffalo to a 2-1 victory over Florida last night in Miami.
Although Buffalo goaltender Dominik Hasek inadvertently kicked the Panthers' lone goal into his own net, he was spectacular when it counted, turning aside 32 shots. (AP)


Personal Health; Ignoring an easy way to cut risks of crib death.
IN a letter published recently in The New York Times, a distressed grandmother complained that she had been banished from baby-sitting for her 6-week-old grandson after the parents caught her putting the baby to sleep on his stomach.
"Don't you know about SIDS?" the equally distressed father hissed, referring to the growing evidence that babies who sleep face down are at increased risk of sudden infant death syndrome.


Variations of First Love In Late-1950's Ireland
In "Circle of Friends," Minnie Driver gives a lovely performance as unlovely Benny Hogan, a wallflower from a small Irish town.
In this sweetly winsome story of first romance, Benny sets her sights on handsome Jack Foley and shows enough spirit to win his heart.
One nice thing about "Circle of Friends," both on the screen and in Maeve Binchy's entertaining novel, is that where Jack is concerned, it has no trouble making Benny's near-impossible wishes come true.
Another nice thing about "Circle of Friends" is that it escapes a happily-ever-after scenario to provide more bite and toughness than it first promises.
It helps that the director is Pat O'Connor, whose involving, atmospheric style here harks back to his "Cal" and "A Month in the Country," and that Ms.
Binchy is herself a born storyteller.
In its own modest way, the beautifully fashioned "Circle of Friends" works as deftly as Benny does to get what it wants.


In Defense of Algae
To The Living Section:
Marian Burros's Feb. 1 Eating Well column  [ "Don't Believe Everything Your Mouse Clicks Onto" ] , about on-line health services, referred to algae as "nothing more than pond scum." Meat, in the same vein, can be called "nothing more than decaying flesh." Algae is consumed by millions of people worldwide; it is high in protein and minerals and virtually fat-free.


A Recuperating Irvan Takes Some Fast Laps
ERNIE IRVAN got into his race car yesterday for the first time since a near-fatal crash Aug. 20 at Michigan Speedway.
He breezed around Darlington (S.C.) Raceway, setting an unofficial course record of 30.26 seconds in his Busch Grand National Thunderbird.
Wearing a patch on his left eye, he ran a four-lap set on the 1.366-mile oval that produced a turn of 162.510 miles per hour.
That bettered the mark of 161.342 m.p.h. set in September. (AP)


Local Bouts Are Back
The former champions TRACY HARRIS PATTERSON and AARON DAVIS headline the first boxing show in Manhattan in two years March 29 at the 69th Regiment Armory on Lexington Avenue and 26th Street that the promoter, MICHAEL BLUTRICH, hopes will lead to a series of monthly shows.
Boxing had disappeared from New York when Madison Square Garden ended its regular shows at the Paramount in 1993 until Blutrich got New York State to rent him the armory.
The armory will seat about 3,000 with tickets priced from $75 to $20.


Kohlberg, Kravis Plans to Divest Remaining Stake in RJR Nabisco
Putting an end to one of America's more rambunctious corporate sagas, Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission yesterday to divest itself of its remaining 8 percent ownership of the RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation.
Kohlberg, Kravis said the value of 111.6 million shares, worth $642 million at RJR's closing price of $5.75 yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange, would be "contributed to" Borden Inc., the ailing consumer-products giant that Kohlberg acquired in December in a tender offer worth $1.88 billion, or $13.32 a share.
Kohlberg, Kravis, which purchased 100 percent of RJR Nabisco in 1989 for $26.4 billion, the largest leveraged buyout in United States history, took RJR Nabisco public again in 1991.
It had whittled its ownership of the company down to 39.7 percent before it began the Borden takeover.


Essay; The Greatest Auction Ever
They all laughed at the economist Milton Friedman when he suggested a generation ago that the Federal Government auction off broadcast licenses, instead of giving them away to political favorites.
The last laugh is his; last week, in the greatest auction in history, bidders for wireless places on a tiny fragment of the broadband spectrum committed nearly $8 billion to the U.S.
Treasury.


CHRONICLE
BUDD SCHULBERG was determined that the cast of his new play, "On the Waterfront," absorb the atmosphere of a place where dockworkers gathered.
So yesterday, he accompanied 35 people to the Church of St.
Francis Xavier, at 30 West 16th Street.
"This gives me a chill; I am sitting in the office of Father Neil Hurley, who was a friend of Father John Corridan," Mr.
Schulberg said.
Father Corridan was the crusading priest who was the model for the character played by Karl Malden in the 1954 movie of the same name, which depicted the struggle against mob violence and corruption on New York City's piers.


Berlitz Intl.(BTZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wiley (John) &amp; Sons Inc.(WILLA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Jaguars Get Free Agent
DAVE WIDELL, a free-agent offensive lineman, signed yesterday with the Jacksonville Jaguars.
Widell, a seven-year veteran, started all 16 games at center last season for the Denver Broncos after previously playing guard and tackle.
He spent his first two years in the National Football League with the Dallas Cowboys in 1988-89. (AP)


N.F.L. Owners Reject Rams' Bid to Move To St. Louis
In a fragmented scene that was the order of the day and possibly a hint of the future, the National Football League owners today overwhelmingly rejected the Los Angeles Rams' bid to move to St.
Louis.
Paul Tagliabue, the N.F.L. commissioner, announced the vote as 21 against, 3 for and 6 abstaining.
Moments later, in a separate news conference at the other end of the sprawling resort complex where the owners are conducting their annual meeting, the Rams' owner, Georgia Frontiere, defiantly announced that she was disappointed and said that the league's conditions for approval of the move were "arbitrary, capricious and not based on precedent." She hinted that the Rams would sue the league in an attempt to force a move to St.
Louis.


History Standards for All Tastes; Arts Agency's Mistake
To the Editor:
In "Mocking America at U.S. Expense" (Op-Ed, March 10), Lynne Cheney correctly states that I think Arts Endowment funding for a few controversial artists was a mistake. (Actually the individuals I had in mind were given tiny amounts of money indirectly through institutions that received N.E.A. funding.) What she doesn't say is that it doesn't bother me in the least if the N.E.A. subsidizes art I don't like.
I see these grants as a mistake only in the sense that they have made life more difficult for the agency.


Cornell Dorms Based on Race Are the Focus Of an Inquiry
Acting on a complaint from a Manhattan-based civil rights organization, the State Department of Education is investigating whether race-based dormitories for black, Hispanic and American Indian students at Cornell University violate state laws.
In November, the New York Civil Rights Coalition complained to the Education Department that the dormitories on the Ithaca, N.Y., campus fostered racial segregation.
The coalition asked the state to look into whether the dormitories violated Board of Regents regulations prohibiting schools from excluding students from housing based on race or ethnicity.


Prudential Is Putting Its Home Mortgage Business Up for Sale
The Prudential Insurance Company of America announced yesterday that it wanted to sell its home mortgage business, one of the largest in the country.
The sale, which analysts said could fetch as much as $1 billion, comes at a time when rising interest rates have caused mortgage lending to drop by more than 50 percent from 1993.
The decline has led to big losses at many companies and a flurry of sales, as some have abandoned the business.
The Prudential mortgage business, for example, lost $119 million last year, after earning about $150 million in 1993.


Management Shifts At Martin Agency
The Martin Agency in Richmond said yesterday that it would make several changes in top management, one effect of which would be to give more autonomy to a new unit that specializes in interactive marketing.
Effective July 1, Harry M. Jacobs, 65, chairman and chief executive, will take the new post of chairman emeritus, which he will hold until he retires on Dec. 31, 1997.
Succeeding Mr.
Jacobs as chairman and chief executive will be John B. Adams, 46, who has been the agency's president since 1992.
And Mike Hughes, 46, vice chairman and creative director, will succeed Mr.
Adams as president while remaining creative director.


Edward V. Roberts, 56, Champion of the Disabled
Edward V. Roberts, a quadriplegic who helped redefine how Americans view the physically handicapped, died on Tuesday at his home in Berkeley, Calif.
He was 56.
The cause was cardiac arrest, said Jonathan Gold, his attendant and friend.


Into the Middle, Where There's Gravity
Bang on a Can's march from the fringes into the mainstream concert world must be inspiring for young avant-garde musicians, but its transformation from a ramshackle, freespirited festival into a concert series at Lincoln Center has meant losses as well as gains.
The series, which opened on Monday evening at the Walter Reade Theater, is no longer a forum for new music ensembles of all stripes, as it was during its early years.
Now the organization has a house band, the Bang on a Can All-Stars, who play its concerts and make recordings.
Only the annual marathon (this year's is on May 21 at Alice Tully Hall) is the kind of omnibus offering that won Bang on a Can attention when it started nine years ago.
That said, the All-Stars are not a bad band by art-rock standards, and one could argue that in taking on all the performing chores, they are presenting a broader repertory than a series of composer-led ensembles would yield.
Works by seven composers were played on Monday, and although there were both hits and misses, the program suggested that composers interested in combining elements of rock, jazz, unstructured noise and narrative structure are still finding fresh ground and are apparently feeling entirely unconstrained.


Economy Shows Some Signs of Strength, but Dollar Falls Sharply
Even as consumer spending appears to be tailing off, American industry pushed solidly ahead in February and prices obtained by producers showed signs of acceleration, according to Government figures released today.
While the latest reports added to anxiety over inflation, the Federal Reserve helped calm them with fresh evidence from its regional banks around the nation that the economy was slowing to a more sustainable pace.


Tough Guys in America's Landscape
SUNBURN  By Laurence Shames  279 pages.
Hyperion. $21.95.
THE STANDOFF  By Chuck Hogan  306 pages.
Doubleday. $23.50.
"I got regrets like Heinz got beans," says Vincente Delgatto, an aging Mafia godfather, at the opening of Laurence Shames's engaging new Florida novel, "Sunburn." The godfather with regrets is "sitting poolside in Key West, at the home of his bastard son, Joey Goldman." Joey, as fans of Mr.
Shames's fiction may recall, moved from New York City to Key West in the author's amusing first novel, "Florida Straits," in which he unsuccessfully tried to break free of his menacing family.


Marshall Industries(MI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Economic Scene; The dollar also rises, but not so much lately. Why is that?
THE weighty dollar, anchor to the world's monetary system, has once again torn loose in turbulent financial seas.
Why did it happen now, even as the Federal Reserve was being congratulated for navigating so cleverly between the Scylla of inflation and the Charybdis of recession?
Was this just a preview of worse to come?


Stanhome Inc.(STH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


2 Former Officials Of United Way Sued
Attorney General Dennis C. Vacco of New York filed suit yesterday to try to recover more than $480,000 that he says two former executives at United Way of America took from the charity to finance a luxurious life style, trips and gifts.
The two executives, William Aramony, who was president of the organization for 22 years, and Thomas Merlo, a former chief financial officer, are already on trial in Federal District Court in Alexandria, Va., where they face criminal charges of fraud, conspiracy, tax evasion and money laundering.
Stephen Paulachak, another former United Way financial officer who is on trial in the criminal case, was not named in the new civil suit.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  City of New York is selling $445 million of tax-exempt general-obligation bonds through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The bonds are priced to yield a maximum of 6.75 percent in 2014 and 6.80 percent in 2025.
For short-maturity serial bonds, yields range from 5.25 percent in 1997 to 6.70 percent in 2010.
The bonds are rated Baa1 by Moody's, A- by S.&amp; P. and A- by Fitch.
Commercial Credit Co., Baltimore, is selling $200 million of notes due in 2002 through CS First Boston Corp.
The noncallable notes are priced at 99.441 to yield 7.375 percent and are rated A1 by Moody's, A+ by S.&amp; P. and A+ by Duff &amp; Phelps.


The Pipes, The Pipes
They practice in basements, backyards and parks.
As the bagpipes resonate, the din of sirens and scanners fades from their minds, and they feel a fleeting sense of calm.
Members of the Police Department's Emerald Society Pipe and Drum Band, a centerpiece of the St.
Patrick's Day Parade on Friday, take their music seriously.
Some say their band audition was the most stressful event of their police career.
"You're trying to stay slow and not panic," said Timothy Galvin, a special operations lieutenant in the 44th Precinct in the Bronx, "because you've put so much of your life into this instrument."


Fire at the Four Seasons: Everyone Who's In Is Out
For the movers and shakers who arrived to have lunch as usual yesterday at the elegant Four Seasons, yesterday was decidedly unusual.
Former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger never got in at all.


Sizzler Intl.(SZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 5


Market Place; Another first for cyberspace! An S.E.C. suit for investor fraud.
THE slick pitches that dotted the classified ads of America Online promised, "You can't lose!" For $189 a share, investors could get in on the ground floor of an operation that would yield them a minimum $60 a week.
It was, as the cyberspace ads crowed, "an amazing company."
In cyberfraud land, is there any other kind?


Clothes that look tough, masculine and dangerous:


John Ellis, 82, a Republican Who Aided Disabled Children
John Ellis, a prominent liberal Republican who worked on behalf of mentally ill children, died on March 6 at his home in Aiken, S.C.
He was 82 and kept a home in Manhattan until 1975.
The cause was congestive heart failure, his family said.


Compromise Plan On New York City And Public Stations
New York City would divest itself of its public radio and television stations under a compromise plan that could win initial approval as early as next week, parties to the discussions said yesterday.
The plan, months in the making, would preserve the two radio stations, but not the television channel, as bastions of commercial-free public-affairs and classical-music programming while still raising millions of dollars to help close a multibillion-dollar city budget gap.


How many ideas to fill a studio? Count 'em:


Phillips-Van Heusen Corp.(PVH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Sit-In at Hunter


AT HOME WITH: Evangeline Bruce; The Improbable Author
EVANGELINE BRUCE has been called many things in her 70-odd years -- beauty, fashion plate, consummate diplomat's wife, American society's last empress -- but no label rankles more than what she calls the "H" word.
"Hostess -- that one I really resent," she says, walking into the drawing room of her Federal house in Georgetown, where she has lived for more than 20 years.
In one hand is a pair of reading glasses; in the other, a silver cachepot filled with broccoli, which she sets down on a gessoed table as casually as a vase of daisies.
Vegetables as accessories is a Bruce hallmark, like the extravagantly patterned stockings designed to accentuate her long legs -- today, broad black stripes -- and the soft, husky voice, pitched somewhere between a whisper and a promise.


Coventry Corp.(CVTY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New Jersey Daily Briefing; Two Sought in Fatal Robbery
The authorities searched yesterday for at least two men who posed as deliverymen in a botched robbery attempt on Tuesday that left the wife of a jewelry store owner dead and another suspect wounded.


Henry Lieberman, a Times Editor, Dies at 78
Henry R. Lieberman, a foreign correspondent and later an editor for The New York Times, died yesterday at his home in Scarsdale, N.Y.
He was 78.
The cause was a stroke after a long illness, his family said.


Showtime's Former Chief Leaves Viacom
Winston H. (Tony) Cox, who recently was replaced as chairman and chief executive of Showtime Networks Inc., has now resigned from Showtime's parent company, Viacom Inc.
Carl Folta, a spokesman for Viacom, said yesterday that Mr.
Cox "made a significant contribution to Showtime over the last eight years, but he felt it was time to make a change."


Crackdown on Job-Injury Costs
Willie Brown, one of the most powerful politicians in California, recently found himself on the other side of the fence from the working people whose causes he likes to champion.
Shortly after Mr.
Brown, the Assembly Speaker for California, invested in an Oakland radio station, almost all the employees filed claims seeking workers' compensation for the stress they felt about the changes the owners were making.
"At that moment," Mr.
Brown told an appreciative audience of insurance executives in New York late last year, "you could be sure that elimination of stress claims was No. 1 on the agenda."


INSIDE
The School Door as Turnstile
Across the country, especially in poor areas, schools are struggling with student turnover rates of up to 90 percent.
The impact is troubling for both school and student.
Page B1.
New Plan on Public Stations
In a compromise, the two radio stations owned by New York City, but not its television station, might remain commercial free.
Page C15.
Fury in a Courtroom
F.
Lee Bailey, a lawyer for O. J. Simpson, and the prosecutor Marcia Clark tangled and traded recriminations in court about a potential witness.
Page A18.
Arts Festival Debate
Lincoln Center is feeling the strain as it debates plans for its riskiest venture yet: a new international arts festival, to open in 1996.
Page C15.


The House That Replacements Rebuilt?
Replacement baseball will stain Yankee Stadium and Yankee tradition, Don Mattingly said today.
What it won't do, the latest in the tradition of venerable Yankee stars added, is make any impact on striking players.
Mattingly was one of 19 mostly high-profile players who attended a news conference following a Players Association meeting of 35 mostly high-profile players.
He said he was also hoping to get a first-hand look at the negotiations, but he discovered there were no negotiations to see.


A Mistake, a Rare Prosecution, And a Doctor Is Headed for Jail
The elderly nursing home patient was suffering from total kidney failure.
She was blind and she could not speak.
On the afternoon of May 18, 1990, Dr.
Gerald Einaugler mistook a dialysis catheter in her abdomen for a feeding tube, and ordered feeding solution pumped through it.
Six days later, Alida Lamour, 78, was dead, and Dr.
Einaugler, a Brooklyn internist, was in trouble.
But this was not ordinary doctor trouble; he faced criminal prosecution, not civil suit.


Risky Cure -- A special report; Parkinson's Sufferers Gamble On a Surgery With Hazards
A surgical treatment for Parkinson's disease has dramatically helped some patients with the debilitating disease, but, unknown to many eager and desperate Parkinson's sufferers, the surgery has left others paralyzed, blind, demented or comatose.
The surgery is pallidotomy, destruction of minute areas of the brain that control movement.
It is done in the hope of quelling the rigidity, the jerking motions and the freezing in place that plague people with Parkinson's.


Corrections
An article on March 8 about House passage of legislation to reduce the number of lawsuits brought in Federal courts misidentified the section of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure governing sanctions on lawyers for frivolous lawsuits.
The section is Rule 11, not Chapter 11.


In French Presidential Race, Lagging Neo-Gaullist Hustles on the Hustings
Once the front-runner and now the underdog in the race for the French presidency, Prime Minister Edouard Balladur is trying to regain the lead with a new campaign full of hustle and hoopla.
With just five weeks to go before the April 23 vote, and polls showing that close to 50 percent of the voters have not made up their minds, Mr.
Balladur clearly hopes to beat the odds by replacing his aloof, stiff image with something a little more hot-blooded.


Mason-Riley Blowup Symptom of Internal Strife
The latest dispute between Pat Riley and Anthony Mason magnified a larger issue that the Knicks were ready to admit today.
They are a team with internal problems, a team on the verge of letting petty gripes and a lack of unity ruin a chance to win a championship.
Several players, most notably Derek Harper, called on the team's veteran leadership, in particular Patrick Ewing, to speak up and address the team's problems before it was too late.
But Ewing, the team's franchise player, left today's practice offering hardly any comment.
Meanwhile, Mason stayed away from practice at Riley's request, as the team's hierarchy discussed whether Mason would be fined, suspended, both, or neither.
As of tonight, Ernie Grunfeld, the Knicks' general manager, said a decision on Mason's status would likely be made Thursday.


Pamida Holdings Corp.(PAM,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Accounts
The Golden Grain Co. unit of the Quaker Oats Co., Pleasanton, Calif., to Young &amp; Rubicam San Francisco, as the first agency of record for Nile Spice instant soup cups, which Golden Grain recently acquired.
Y.&amp; R. San Francisco already handles other Golden Grain brands.
Billings were estimated at $2 million to $4 million.


The Right Time to Visit Moscow
The White House should stop agonizing and accept the Russian invitation for President Clinton to attend ceremonies on May 8 marking the 50th anniversary of the German surrender in World War II.
Presidential advisers are overly concerned that Mr.
Clinton's presence would be taken as a blanket endorsement of President Boris Yeltsin and the savage Russian war in Chechnya.
That need not be the case.
With some skillful stagecraft, Mr.
Clinton could actually use the occasion to reach out to Russian reformers and to remind Mr.
Yeltsin and the Russian Army that the Chechen war is a betrayal of the principles that united the allies in the war against Fascism.


LaFontaine's Odyssey Of Recovery Set to End
Two weeks ago, Pat LaFontaine of the Sabres had just finished an extensive rehabilitation session on Long Island with Steve Wirth, the Islanders' team therapist.
LaFontaine, the 30-year-old former American Olympian who was once an Islander star, had his right knee propped up on Wirth's desk underneath a mountainous bag of ice.
He was responding to questions about the innuendo, speculation and hearsay that has swirled around his oft-delayed attempts at a comeback.


Smoking Sickness
Ninety percent of all smokers pick up the habit in their teens, and their reasons for doing so are the same now as they were 50 years ago.
Their friends smoke.
A cigarette is a cool accessory.
Smoking is a rite of passage.
They will not know until the day they try to quit that they are exposing themselves to a substance, nicotine, that the National Institutes of Health says is as addictive as heroin and 5 to 10 times more potent than cocaine or morphine in producing effects on mood and behavior.
Dr.
David A. Kessler, the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, calls smoking "a pediatric disease." While the adult quit rate is increasing, the teen-age start rate stays the same.
During the last 10 years there has been a decrease in smoking among all age groups except adolescents, and the number of young female smokers has actually gone up.


Judge Says Gay Group Can't March
A Federal judge yesterday rejected the latest effort by a gay Irish group to win permission to march on Fifth Avenue tomorrow, St.
Patrick's Day.
In refusing to reverse a state court that barred the group from marching, Judge John F. Keenan of Federal District Court in Manhattan ruled that the First Amendment right of the group, the Irish Gay and Lesbian Organization, to march was outweighed by the interests of the city as a whole.


Delusions and Frustrations of the Sexual Whirl
No matter what the papers say about a new age of celibacy, life as a sexual square dance continues in America, at least on its stages and screens.
It seems telling that "La Ronde" by Arthur Schniztler, which was the mother of the romantic daisy-chain drama, has been adapted into both a film and a musical in the last several years.
And for those who find real life a barren field for gossip, there are always partner-switching soap operas on television.
The dance continues, in a somewhat more contemplative vein, in "Trust," a new comedy by Stephen Dietz, performed by the reliably polished Barrow Group at the Perry Street Theater.
The story of six urbanites in pursuit of love, it considers the delusions and frustrations of desire with a familiar combination of wistfulness and weary resignation.


McCormick &amp; Co.  (MCCRK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Oshkosh B'Gosh Inc.(GOSHA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reviews/Fashion; In Paris, Clothes That Look Tough, Masculine and Dangerous
An underground fashion newspaper being passed out on the first day of the fall '95 women's ready-to-wear shows here opens with a chart listing the six most popular films in Paris: "Natural Born Killers," "Pulp Fiction," "Interview With the Vampire," "True Romance," "Serial Mom" and "Reservoir Dogs." Calling attention to their shared violence, the newspaper, called F (for freedom), asks: "New reality or fashionable attitude?"
Both, it seems, judging by the opening round of what will be 10 days of shows, nine a day.


Hills Stores Co.(HDS,N) reports earnings for 13wks to Jan 28


Sponsorship Moves By BMW and Coke
Two marketers are getting a head start on promoting their sponsorships of the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta.
The BMW Holding Corporation, the North American unit of the German vehicle marketer, said yesterday that it would become the official "international automobile" sponsor of the Summer Games as well as the official motorcycle and mountain bike.
The General Motors Corporation was signed last week as the official domestic car sponsor.
BMW Holding is expected to pay the estimated $10 million sponsorship fee to the Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games with a combination of cash and vehicles.


Manhattan Is Aiming To Prove It Belongs
For Manhattan College, the small Bronx school from a midlevel conference, the goal in the first round of the National Collegiate Athletic Association basketball tournament is not to lay an egg.
For Oklahoma, whom the Jaspers play in the first game of the Southeast Regional at the Pyramid here on Thursday, the goal is to advance without getting egg on its face.


History Standards for All Tastes; Iraqi Kurds Mark Grim Anniversary
To the Editor:
You report from Damascus (news article, March 14) that early this month Iraqi opposition forces tried and failed to overthrow President Saddam Hussein.
And you quote a "senior Pentagon official" who said that some Kurdish guerrillas "stood on the sidelines" and watched instead of fighting.
This is plausible.
But you forgot something that the Kurds will never forget.


Chrysler Idles Plant to Repair Noise in Neons
The Chrysler Corporation said today that a peculiar noise emanating from the front ends of its Neon subcompact cars had forced the company to idle the assembly plant in Illinois that produced the vehicles.
Chrysler said it detected the problem before any flawed cars were shipped to dealers.


Berlin Journal; The Wall Is Back as a Movie (and Still a Divider)
More than five years after the Berlin wall was breached by ecstatic East Germans, the first major feature film about the wall is helping Berliners confront its emotional legacy.
The film, called "The Promise," is a love story about a young couple caught in East Berlin when the wall is put up in 1961.
They plan an escape through sewer tunnels, but an army truck rolls by as they are descending and the man's nerves fail him, so he is left behind.
The lovers see each other just four times in the next 28 years, and they are finally reunited on the night the wall collapses.


History Standards for All Tastes
To the Editor:
How ironic that Lynne Cheney ("Mocking America at U.S. Expense," Op-Ed, March 10) would accuse members of the academy of constructing "new versions of the truth to achieve social and political goals that have gone unmet," when that is precisely what she herself is doing in her attack upon the National Standards for United States History.


Rison to Join Browns
Wide receiver ANDRE RISON, leaving the Atlanta Falcons as an unrestricted free agent, said he will play for the Cleveland Browns next season.
"It's where I want to go, that's the place," Rison said in an interview with The Atlanta Journal-Constitution yesterday.


Fans Back Grobbelaar
BRUCE GROBBELAAR and two other English Premier League soccer players, HANS SEGERS and JOHN FASHANU, were released on bail yesterday in London after 30 hours of questioning over bribery allegations.
The police are investigating allegations that the three players were paid to fix the outcome of games.


Big B Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Power Play Falls Short Again for Rangers
Should the Rangers be concerned?
Perhaps a little bit.
After losing by 4-3 to the Philadelphia Flyers last night at Madison Square Garden, they are flirting with a slump.
They have lost two straight games for the first time since January.
They now share first place in the Atlantic Division with the Flyers, a team that has played two fewer games.


CHRONICLE
The name of the chairman of the benefit dinner for the National Conference of Christians and Jews may have a familiar ring: ALFRED E. SMITH 4th.
Yes, he is a namesake and great-grandson of the 1928 Democratic Presidential nominee and three-term Governor of New York.
It's only appropriate, Mr.
Smith said yesterday, that he be involved with an organization that battles intolerance and bigotry.
His great-grandfather, the first Roman Catholic to run for the Presidency, endured many attacks during the campaign, which he lost to Herbert Hoover.


Italian Premier Calls for a Confidence Vote in Debate on Budget
Pushed to the brink by a debilitating budget battle, Prime Minister Lamberto Dini called today for a confidence vote on his two-month-old Government, a gamble that could force national elections to be held as early as June.
After two days of debate in Parliament's lower house on amendments to his critical deficit-cutting budget package, Mr.
Dini told deputies this morning that he had no choice but to put his Government on the line.
"I am not asking you to form a government majority, or to choose political sides, but to render a service to the country," he said.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; Trump Collateral Is Allowed
Donald J. Trump, facing a March 31 deadline for a $60 million payment to regain control of a hotel that bears his name, got permission from the Casino Control Commission yesterday to use his management-services agreement at another Trump business as collateral for a loan.


American Israeli Paper Mills Ltd.(AIP,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Austerity and Rates of 92% Fail to Perk Up the Peso
A tough new economic plan and interest rates of more than 90 percent were not enough to rekindle much confidence in Mexico today as the peso tumbled an additional 5 percent and investors expressed worry that the country's problems would continue to worsen.
The peso closed at an exchange rate of 6.95 to the dollar, which means that one peso now equals little more than 14 cents, compared with almost 29 cents before the Government first devalued last December.


METRO DIGEST
AN ERROR, A DEATH, A JAIL SENTENCE Dr.
Gerald Einaugler, a Brooklyn internist, was in trouble.
But this was not ordinary doctor trouble; he faced criminal prosecution, not a civil suit.
And so the American Medical Association, the Medical Society of the State of New York and two other doctors' groups have taken up an impassioned defense.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  THE PIPES, THE PIPES As the bagpipes resonate, the din of sirens and scanners fades from their minds, and they feel a fleeting sense of calm.
Members of the Police Department's Emerald Society Pipe and Drum Band, a centerpiece of the St.
Patrick's Day Parade, take their music seriously.
Some say their band audition was the most stressful event of their police career.
B3.


Sports of The Times; Another Rebellion At Fort Riley
ANYONE who sits behind the Knicks' bench at Madison Square Garden will tell you that the most fascinating exchanges are the ones between Pat Riley and Anthony Mason.
If that's what they can be called.
Riley taps Mason on the knee.
Riley prods.
Riley demands.
Mason hears.
You know he hears because he consistently plays with intelligent purpose.
But he does not see.
He does not see Riley's face because he refuses to make eye contact with his coach.
Mostly, Mason sneers.
And there are times, when the urgency of the moment causes Riley to move closer, when Mason will lean back and turn his face, like a defiant child facing a dentist's drill.


Venezuela, Fearing an Uprising Today, Arrests 150 Leftists
Venezuelan authorities have arrested 150 leftists across the nation this week, alleging that they were plotting to set off an uprising on Thursday.
The crackdown, coming at a time of raging inflation and a shrinking economy, had Venezuelans nervously recalling their nation's recent political traumas: a violent uprising in Caracas in 1989, two failed coup attempts in 1992 and a presidential resignation in 1993.


Coleman's Magic Show Spellbinding
They tried to play Hack-a-Shaq tonight, but Shaquille O'Neal grew tired of this game of push, foul and whack.
He began to dominate, and the Nets were forced to depend on something more substantial, something with teeth and resolve.
At first, Derrick Coleman simmered. Then he boiled and the Magic disappeared.


Sahara Voting Drive Tests U.N. Resources
To the Editor:  Your March 5 news article on Morocco's involvement in Western Sahara paints an inaccurate picture of the United Nations mission for the referendum in Western Sahara.


Eagle Hardware &amp; Garden Inc.(EAGL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 27


3 Officers Accused of Making 'Collars for Dollars' Go on Trial
A rogue band of police officers in a Brooklyn precinct relentlessly stole cash, drugs and guns from suspects, made false arrests to gain overtime and counted on a "blue wall of silence" to protect them, a Federal prosecutor charged yesterday as three of the accused officers went on trial.
In the latest trial stemming from charges of major corruption at several police precincts across New York City, the prosecutor, Charles Gerber, told a jury in Federal District Court in Brooklyn that the defendants "are criminals who wore the uniforms and badge of the New York City Police Department, who thought they had a license to steal" and who made arrests as "collars for dollars."


New Jersey Daily Briefing; 4 Held in Hate-Group Attack
Four members of a white supremacist group remained in custody yesterday after being charged with beating a 14-year-old Woodbridge girl who was trying to quit the group, prosecutors said.
The four members of the S.S.
Action Group were arrested last month, said an assistant Middlesex County prosecutor, Christopher Kuberiet.
Two are adults and two are 17 years old, he said.
The victim was beaten and robbed in the woods in Woodbridge last Nov. 26, Mr.
Kuberiet said.


Sigma-Aldrich Corp.(SIAL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Student Center That Defies Dull
FROM 7 A.M. to midnight, at least 100 of the 1,500 students at Bowdoin College in Brunswick, Me., are shooting billiards, drinking wine or chatting at the new 40,000-square-foot David Saul Smith Union, dedicated this month.
The interior of the student center is as lively as the 1913 brick exterior is formal.
"People wanted a place with space, light and color, that had games, a convenience store, and space for concerts or just reading a book," said Mark Wethli, a professor of art and chairman of the planning committee.


It's Raining Cats and Shoes
MOST illustrators put their designs on paper; some also put them on umbrellas.
Victoria Roberts's umbrellas (left) are printed with leaping cats.
Philippe Weisbecker's (above) are printed with shoes -- high-heel and low-heel, pointy-toe and turned-up-toe -- with a boot for a handle.
Both are made by Stormy Weather Umbrellas and are $49.95 to $64 (depending on the handle) at the Whitney Museum's Store Next Door, 943 Madison Avenue (75th Street.)


Paychex Inc.(PAYX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Can It Be? Disney Builds Resort Without Mickey
The Walt Disney Company announced yesterday that it was building its first resort exclusively for adults and families with older children.
When the Disney Institute, as the resort is called, opens next February on the grounds of the Disney World Resort near Orlando, Fla., such familiar Disney characters as Mickey, Minnie and Donald Duck will be conspicuous by their absence.
Instead, the 58-acre Disney Institute will allow guests to fashion individual vacations from more than 80 programs as diverse as rock climbing, cooking, animation workshops or golf for hackers and advanced players.


The Pop Life
Warner's Progress
When an internal power struggle shook up Warner Music, the largest record company in the country, last summer, there was talk of an artist exodus from the company.
But in the last week Warner Music has made three decisive deals that it hopes will quell talk of instability and solidify its position as an industry leader.
It has re-signed Neil Young, settled a legal and contractual dispute with Metallica and, most significant, become an equal partner in Interscope Records, which it hopes to make its fourth major label, joining Warner Brothers, Elektra and Atlantic.


Separation Anxiety for Home of Bullets and Capitals
Since 1973, this Washington suburb has been known nationally as a dateline on the sports pages, the town that Charles Barkley and Wayne Gretzky pass through when their teams play Washington.
But the basketball and hockey stars will soon leave Landover's outdated USAir Arena -- the Capital Center until 1991 -- to play in a fancy new complex in downtown Washington.


Amid Accusations and Adjectives, Tension of 2 Lawyers Erupts
Smoldering tensions between the opposing lawyers in the O. J. Simpson case broke into the open today as Marcia Clark and F. Lee Bailey squared off in an unusually nasty exchange.
Ms.
Clark called Mr.
Bailey a liar; Mr.
Bailey dismissed Ms.
Clark as "shrill."
Ms.
Clark demanded -- a demand Judge Lance A. Ito ignored -- that Mr.
Bailey be held in contempt for what she said were misrepresentations about a possible defense witness.
Still, the air in his courtroom was thick with contempt of a different sort: the clear contempt in which the two lawyers hold each other.
They tangled over everything from candor with the court to the low station of lawyers, from the honor of the Marine Corps to Mr.
Bailey's manliness.


Cutting Nursing Home Profits, Not Care
THERE is quite a crowd-pleaser in Gov.
George E. Pataki's rather daunting list of proposed Medicaid cuts.
Halve the profits that nursing homes earn from Medicaid, says the Governor.
At first glance at least, the idea seems sound and attractive, especially since New York spends considerably more on each nursing home resident than any other state.
What's more, the industry is a healthy one.
Its own numbers reveal that there is indeed considerable profit to cut.


Sotheby's Holdings Inc.(BID,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Violist Finds the Purity in Late Shostakovich
Shostakovich's Viola Sonata is less than 20 years old.
It seems as if it has been around much longer, like a distant supernova whose light has just reached the eyes of earth.
With this work, and with his 15th Symphony, Shostakovich began a new stylistic progression that death immediately cut short.
The sonata does not carry forward the anguished personal dramas of the late quartets; it exists on a plane of pure music, conversing with voices out of the past.
A ghostly echo of Beethoven's "Moonlight" glides through the finale.
There is deep melancholy, but also deep repose.
Only a great musician can make sense of these profound simplicities, written at the edge of the grave.
Yuri Bashmet made the music entirely his own on Tuesday night in one of the most important Carnegie Hall debuts in recent years.
He gave lyric life to the score's endless strings of quarter notes and half notes, and he cast a fiery glow on the few stretches of wildness.
Mikhail Muntian, a veteran of the world premiere in 1975, supplied an unmannered, authoritative rendition of the minimal piano line.


Garden Is Interested in Bowe-Tyson Bout
Rock Newman may propose it and proclaim it.
He may scream about the historical logic behind two Brooklyn homeboys fighting at boxing's former mecca.
But wishing and hoping is a long way from making certain that Madison Square Garden is the best site to match up Riddick Bowe, whom Newman manages and promotes, and Mike Tyson, who is scheduled to be released from prison March 25.


Filipinos Protest Singapore Death Sentence
The Government of Singapore, which has tried to portray the debate over its draconian legal system as a clash between Asian and Western values, now finds its courts under attack by fellow Asians who are campaigning to prevent the execution of a Philippine woman this week.
Leading Philippine politicians, human rights groups and church leaders are demanding that Singapore stay the execution of Flor Contemplacion, a Philippine maid who is scheduled to be hanged on Friday for the deaths of another maid and a 4-year-old Singaporean boy in 1991.


Helms Seeks to Merge Foreign Policy Agencies
Senator Jesse Helms proposed a radical restructuring of foreign policy apparatus today that he said would save billions of dollars by merging half a dozen agencies into the State Department.
Asserting that Republican control of Congress created an unusual opportunity to revamp foreign policy institutions, the Senator proposed eliminating the Agency for International Development, the Arms Control and Development Agency, the Export-Import Bank, the Overseas Private Investment Corporation and other agencies.


Some Drugs Rise in Price At Fast Pace
Pharmaceutical companies have increased the pace of price increases on many of their best-selling drugs since the collapse of the Clinton Administration's health care proposal last year.
During the battle over health care, drug companies promised to rein in their price rises, keeping them at or below the increase in the Consumer Price Index.
That promise, made in an effort to ward off legislated price controls, has almost been kept over all, with drug prices rising 3 percent last year.


With Kobe in Mind, South Koreans Act Out a Catastrophe


One Trophy Missing From Marbury Case
Stephon Marbury has collected basketball awards the way the Internal Revenue Service collects taxes.
Yet there is one achievement the 6-foot-2-inch senior guard from Lincoln High School conspicuously lacks: a championship.
The Public Schools Athletic League A championship "is definitely the one that I want, the one that I dream about," Marbury said yesterday at a Madison Square Garden news conference for this year's tournament final.
"I had three chances. I've come up short each time. Hopefully, this year I'll come up and win."


Angelica Corp.(AGL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Simpson Defense Details Glove Theory
F.
Lee Bailey, one of O. J. Simpson's defense lawyers, today laid out more explicitly than ever before just how Detective Mark Fuhrman could have removed a bloody glove from the spot where Nicole Brown Simpson and her friend were killed last June, stored it on his person without being detected, carried it to Mr.
Simpson's house and deposited it there without being seen.
Seeking to explain how a policeman he describes as a rogue and racist set out to frame his client, Mr.
Bailey all but accused Mr.
Fuhrman of secretly picking up the bloody right-handed leather glove near the body of Ronald L. Goldman, placing in a plastic evidence bag, stuffing it "marine style" in one of his socks, and then dropping it behind Mr.
Simpson's house.


Cato Corp.(CACOA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


New Jersey Daily Briefing; Before Car Chase, a Robbery
Two of the four men captured in a wild car chase early Tuesday are suspected of having stopped here for gasoline (and about $300) shortly beforehand.
The police say that John J. Carroll and Keyseaa Hodges robbed an Exxon station near the Lincoln Tunnel just after midnight and drove off in a stolen Acura.
The money was found on Mr.
Hodges when he was arrested, investigators say.


Baker (J.) Inc.(JBAK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


An Expanded Business Day
Worried about the growth of disability benefits, many states are rewriting laww to make it tougher to claim them.
Today Business Day examines the results: good news for insurers, who are finally making a profit on the business, but concerns about the arbitrary treament of workers.
Business Day, Section D.


Once Again, Record Levels Of Lobbying
Amid concerns about budget cuts and health care overhaul, spending on efforts to lobby state officials reached a record of $39.1 million last year, a report released today said.
Leading the way in lobbying expenditures were groups most affected by the state budget -- health care providers, teachers and state workers -- the annual report from the New York Temporary State Commission on Lobbying said.


Calendar: Crafts Shows, Gardens and an Auction
Crafts Times Three  American Craft Museum, 40 West 53d Street; (212) 956-3535.
Three shows open today and continue through June 25.
The work of William Daley, a ceramic artist, will be examined through his sculpture and his drawings.


Puritan-Bennett Corp.(PBEN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Resorts Intl.(RT,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


In Los Angeles, A Time for Planting
ON a desolate corner of Martin Luther King Jr.
Boulevard in the South-Central neighborhood recently, a group of fidgety fifth- and seventh-grade students from two local schools were being taught a lesson in urban renewal, environmental conservation and civic responsibility.
The only tools of learning they needed were a square of barren earth, a shovel and gardening gloves.


Sports Authority Inc.(TSA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 22


About Churches, Souls And Show-Biz Methods
The title of tonight's ABC report, "In the Name of God," is flexible enough to allow for at least two interpretations.
Is Peter Jennings out to show what growing numbers of evangelical churches are doing in God's name; or is he asking, what in God's name are they doing?
Faced with declining attendance in a nation of professed believers, some mainline churches are seeking guidance from marketing specialists and show business professionals.
Mr.
Jennings ponders whether they are deepening parishioners' spirituality or just competing for souls, whether in trying to attract sell-out crowds, they are selling out the Gospel.
He does not presume to provide answers, but then those are pretty fuzzy questions.


U.N. Force in Croatia Is Waiting for Orders
As diplomats in New York begin urgent discussions about an expanded mission for the United Nations military force in Croatia, their commanders in the field are worried that the troops will be given a mandate without the means to fulfill it.
Their fears are heightened because of emerging confusion about whether the United Nations forces will be expected to merely monitor Croatia's international borders, or whether they will be ordered to actually search vehicles in an effort to stop the transport of weapons to areas of Croatia held by Serbs.
The latter job, depending on how large an area it would cover, could require as many as 10,000 troops.


Accused Alcatel Chief Mounts a TV Defense
Breaking his silence by going on national television, the chairman of Alcatel Alsthom today denied all charges that he misused company funds to remodel his house and that his company, the world's largest maker of telecommunications equipment, had overbilled its biggest client, France Telecom.
"Nothing is true; nothing has been proven so far," the embattled executive, Pierre Suard, said in a vigorous defense as he answered questions from three television journalists.
"I am innocent and the group is innocent."


Learning From Two Masters
Old-style patronage may be only a memory in the art world, but as the fall fashion shows began here this week, two of the more interesting collections emerged from young talents backed by two of the most influential designers in the business, Rei Kawakubo and Issey Miyake.
Junya Watanabe presented his fourth collection under his name and Ms.
Kawakubo's Comme des Garcons label.
Kosuke Tsumura, who has worked in the Miyake Design Studio for 10 years, introduced his first line as Mr.
Miyake looked on from the audience.


Whitman Bond-Recycling Plan Would Provide $500 Million to Stimulate Housing
By recycling state mortgage bonds and refining construction rules, New Jersey housing agencies will put more than $500 million into urban and suburban low- to medium-income housing in the next nine months.
The program announced today by Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman will promote home ownership in cities, where ownership rates are low, and smooth the way for apartment construction in the suburbs, where rental units are scarce.
The Governor said one part of the program would produce at least 1,500 city homes.


Solectron Corp.(SLR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 24


Michael Dash; Countertenor and Baritone, 36
Michael Dash, a singer who functioned both as a countertenor and a baritone and who appeared with numerous opera companies around the country, died on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 36.
The cause was AIDS, said a friend, the conductor Robert Bass.


A Bank Goes to Great Lengths to Move Shares Up
In an unusual attempt to push up its stock price, California Federal Bank plans to issue a security that would give its shareholders 25 percent of any cash award it might receive in its pending lawsuit against the Federal Government.
Some industry analysts praised the idea yesterday and predicted that some of the 40 other savings institutions with similar claims stemming from the savings and loan bailout legislation of 1989 would probably follow California Federal's lead.


At New York Public Hospitals, Quality of Care Keeps Improving
To the Editor:
Re "Mismanaged Care" (front page, March 5 to 7), critical of health care provided at hospitals operated by the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation: The series focused on some unquestionably tragic cases at certain public hospitals.
We feel a great deal of empathy for the people involved.


Leroy B. Kellam, 76, Ex-Judge in Queens
Leroy B. Kellam, a former State Supreme Court justice in Queens who was a founder of a bar association for minority lawyers, died on March 7 in the North Carolina Baptist Hospital in Winston-Salem, N.C.
He was 76 and had lived in Pinnacle, N.C., since his retirement in 1988.
The cause was complications from leukemia, said a daughter, Geneva Grace Kellam.


Taking the Pentium For a Test Drive
COMPUTERS powered by the fast chips known as 486's provide excellent performance for almost all software used by families.
Those using the next generation, the more expensive Pentium chips, promise even better performance.
"The fact is, all PC software runs better on a Pentium processor," say the advertisements from the Intel Corporation, which makes the Pentium chip and most 486 chips.


Sports of The Times; It's Not Major League Baseball
QUICK now, do you know the names of any of baseball's so-called replacement players?
Do you want to know any of their names? Will you ever want to know any of their names?
Do you care if any of them pitch a no-hitter? If any of them hit four homers in a game?


Peering Into New York's Glass House
A state legislative hearing called today by the Senate majority leader, Joseph Bruno, promises to shed light on corruption at New York City's Jacob K. Javits Convention Center.
A key witness on the schedule is the embattled former president of the Javits Center, Fabian Palomino.
This can be a valuable exercise, especially if Mr.
Bruno can keep the political grandstanding to a minimum.
The public needs to hear both what went wrong and what practical steps can be taken now to end mob domination and the exorbitant prices and extortionate work rules that are driving away business, and jobs, from the glass-and-steel complex on Manhattan's West Side.


OfficeMax Inc.(OMX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 21


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
E.C.A.C. Tournament
Clarkson, the only nationally ranked team in the tournament, should win the Eastern College Athletic Conference's 34th championship event, to be played tomorrow and Saturday at the Olympic Arena in Lake Placid, N.Y.
The Golden Knights, who scored 13 goals against Cornell in two quarterfinal games, meet seventh-seeded Princeton in a semifinal match and have a much better overall record, 22-8-4 to 17-12-4.
In The Troy Record's top-10 poll this week, Clarkson is ranked seventh.
The other ranked Eastern teams are all from Hockey East, No. 1 Maine, No. 3 Boston University and No. 9 New Hampshire.


Journal; Dropping the N-Bomb
Perhaps not since Ted Danson donned blackface to honor Whoopi Goldberg at the Friars Club has a white man flogged the word "nigger" as publicly as F. Lee Bailey did this week.
Mr.
Bailey, whose acting skills make Mr.
Danson look like an amateur, all but exulted in bellowing out the word for a national TV audience, as if he were looking forward to capping what seems to be a waning legal career by playing the role of Bull Connor in a prequel to "Mississippi Burning."
Does this make Mr.
Bailey a racist?
No.
But there was something twisted about the scene, just the same.


Ballet Drawn From Danza
Ballets de San Juan, Puerto Rico's oldest ballet troupe, romped into town for a rare New York appearance on Saturday night and established itself as a company of special charm and warmth.
Part of that warmth had to do with where the group performed.
The Pregones Theater at the new Hostos College complex in the South Bronx, an accessible and comfortable new performing space, was packed with cheering dancers, balletomanes and families.
The San Juan company was founded in 1954 by Ana Garcia, who haddanced with George Balanchine and Alicia Alonso.
Miss Garcia's "Pas de Quatre Criollo" was a funny, knowing response to several famous ballets satirizing the egomaniacal stage manners of ballerinas.
Here the "ballerinas" were three young ladies who, dressed in delightfully tatty finery designed by the choreographer, competed for the attention of a lone male sporting a "Puerto Rico" T-shirt.


It's Playtime At the Dentist
IF anyone doubts that times have changed, just listen to this: there are some children these days who have burst into tears when told their visit to the dentist was being postponed, and some parents who have punished naughty children by canceling their haircut appointments.
A new crop of child-care services, from haircutting salons to dental offices, is coming of age throughout the city and neighboring towns.
They do not look the drab way they used to, and they go out of their way to pamper children as if they were at a birthday party.
While children get their bangs cut or their teeth cleaned, they can play video games or watch cartoons, and they leave not only with the traditional balloon but also with a bag of party favors -- a new toy from the hair salon, say, or sunglasses from the dentist.


Rifts Emerge Inside G.O.P.
For 70 days House Republicans have closed ranks, demonstrated remarkable party discipline and kept moving through the legislative agenda in their Contract With America.
But now the familiar cracks are beginning to show.
The bills before them now are inherently harder, with immediate, real-life consequences for constituents back home.
The bitter disagreements in the party over social issues, notably abortion, are coming to the surface.
The Democratic assaults on Republican spending and fiscal priorities are unrelenting.
And beyond all the political and institutional factors, House Republicans are simply getting tired.


In Jersey City, It's Earning by Learning
To the Editor:
"Paying Children to Read Isn't Cheap, or Right" (letter, March 9) attacked Newt Gingrich and his Learning by Earning program.


Dole's the One For Delegation In Congress
The 14 Republican members of the New York delegation in Congress today declared their support for Senator Bob Dole for the party's Presidential nomination.
The announcement marked the first time in the 1996 campaign that an entire state delegation has announced its backing for one candidate, and it came after the recent endorsements of Mr.
Dole by Gov.
George E. Pataki, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato and other state Republicans.


Great Atlantic &amp; Pacific Tea Co.(GAP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 25


PROGRAMS BASED ON SEX AND RACE ARE CHALLENGED
The simmering debate over affirmative action boiled over on several fronts today.
Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the majority leader, said he would seek to end preference programs for women and minorities, while a Federal court and a Congressional committee also raised questions about the programs' validity.
At the same time, however, a Federal commission reported that despite the growing chorus of complaints from white men who say they have been harmed by affirmative action programs, women and minorities have made little headway in breaking into the top ranks of corporate management.


No Headline
"Many middle- and upper-level white male managers view the inclusion of minorities and women in management as a direct threat to their own chances for advancement." -- GLASS CEILING COMMISSION.  [ A22:1. ]


ING CREATES NEW MANAGEMENT STRUCTURE FOR BARINGS
The ING Group, which acquired the failed British investment bank Barings P.L.C. earlier this month, said yesterday that it had created a new management structure for Barings.
It gives only a limited role to Peter Baring, who had been the investment bank's chairman, and Peter Norris, who had headed the securities division and had ultimate authority over the Singapore futures-trading operation.
Enormous losses in Singapore caused the collapse of Barings.
Mr.
Baring will be one of six members of a committee that will advise ING executives who will make up the board of Baring Holding Company Ltd., as the parent company will now be known.
ING said Mr.
Baring's new role reflected his desire, announced before the firm's collapse, to retire later this year.
Mr.
Norris will serve as an adviser to the management committee.


Farm Aid to Chicago? Miami? Study Hits an Inviting Target
Marco Island, Fla., hardly seems an obvious destination for checks under the Agriculture Department's farm programs.
It is, after all, one of South Florida's most exclusive vacation paradises, renowned for its golf courses, beaches and expansive homes.
But for the past 10 years, mostly in the name of saving family farms, the department has sent farm program money to Marco Island and other addresses in a host of unlikely locales -- from Beverly Hills to Manhattan, Chicago and Miami, according to a new computer analysis by the Washington-based Environmental Working Group.


U.S. Steel Plans to Increase Its Prices on Sheet Products
The nation's newly prosperous basic steel industry appears on its way to even more prosperity by raising prices for the second time this year on the sheet products that go into automobiles, appliances and a broad variety of consumer and industrial products.
A spokesman for the largest domestic steelmaker, the United States Steel subsidiary of the USX Corporation, said yesterday that the company had notified its customers that it planned to raise prices by an average of 3.5 percent effective July 2.
The increases would total $15 a ton for hot-rolled steel, $20 a ton for higher-quality cold-rolled steel and $30 a ton for steel with an additional coating like zinc galvanizing.


White House Memo; Lies, Regrets and Presidential Loyalty, of a Sort
The Attorney General concludes, in notably pungent terms, that the Housing Secretary lied to the F.B.I. about how much money he paid his former mistress, and that he did so at the time he was applying for the honor of serving the President.
The President says he regrets that mistakes were made, and vows to stand by his man -- for now.
President Clinton's defense of his Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, Henry G. Cisneros, might seem puzzling to those who recall that this Administration took office with a commitment to the highest ethical standards.
But it is vain to search for overarching rationale or rigorous logic in the President's stance: An administration racked by political storms and perpetual personnel problems has fewer and fewer good choices, and the White House knows it.


Western Beef Inc.(BEEF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30


Court Orders Votes Counted In Alabama
In a decision that may reverse the results of the election of its Chief Justice, the Alabama Supreme Court has ruled that some 1,700 contested absentee ballots that are likely to favor the Democratic incumbent over the Republican challenger should be counted.
If the ruling, by a panel of the all-Democratic state Supreme Court, is eventually upheld by a Federal appeals court here, it would probably mean that Justice E. C. Hornsby will emerge the winner.
On Nov. 8, Justice Hornsby received 270 fewer votes than his Republican challenger, Perry O. Hooper.


Life Re Corp.(LRE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Duper Is Acquitted On All Drug Charges
MARK DUPER, the former Miami Dolphins wide receiver, was found not guilty in Federal court in Miami yesterday on all charges in a scheme to buy cocaine, convert it to crack and sell it in Louisiana.
Duper, a three-time selection to the Pro Bowl and favorite target of quarterback DAN MARINO, was found not guilty on charges of cocaine possession with intent to distribute and conspiracy.
His brother-in-law, BRIAN BRIGGS, was also found not guilty on the same charges.


Education Transfers, and Stops; Public Schools Are Struggling With High Student Turnover
It is March, and Marie Pompeo-Melone, the nurse at Public School 8, is still registering new students -- 25 in the first eight days of the month alone.
The students keep coming, but the seams of the school do not burst because others are leaving just as fast.
In 1993, the school had a mobility rate of 89 percent, according to the State Education Department, meaning that 89 percent of the children spent part of the year elsewhere.
Ms.
Pompeo-Melone's file cabinets are crammed with their transfer papers, and her head swims with their faces and names.


State Leaders Agree on Revenue Estimate
Gov.
George E. Pataki and the state's legislative leaders passed the first milestone on the path to enacting a state budget by agreeing today on how much money they will have available to spend.
Aides to Mr.
Pataki had warned only a week ago against the dangers of unjustifiable increases in state revenue estimates.
But today, the Governor agreed to raise his previous projection of $33.88 billion by $300 million.
That figure, which is for the fiscal year that starts on April 1, fell between the Senate Republicans' estimate that state taxes and fees would generate an additional $214 million and the Assembly Democrats' estimate of $549 million.


Loyce Houlton, 70, Troupe Founder And Choreographer
Loyce Houlton, a leader in American regional dance and a choreographer whose works were performed by companies in the United States and Europe, died on Tuesday at United Hospital in St.
Paul.
She was 70 and lived in Minneapolis.
The cause was a stroke, said her daughter, Lise Houlton Gilliland, a former member of American Ballet Theater and the Stuttgart Ballet.


For Many in Work Force, 'Glass Ceiling' Still Exists
Despite three decades of affirmative action, "glass ceilings" and "concrete walls" still block women and minority groups from the top management ranks of American industry, a Federal commission said today in the Government's first comprehensive study of barriers to promotion.
White men, while constituting about 29 percent of the workforce, hold about 95 of every 100 senior management positions, defined as vice president and above, the report said.


G.O.P. IN SENATE BOWS TO MINORITY ON STRIKER ISSUE
In the face of determined opposition by the Senate's Democratic minority, Republicans today abandoned their effort to overturn a directive by President Clinton on the use of replacement workers in strikes.
Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the majority leader, was forced to call a halt to the effort this evening after it became clear that Democrats had the votes to maintain a filibuster against the majority party.


Bridge
Each year, the International Bridge Press Association organizes the Bols Tip competition, sponsored by the Dutch liqueur manufacturer.
Eight invited experts submit articles based on a useful piece of advice, and the journalists vote on their comparative merit.
The 1994 winner has not yet been determined, but one favorite is Zhou Qi, who was for many years China's leading tournament director and now resides in Flushing, Queens.
His tip is "Play your honor earlier if it is of no use," and he mentions a famous episode that decided the 1975 World Team Championship: An American player, defending seven clubs, held K-10 doubleton of clubs and found the A-Q doubleton in dummy on his left.
If he had played his king when the declarer led from his hand, he would have tempted the declarer into taking a losing line of play and changed the result of the world championship.


Lincoln Center Feels Strain as It Prepares New Festival for 1996
Lincoln Center's plans for a major new international arts festival in the summer of 1996 are placing a strain on the always delicate balance of interests among the center's cultural institutions, according to people who have been following the project.
Besides the practical problems of putting together such a major event on relatively short notice, the proposed festival has provoked much debate, not all of it exactly civil.


Ross Stores Inc.(ROST,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


A Studio Breathes, Idea by Idea by Idea
ADAM WEITSMAN, 26, may be noblesse in the antiques world.
But in the world of interior design, he is a novice.
Growing up in Owego, N.Y., a town of 500, he tagged along with his family to antique shops and bought his first early American stoneware jug for $5 when he was only 11.
Three years later, he owned 60 jugs.


Mixed Economic Signals Leave Long Bond Unchanged
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed yesterday, as the dollar remained weak and reports of strong growth in the economy countered a Federal Reserve report that suggested that inflation was unlikely to accelerate.
The price of the 30-year bond was unchanged at 1036/32 for a yield of 7.36 percent, with rates on shorter-maturity bills slightly lower.


Turmoil After Fire At Design Center
SEVERAL years from now, the week the Decoration &amp; Design Building was closed because of an electrical fire may become the stuff of legend, like the New York City blackouts and the winter of '94.
Right now, though, there is relief that no one was injured and that damage to the building's famous showrooms, home to some of the design world's most prestigious fabrics and furnishings companies, seemed minimal.
No one likes to think of a smoke condition at $250 a yard.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
From Boston With Blooms
The weather has warmed up a lot this week, but if spring still seems too far off, you can visit Boston.
Through Sunday, that's where gardeners can indulge their wildest floral fantasies courtesy of the New England Spring Flower Show.
This year's theme, "Magical Moments," has inspired some dazzling displays, from the charmingly whimsical to the seriously horticultural.


AMR Overhauls Top Tier, Naming Likely Crandall Heir
The parent company of American Airlines announced an overhaul of management yesterday that includes sharp job cuts and the naming of an heir apparent to Robert L. Crandall, the chairman and chief executive.
Donald J. Carty, was named president of a new airline group within the parent company, the AMR Corporation.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; 4 Arrested in Sales of Heroin
A gang that sold heroin round the clock here, 50 feet from an elementary school, was dismantled yesterday, Federal authorities said.
In announcing the arrests of four suspects, United States Attorney Faith S. Hochberg said, "This drug gang operated more efficiently than any fast-food store." Four other people remain at large, she said.


Eagle-Picher Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Economy Shows Some Signs of Strength, but Dollar Falls Sharply; Both Stocks and Bonds Shed Early Nervousness
The dollar tumbled to near-record lows in overseas trading yesterday, despite signs of robust growth in the American economy that could lead to higher interest rates.
The stock and bond markets largely shrugged off the fall in the dollar and the stronger-than-expected economic data.
The economy's resilience was apparently more attractive to stock traders, who might have sold off on such positive data a few months ago, fearing another increase in rates by the Federal Reserve.
Indeed, on Friday, stocks surged after a strong employment report for February.


Corrections
A headline and an entry in the front-page "Inside" listing on Tuesday referred incorrectly in some editions to the trend in welfare and food stamp rolls.
They have leveled off, not decreased.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; Preserving a Forest and Falls
The Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee yesterday authorized $20.8 million to help northern New Jersey hold on to some of its past.
The panel approved $17.5 million to preserve 17,000 acres of Sterling Forest along the New York border.
New Jersey already owns 2,100 acres of the forest in Passaic County and has agreed to contribute $10 million for the remaining acreage.
New York would also be asked to put up money.


Mideast Goal Of Clinton And Hassan
With Israel and Syria set to resume direct talks soon, President Clinton and King Hassan II of Morocco called today for speeding up the quest for Middle East peace.
After a White House meeting with the Moroccan leader, Mr.
Clinton spoke of renewed hope and urged the parties to seize what he said was now a real opportunity to resolve the Arab-Israeli conflict.
King Hassan, who is beginning a state visit to the United States, said it was crucial that the tempo of talks between Palestinians and Israelis be quickened.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Report Says 'Glass Ceiling' Is Prevalent in U.S.
Industry  A Federal commission has found that white men hold about 95 percent of all senior management positions, and although white women have poured into lower management, they often do not advance.
The report is likely to become part of the debate over Republican pressure in Congress to abandon the affirmative action programs created in the 1960's.
A22.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Assigned Walt McKeel, catcher; Pat Murphy and Nomar Garciaparra, infielders; and Scott Bakkum and Pete Young, pitchers, to their minor-league camp.
Released Jeff Hammond, outfielder.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Signed Gregg Olson, pitcher, to a minor-league contract.


Court Stalls F.C.C. Program For Women and Minorities
A Federal appeals court here today derailed the Government's most ambitious affirmative action program, temporarily blocking a plan to reserve a valuable swath of the nation's airwaves for small businesses, minorities and women.
In a tersely worded decision, the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit barred the Federal Communications Commission from proceeding with its plan to auction nearly 500 licenses this summer for new wireless telephone and data services.


France Assures Public on an Ailing Bank
Seeking to bolster public confidence in Credit Lyonnais, the huge state-owned bank, and shore up the presidential hopes of Prime Minister Edouard Balladur, the Government has gone on a public relations blitz by assuring depositors that their money is safe, telling taxpayers they will not pay for future bank losses and warning bank officers that fraud will be prosecuted.
"All measures will be taken to punish those who may be found responsible " for fraud, Mr.
Balladur said in a statement Tuesday night.
A senior Government official said today that three former officers of one of the bank's subsidiaries had been taken into custody in an investigation begun last year.


Dollar Falls Sharply Despite U.S. Growth
The dollar fell sharply yesterday to near-record lows against the Japanese yen and the German mark, despite signs of robust growth in the American economy that could lead to higher interest rates.
Still, the stock and bond markets largely shrugged off the fall in the dollar.
The Government said that industrial production and factory capacity rose in February to new 15-year highs and that producer prices rose by three-tenths of 1 percent.
In the past, such reports have bolstered the dollar by raising the prospect that the Federal Reserve might increase rates to keep inflation in check.
Instead, the dollar continued on its downward course of recent weeks.


Poor Land Is Exerting Big Weight In Africa
When the Liberian faction leader Charles Taylor needs a plane to move around the region, diplomats say, he picks up his satellite telephone and calls Blaise Compaore, the President of Burkina Faso, a hardscrabble nation of nine million people.
Typically, a plane bearing the country's yellow, green and red colors arrives in short order.
When France decided to expel 20 Algerian Islamic militants last August, Paris first had to find a country that would take them in.
The solution involved a call to Mr.
Compaore, who accepted the request and placed the exiled militants under house arrest.


E.M.S. Erred In a Dispute, Report Finds
Emergency Medical Service personnel made a long series of blunders in treating a pregnant Queens woman last year, from failing to take her vital signs to failing to note that she was bleeding, and wasted crucial minutes as her baby bled to death, according to a city investigators' report issued yesterday.
The report by the Department of Investigation dealt with an incident on Feb. 13, 1994, that drew widespread attention when the woman and her family charged that an E.M.S. ambulance crew had wasted valuable time arguing with them over which hospital she should be taken to.


Wallace Computer Services Inc.(WCS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


I.R.A. Backer Leaves Shadows for the Crystal Chandeliers
Gerry Adams's fever had hit 102, and a savage cough wracked his body.
And so shortly after dawn, he sat slumped in the back seat of a modest sedan on his way through a faint but gathering light to the Albany County airport.
At the midpoint of his hectic 10-day fund-raising tour in the Northeastern United States, the transformation from accused terrorist to hand-pumping lobbyist had proved debilitating for the president of the Irish Republican Army's political arm, Sinn Fein.
On Tuesday morning, he pulled a green scarf tightly around his neck and proposed an epitaph for his tombstone: "I told you I was sick."


Ringling Brothers finds just coming to town isn't enough any more.
ALL the hoopla, ballyhoo and bunkum surrounding the 125th anniversary year of the Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus has obscured two marketing facts: The company will spend more on advertising this year -- $25 million -- than ever.
And "the Greatest Show on Earth" is introducing the first national advertising campaign in its history.
Ringling "is the greatest brand on earth," said Allen J. Bloom, the circus's marketing and sales director, sounding very much like P. T. Barnum, a predecessor in the job.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Miller's 40 Points Lead Pacers  Reggie Miller scored a season-high 40 points, including 17 in the final quarter when the Indiana Pacers rallied to defeat visiting Milwaukee, 117-108, last night. (AP)
BULLS 99, HAWKS 86: Pete Myers, the man who replaced Michael Jordan last season and the man most likely to be replaced if Jordan returns to the Bulls, scored a season-high 14 points to help Chicago beat Atlanta.
Scottie Pippen scored 20 points. (AP) CLIPPERS 117, PISTONS 87: Malik Sealy scored 25 points and Loy Vaught had 21 points and 14 rebounds as host Los Angeles dealt Detroit its fourth straight loss. (AP)


'Boat People' Prefer Death To Homeland
Tran Ba is so desperate to avoid being forced back home to Vietnam that in a protest this month he doused himself with kerosene in front of horrified Philippine guards and threatened to set himself afire.
"Next time I will light the match," said Mr.
Ba, who left Vietnam four years ago believing that he had been promised a new life in the United States.


Value City Department Stores Inc.(VCD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Top Orange County Official Raises Specter of Tax Increase
Orange County's chief executive violated an unofficial taboo today by becoming the first senior official to say what many people had long believed: the county has no hope of climbing out of bankruptcy and paying off its creditors without a prompt tax increase.
William Popejoy, a businessman who was recently named the county's interim chief executive, took a long-expected step and said the county government should promptly hold a referendum on a half-cent increase in the sales tax, raising it to 8.25 percent from 7.75 percent.


Senate to Begin Hearings on Operation of Javits Center
At a conference on the city's economy last month, Jonathan M. Tisch, president and chief executive officer of Loews Hotels, appealed to public officials and private executives to focus on cleaning up the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center.
"The most important issue is what do we do with the Javits Center," he said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  VIETNAM'S ADAMANT BOAT EXILES  Two decades after the first vessels pushed off the shores, the tragic final chapter of Vietnam's boat people is being written in detention camps across Southeast Asia.
More than anything, the boat people fear a return to their country, so forcing them home will be an ugly, possibly dangerous business.
A1


Broadway StoresInc.(BWY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


COMPANY NEWS BROOKLYN UNION GAS CO., the natural gas utility company, said its Pennunion Energy Services gas-marketing venture with Pennzoil Co., Houston, would begin full-scale operations on April 1.


Strong Yen Aids Japan
To the Editor:
Your front-page article March 8 on the dollar's continuing fall states that a "7 percent rise in the value of the yen in recent days will cost Japanese companies billions in lost products on exports." The yen has risen approximately 10 percent in the last two months, which means that all the food and fuel Japan eats and burns will be bought 10 percent cheaper in world markets.


Kirby Corp.(KEX,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


To Thy House Be True
SIR EDWARD COKE, a jurist in 17th-century England, is credited with saying, "For a man's house is his castle." An exhibition at the Folger Shakespeare Library in Washington is debating the point.
"We set up a framework of how the Elizabethan household was supposed to be organized, patriarchally, but things didn't work according to the rules," said Dr.
Lena Cowen Orlin, the curator of the show, "Elizabethan Households," and the executive director of the Folger Institute, the library's research center.


Mitchell Energy &amp; Development Corp.(MND.A,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


William A. Fowler, 83, Astrophysicist, Dies
Dr.
William A. Fowler, a Nobel laureate who played a leading role in developing the commonly accepted theory that virtually all of the elements throughout the universe were created inside the stars, died on Tuesday at Huntington Memorial Hospital in Pasadena, Calif.
He was 83 and lived in Pasadena.
The cause was kidney failure, said Charles Barnes, an emeritus professor of physics at the California Institute of Technology.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.13
5.93
3.05
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.73
5.75
3.51
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.88
5.89
3.77
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.08
7.10
6.36
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.36
7.36
6.80
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.21
8.21
7.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.35
6.35
5.09
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 8


Thermo Instrument Systems Inc.(THI,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bonnie Raitt in a Self-Revealing Mood
In a change of pace from its normal run of cautionary dramas for young audiences, the "ABC After school Special" series turns this afternoon to a talk-show format.
Whoopi Goldberg is the interviewer on "Bonnie Raitt Has Something to Talk About."
Actually, Ms.
Raitt, a seven-time Grammy Award winner, has a lot to talk about, or at least skim over with varying degrees of discretion.
There is her growing up as the daughter of John Raitt, leading man of musical theater, and deciding that what he represented was "not the music of my time." Young Bonnie loved rhythm-and-blues and folk music.
She still describes herself as a rocker "because of my attitude," rooted in the counterculture and "people who don't go to bed on time." She and Ms.
Goldberg agree that they will probably still be "rockin' in our rockers" in their 70's.


Even for Top-Seeded Teams, There's Still Much to Prove
The National Collegiate Athletic Association begins its first 64-team women's tournament Thursday night with the four top-seeded teams on a mission.
Connecticut (29-0) hopes to become the only team other than Texas in 1986 to finish the regular season and the N.C.A.A. tournament unbeaten.
Tennessee (29-2) hopes to prove that its loss to Vanderbilt in the Southeastern Conference tournament final was a fluke.


Colgate, to the Big Dance
College coaches cried out in anguish last spring when a bright, athletic high schooler named Adonal Foyle (6 feet 10 inches tall, 260 pounds) said no to the basketball factories and instead chose Colgate, a smallish school with no basketball reputation, in Hamilton, N.Y.
As Mr.
Foyle said at the time: "People were saying that Duke was the school for me and Syracuse was the school for me, and I was shocked. It's confusing to me, this idea that the decision has to be based on my basketball life. . . . Isn't this supposed to be about education and what's best for me as a whole?"


For UConn, Memories of '94 Reverse
Life does not take place 40 minutes at a time.
It is just measured that way this month.
Two time zones from home, the Connecticut Huskies have transformed the factors that did not develop this time last year into the tasks that must be done this month.
The Huskies are making the school's fifth appearance in the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament in six years, but this group's point of reference only extends back one year, to the loss to Florida in the Round of 16 and the inconsistent play that preceded it.


John Kearney, 82, Longtime Counsel To Brooklyn Diocese
John H. Kearney, who was counsel to the Roman Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn for more than 50 years, died on Saturday at New York Medical Center.
He was 82.
The cause was heart disease, said a son, Kevin.


A Snip Here, A Topiary There
WHEN most people look at an unruly shrub, they see only a mass of green.
Asher Eden, a gardener who specializes in topiaries, envisions a landscape of shapes -- circles, rectangles, triangles.
In the early 1980's, Mr.
Eden, who lives in Chelsea, began fretting about the overgrown bushes he passed each day in front of Chadwin House, a block-long apartment building at 140 Seventh Avenue (18th Street).
In 1987, when the building was converted into condominiums and friends joined its board, Mr.
Eden was hired to turn the bushes (shown above as they were then) into topiaries that would change at his whim.


Erotic Energy and Social Disorder
He Ping's lushly pictorial film, "Red Firecracker, Green Firecracker," reinvents a hackneyed Hollywood symbol -- fireworks as a metaphor for sexual ecstasy -- by blowing it up into a more sweeping image of unleashed erotic energy and social disorder.
Set in northern China in the years before the 1911 revolution, the film portrays a fiercely puritanical society living on land that is literally laced with the ingredients for pyrotechnics.
When this repressive order is threatened by sexual impropriety, all sorts of explosions begin to detonate.
The film's central character, Chun Zhi (Ning Jing), is a beautiful, impassive young woman who runs her family's far-reaching fireworks empire.
Known as "master" to the hundreds who work on the estate, Chun Zhi, who dresses like a man, presides over her fief with a chilly air of noblesse oblige.
Under the terms of her inheritance, she is not allowed to marry, for to do so would take the business out of the hands of her family, which founded it many centuries ago.


Pakistan's Ties to U.S. Remain Strong
To the Editor:
Your March 12 news article on the vow by Pakistan's Prime Minister to adopt tough tactics in the wake of the killings of two American consular officials not only contains factual inaccuracies but also quotes Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto completely out of context.


Prominent Black Americans Take Aim at Nigeria
A group of prominent blacks began a national campaign today to press Nigeria's military dictatorship to restore democracy, the first time African-Americans have embarked on a protest of such magnitude against a black African government.
"We must isolate Nigeria, politically, socially and economically, in the same way we were able to isolate South Africa and Haiti," said Randall Robinson, executive director of TransAfrica, the black lobby for Africa and the Caribbean that is leading the campaign.
The effort will include newspaper ads and protests outside the Nigerian Embassy.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Rodman a No-Show, but Spurs Beat 76ers  David Robinson had 26 points and 11 rebounds in three quarters as the San Antonio Spurs -- playing without Dennis Rodman, the National Basketball Association's leading rebounder -- beat the Philadelphia 76ers, 112-86, last night in San Antonio.
Rodman arrived in the Spurs locker room at the beginning of the second quarter.
He never emerged from the locker room during the game.
J.
R.
Reid, starting for Rodman, had 16 points and 7 rebounds.
Dana Barros led the 76ers with 17 points.
The Spurs led by as many as 31 points in the third quarter, and San Antonio Coach Bob Hill benched Robinson and his other starters with 3 minutes 15 seconds remaining in the third. (AP)


Grandeur and Glory, But Oh, What a Cost
The year is young, but it may already have yielded its weirdest movie subject matter with "Farinelli," the story of a celebrated 18th-century castrato.
Abandoning his given name of Carlo Broschi, he became a singer so famous that admirers wept and fainted at his performances.
He spent 10 years attached to the Spanish court, singing the same four songs to King Philip V each night to relieve the king's melancholy.
If this film is to be believed, he was also a remarkable lady-killer, succeeding in the boudoir with the help of his brother, Riccardo Broschi.
"It's the pact, Madame," Riccardo (Enrico Lo Verso) says whenever he appears to assist Carlo (Stefano Dionisi) at a crucial moment.
The film includes several sinuous menage a trois scenes during which Carlo, or Farinelli, suggests that castration has been no real inconvenience and may actually contribute to the sexual mystique of a musical celebrity.
The culmination of these episodes occurs when Riccardo quietly materializes and, figuratively speaking, lends a hand.
An air of worldly complicity accompanies such moments.


Inside Art
What's a van Gogh Worth? $7 Million?
A van Gogh portrait has come on the auction market for the first time in five years.
On May 11, Christie's in New York is selling "Young Man in a Cap" (1888), a striking portrait of a peasant painted against an acid-yellow background.
While the auction house won't be pinned down on exactly how much it expects the portrait to bring, Nancy Whyte, who heads Christie's department of Impressionist and modern art in New York, estimates it could fetch anywhere from $7 million to $9 million.


Legal Action Is Threatened in Rams' Move
The Rams appeared resigned yesterday to spending another season in California while National Football League Commissioner PAUL TAGLIABUE -- who opposed the move to St.
Louis -- suggested relocation is still possible.
"The objective is to have teams in both places in a short-term time frame," Tagliabue said at the N.F.L. owners meetings in Phoenix.


The Melancholy Images That Made an Era Real
The first task some viewers will face when they look at the photographs in "Dorothea Lange: American Images," the stirring exhibition now at the International Center of Photography, is to strip the pictures of their dulling glaze of fame.
Lange had an astonishing ability to make images that summed up the terrible impact of the Depression of the 1930's on people's lives, and many of the pictures here have become classics, not only of photography but of the history of America.
As a result, they have been endlessly reproduced, and it may be difficult for some people to break through the pictures' familiarity and to recognize the human realities they record.
These are the images that have defined our understanding of Depression America, and particularly of its people, with their weary eyes and worn faces.


Awad Closes Fast at Gulfstream Park
Gulfstream Park ended its two-and-a-half-month racing season today with a slight drop in attendance but a strong gain in its favorite export, simulcasting.
It also declared Jerry Bailey its leading jockey, Bill Mott and Frank A. Passero Jr. its leading trainers and the 5-year-old Awad the surprise winner of its closing feature, the $300,000 Pan American Handicap.
Awad ran fifth behind several of the same horses three weeks ago in the Gulfstream Park Breeders' Cup Handicap.
He likes to run late, and he did it with success today, shooting from ninth and last place to first as they turned for home.
At the wire, he had 1 3/4 lengths on Misil, who had three lengths on Frenchpark.
The favorite, Yokohoma, finished eighth with Bailey riding.


Gerry Adams Shakes Hands With Clinton
For Congress's annual St.
Patrick's Day luncheon, Newt Gingrich, the House Speaker, invited Ireland's new Prime Minister, John Bruton, to be the main event.
But the first handshake between President Clinton and Gerry Adams, the head of Sinn Fein, the political wing of the Irish Republican Army, stole the spotlight.
Some of the 50 people at the luncheon, most of them Irish-American members of Congress, thought Mr.
Clinton might forgo a handshake because he was under tremendous pressure from Prime Minister John Major of Britain not to give Mr.
Adams a warm embrace.


Clinton Meets With Bosnian and Croatian Chiefs
President Clinton met today with Bosnian and Croatian leaders in an effort to give new life to a languishing political federation that his Administration says is vital to helping Muslims and Croats stand up to their joint enemy, the Serbs.
Administration officials acknowledge that the agreement that formed the federation of Muslims and Croats in Bosnia, signed a year ago in Washington, had accomplished virtually nothing beyond getting the two groups to stop fighting each other.


The Fantastical Visions Of an Obsessive Outsider
These days, outsider art is, as a genre, thoroughly studied and widely appreciated.
It may be becoming so deeply in that it almost renders the very term an oxymoron.
Still, an exceptional exhibition at the Swiss Institute in SoHo proves that for Americans at least, some significant surprises and discoveries remain.
This show introduces the art of Heinrich Anton Muller, a Swiss outsider, or self-taught, artist who died in 1930 at the age of 61.
He's great, almost on a par with outsider giants like Adolf Wolfli (who was also Swiss), Martin Ramirez and Henry Darger.
Muller's work is not a secret in Europe.
Even in his lifetime, his large drawings of fantastical figures and animals were known to Hans Prinzhorn, the German psychiatrist who was among the first to write about and preserve the art of the insane.
Muller's art received its first gallery exhibition in Paris in 1949 and was admired by Jean Dubuffet, who included it in his art brut collection.
It also inspired other French artists, like Daniel Spoerri and Jean Tinguely, who both dedicated artworks to Muller, and was seen in the 1972 Documenta exhibition.


Rangers Know They Can't Live in Past
When the Rangers visit President Clinton in the White House Rose Garden this afternoon, they will present him with a miniature Stanley Cup that bears the inscription: "From One Madison Square Garden Victor to Another."
The reference is to the Rangers' championship of last June and to Clinton's nomination at the Democratic National Convention in New York in 1992.


Italian Premier Wins 2 Votes To Survive Budget Challenge
Narrowly surviving a dramatic parliamentary showdown, Prime Minister Lamberto Dini went on today to win approval for the deficit-cutting budget measure on which he had staked his two-month-old Government.
With back-to-back victories in the Italian Parliament's lower house, first on a 315-to-309 confidence vote and hours later, on the budget bill, Mr.
Dini won more time for his Government of technicians to finish its limited task of political and fiscal reform, and forestalled a call for early national elections.


At Home Abroad; The Price of Indecision
It feels a long way from the handshake on the White House lawn.
The hopes raised by Yitzhak Rabin and Yasir Arafat that day in September 1993 have been worn away by the grinding details of peacemaking, by political hesitation and by terrorism.
Three terrorist acts did particular injury to mutual confidence between Palestinians and Israelis: a Jewish settler's murder of 29 Muslims at prayer in Hebron a year ago, a Palestinian suicide bomber's attack on a bus in Tel Aviv last October in which 22 people died, and another attack by suicide bombers that killed 19 Israeli soldiers at a bus stop this January.


Accounts
*
Omni Hotels, Hampton, N.H., to Gearon Hoffman, Boston, to handle its account, previously at Earle Palmer Brown, Philadelphia.
The billings were estimated at more than $3 million. *
Heinz U.S.A., Pittsburgh, to J. Brown/LMC Group, Stamford, Conn., as the first agency to handle programs that combine advertising and retail promotion for its Heinz Ketchup, Heinz 57 Steak Sauce and Heinz Homestyle gravy brands.
J.
Brown joins agencies on Heinz's roster like the Pittsburgh and San Francisco offices of Ketchum Advertising.
The billings were not disclosed.


Debate? Campaign Issues? But This Is Scarsdale
ROBERT HARRISON is trying to bring American democracy to Scarsdale, but he is having a tough time of it.
He is running for mayor, but at a candidates' forum at the public library the other night, it was just he on the dais.
Following a longstanding Scarsdale tradition, his opponent, Ann Janiak, refuses to debate.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Falcon Drilling Co., Houston, is selling $50 million of senior subordinated notes due in 2005 through Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Securities Corp.
Callable in five years, the notes carry an interest rate of 12.5 percent and are priced at par.
The notes are rated B3 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and B- by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $100 million of notes due in 1997 through Bear, Stearns &amp; Co.
The notes are callable in six months, carry an interest rate of 7.03 percent and are priced at par.


Doubletree Hotels To Withdraw Spot
The Doubletree Hotels Corporation said yesterday that it would withdraw, effective immediately, a television commercial deemed offensive by a Muslim-American organization.


Pitching Camp Where the Old Soldiers Live On
Here towered Patton, binoculars in hand, vigilant against an unseen enemy.
Or perhaps, as West Point lore has it, looking for the library.
There stood bronzed MacArthur, defiant, campaign jacket flung over an arm.
And the five-star Ike, businesslike, hands on his hips, gazing over the Plain.
We had come to the granite Army citadel some 60 miles up the Hudson from Manhattan to rub shoulders with history and perhaps a future President and set up base to reconnoiter the mid-Hudson Valley.
Our contingent numbered four: two generals and two recruits, gender female, ages 15 and 4.


Tongue Found to Hold Natural Antibiotics
In a significant finding about the body's natural defenses, scientists have found that the tongue harbors natural antibiotic substances that protect cuts from being infected by the billions of microbes that infest the mouth.
The discovery was made in the tongues of cows, which are easily available from slaughterhouses, and may hold true of humans and other animals, too.


Critic's Choice/Film; Stressed and Repressed
"It is the most erotic film that I have ever made," Michael Powell said of "Black Narcissus," a peculiar-sounding claim for the chaste story of Anglican nuns in the Himalayas, but it's easy to see what he meant.
The 1947 film is a classic of repressed sexuality, set amid the lush surroundings of a rajah's palace turned convent.
Playing from today through Monday, "Black Narcissus" is a terrific opening for a series at Film Forum 2 called "A Production of the Archers," the company name that Powell and Emeric Pressburger made famous in the 1940's.
Powell, who died in 1990, was the director.
Pressburger, who died in 1988, was the primary screenwriter.
Their joint credit, "Written, Produced and Directed by Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger," came to signal some of the most visually beautiful fantasies ever filmed.


Diner's Journal
Bottled Urbanity
When you want to show an out-of-towner a real New York restaurant, think about Lex.
Everything about this plush, cozy space screams big city, from the conservatively dressed silver- and blond-haired clientele to the compressed space and comforting urban cuisine.
At first it is hard not to wonder how so many people can possibly ask for privacy in such tight quarters, but before long the Manhattan magic kicks in and the other tables fade into the background.
If they surface now and then it is not due to the noise, which is low, but because this is the sort of restaurant where someone is always making an entrance.


A Taste of Freedom


A Caballe Concert
Montserrat Caballe is to give a concert of opera and zarzuela arias with the New Jersey Symphony on April 13 at 8 P.M. at Carnegie Hall.
The program is part of a celebration of the 30th anniversary of the Spanish soprano's American debut.
She will sing works by Rossini, Verdi, Cilea, Boito, Chapi, Serrano and Nieto.
The orchestra, under the direction of Jose Collado, will play overtures by Rossini and Verdi.
Tickets, from $15 to $100, are available at the box office or through Carnegie Charge, (212) 247-7800.


Coleman Speaks, And Beard Cringes
Nets Coach Butch Beard reasoned that Derrick Coleman has this uncanny knack for being Derrick Coleman.
And knowing that, you cannot take everything Derrick Coleman says, print it and call it responsible journalism.
Even when it concerns calling Karl Malone, the Utah Jazz's All-Star forward, an "Uncle Tom."
But this is New York and, hey, it's not exactly Dwayne Schintzius knocking Felton Spencer.


Republicans Lop $100 Billion from Budgets to Pay for Tax Cuts
Much as they have promised for months, Republicans on the House Budget Committee voted today to lop $100 billion from future Federal budgets to pay for a hefty chunk of the tax relief promised in their Contract With America.
This, at least, is the way the Republicans tell it.
Furious Democrats offer a different account.
Others who were there remain uncertain of everything that occurred but would pay admission to see such a bar fight again.


Price Surge Seen In Penny Stocks Underwritten By Failed Firm
A handful of securities once given up for dead are likely to rise sharply on Monday, as a short squeeze of huge proportions hits Wall Street.
It is the latest, but not the last, chapter in one of Wall Street's more bizarre spectacles, involving penny stocks, stock manipulation and apparently illegal short-selling.


Farmer Protection Act Defended
New Jersey's Agriculture Secretary, Art Brown, yesterday defended a Federal Agriculture Department program before a House subcommittee.


Gantos Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


The Bridge Stops Right Here, A Nonunion Builder Is Told
For six months, Dave Allan has been doing everything he can think of to rebuild a bridge on a highway to Jones Beach in time for summer.
He has fired off angry letters to state officials, held clandestine meetings with would-be suppliers and even obtained court orders to force other reluctant suppliers to honor their obligations to him.
But try as he might, Mr.
Allan, a nonunion builder with a $6.7 million state contract to rebuild a bridge on the Wantagh State Parkway, has been unable to circumvent the largest roadblock he has encountered in 30 years in the construction industry: a refusal by union workers across Long Island to load his trucks with the concrete and asphalt he needs to do the job.


Around the Corner


In Power Industry, Changes Batter Independents
For Charles F. Goff, the president and chief executive of Destec Energy, the solution to a bad turn in his business is tantalizingly close: the distance he can drive a golf ball.
The Lyondell electric plant of Destec, an independent power company, sits a little more than 200 yards from a complex of chemical and oil refineries near Houston, most of which would gladly buy the inexpensive power produced by the plant.


Art in Review
Nicola Tyson
Friedrich Petzel Gallery  26 Wooster Street  SoHo  Through April 15
The paintings by Nicola Tyson, a 34-year-old English-born artist, are like a cross between the works of Francis Bacon and the Surrealist Hans Bellmer (Bellmer must be the most influential unsung artist today).
They depict mutant figures with bellies for heads and legs for arms (Bellmer) placed in ambiguously enclosed spaces (Bacon).
The colors are acid and bright, also like Bacon's.
In earlier works, Ms.
Tyson favored a softer, more modulated palette and her figures were more intricately detailed.
These images seem starker and more potent: distilled and toughened.
Her new drawings are also different from her previous ones.
Those looked like de Chiricos.
These are strange, wavery, ebullient sketches of otherwordly figures.
MICHAEL KIMMELMAN


As Automotive Air Bags Become Common, So Does Stealing Them
One morning last December, Martin Rothberg found a large hole in the center of his steering wheel.
Confused that nothing of value appeared to be missing, he guessed that his 1991 Ford Taurus, parked in Washington Heights, was the victim of a failed hot-wiring.
When he tested the ignition, the air bag symbol flashed on, and then he knew what had happened.


Ruling Keeps Alive Hopes for Bronx Railyard
A judge's ruling has revived the possibility that a moribund railyard in the South Bronx could be turned into a major center for transfering freight from trains to trucks.
Advocates of the proposal say the creation of the transfer point would lower the cost of shipping goods into New York City, create thousands of jobs and reduce air pollution.
But the State Department of Transportation, which once supported the concept, had opted instead to lease the 96-acre Harlem River Yard, at the southern tip of the Bronx near Randalls Island, to a private developer who planned a smaller transfer operation.


YELTSIN TO ALTER PARADE ON V-E DAY TO DRAW CLINTON
In a fresh effort to persuade President Clinton to come to Moscow for the 50th anniversary of the Allied victory in Europe, President Boris N. Yeltsin said today that he would tailor the Red Square military parade on May 9 to avoid embarrassing the American leader.
"He wants to come," Mr.
Yeltsin said of Mr.
Clinton, but is "a bit concerned about the whole scenario." He said that to make it easier for Mr.
Clinton to come for the celebration, the parade in Red Square would be limited to veterans of World War II and no military equipment would be included.


Old Redwoods Can Be Felled In California
California has decided to allow limited logging of giant redwoods in the last privately owned virgin stand of the trees in the world.
The California Department of Forestry told the Pacific Lumber Company on Wednesday that it had accepted the company's request to remove "dead, dying and diseased" trees from a 6,000-acre forest it owns 250 miles north of San Francisco.
The land includes the 3,300-acre Headwaters Grove, which many California officials have said should become a public preserve.


Connecticut (30-0) Enjoys How the Story Reads So Far
If Stephen King needs ideas for his next horror novel, he was at the right place tonight.
The author, wearing a University of Maine T-shirt, sat in the eighth row behind the Maine bench, cheering on the Black Bears women's basketball team and its heralded freshman, Cindy Blodgett.
Maine needed more help than that against Connecticut, the nation's No. 1-ranked team.
The Huskies decimated the North Atlantic Conference champions, 105-75, in the first round of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.
That raised UConn's record to 30-0 and provided its 34th consecutive home victory.


CHRONICLE
Dr.
JOYCELYN ELDERS, the former Surgeon General, who resigned in a blaze of controversy in December, is coming to town next week.
She is to address a breakfast of the Prochoice Resource Center, a national organization that trains groups how to protect women's rights to abortion.
"I feel very strongly that we need this organization right now to make sure that we protect the reproductive rights of women, especially poor women and women who are not well educated," she said yesterday.
"The violence really is escalating. They've frightened the doctors, and they're using scare tactics to deny women reproductive rights."


A Little Boy and a Plot Worthy of Solomon
Hot-button social issues are usually the province of television movies, but "Losing Isaiah" deserves its status as a feature film.
This drama about interracial adoption is serious and affecting, thanks in large part to the presence of its two magnetic stars.
Duly positioned on opposite sides of this central issue, both Jessica Lange and Halle Berry breathe real life into their debating positions, which are well articulated by the material.
The tone is thoughtful and temperate.
Only once does anyone exclaim, "What about love?"
Stephen Gyllenhaal and Naomi Foner, the director and writer who previously collaborated on "A Dangerous Woman," are able to treat their subject evenhandedly without letting their film turn bland.
There are, after all, two heartbreaking sides to this story.
The first is that of Margaret Lewin, a white social worker who decides to adopt an abandoned black baby.
She's a woman not quite like anyone Ms.
Lange has played before: tough, solid and a little weary, hardened by all the insurmountable troubles she has seen.
In the hospital where Margaret works, the appearance of little Isaiah seems miraculous, since this infant has survived being dumped in the trash by his mother.
Although Margaret has a seemingly happy family -- an 11-year-old daughter (Daisy Eagan, Tony-winning star of "The Secret Garden" on Broadway) and a devoted-looking husband (David Strathairn, an actor too good to play pet spouse to major female stars) -- she doesn't need this new commitment.
But she craves it anyway, in ways that Ms.
Lange makes touchingly clear.


A Premiere in Ragtime, With All the Music's Jaunty Style
It would seem that Arthur Mitchell, the director of Dance Theater of Harlem, has long understood that dance audiences enjoy being entertained, to judge by his canny programming over the years.
Mr.
Mitchell's eye for vibrant new dance talent has added spice to that programming.
He and the company outdid themselves on Wednesday night in the third of four programs being offered by Dance Theater at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
There were judicious helpings of mystery, tragedy and froth, with the froth provided in the new of "The Joplin Dances," created by Robert Garland, a company member who is clearly a choreographic find.
The piece is danced to David LaMarche's witty orchestration of rags by Scott Joplin, James Scott, Joseph Lamb and Artie Matthews.
"The Joplin Dances" is, in effect, a loving and astute valentine to that wistfully melodic, jaunty music, opening in an empty cafe in which first one woman, then another waits impatiently for her late-arriving man.
Then Mr.
Garland opens up the dance and spills two principals, three demi-soloists, two couples and five small ballerinas out into a timeless, airy space that exists for dancing alone.


Shattering the Ceiling
Three years ago Elizabeth H. Dole, then Secretary of Labor, initiated an investigation into the so-called "glass ceiling." The glass ceiling, women and members of minority groups charged, was what they crashed their heads against on their climb up the corporate ladder.
You can go this far, the men on the top rungs seemed to say, and no farther.
The bipartisan Glass Ceiling Commission has now reported that, yes indeed, there is such an invisible barrier.
Despite 30 years of affirmative action, 95 percent of senior management positions are still held by white men, who constitute only 43 percent of the work force.


An Expanded Business Day
With Wall Street suffering from a downturn in which thousands are being laid off, foreign and regional banks are taking advantage of the carnage to pick up new talent.
Business Day examines the implications.


Vatican Backs Iraq on Easing of Sanctions
In its campaign against crippling economic sanctions imposed by the United Nations, Iraq today won the support of the Vatican, which has long opposed such embargoes because of the harm they inflict on ordinary people.
Tariq Aziz, the Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister, who belongs to the country's small Christian minority, won the assurance after meetings today with both Pope John Paul II and Angelo Cardinal Sodano, the Vatican's Secretary of State.


ZENITH PICKS TOSHIBA VIDEODISK STANDARD
The bitter standards battle that has pitted the Sony Corporation and Philips against Toshiba and Time-Warner over the next generation of digital videodisks tilted in favor of the Toshiba camp yesterday when the Zenith Electronics Corporation of Glenview, Ill., said it planned to offer players based on the Toshiba standard.
Both groups are trying to establish a new platform for home systems capable of playing full-length feature films stored on compact disks the size of today's CD audio disks.
Zenith, the nation's second-largest television brand, said that it would begin shipping its player in the middle of 1996.


Down but Not Out


Smithers Alcoholism Unit to Leave Its East Side Mansion
St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center is moving its Smithers Alcoholism and Rehabilitation Center from the Upper East Side mansion where the program was begun more than 20 years ago to the hospital's Roosevelt division, at 58th Street and 10th Avenue.
Hospital officials said yesterday that they decided to move the center -- which drew worldwide attention for treating celebrities like Joan Kennedy, Truman Capote and Dwight Gooden -- because of financial pressures.


Entrepreneur Gets $30 Million To Establish For-Profit Schools
A few months after financial pressures seemed to put its future in jeopardy, the Edison Project, the media entrepreneur Christopher Whittle's groundbreaking venture into for-profit education, announced yesterday that it had secured $30 million in financing and would open its first schools next fall.
Mr.
Whittle will provide half of the money himself and the president of the project, Benno C. Schmidt Jr., a former president of Yale University, is heading a group that will provide another $3 million.
The rest will come from the Sprout Group, one of the nation's oldest and largest venture capital firms.
By securing $12 million from the firm, Edison has allied itself with an investor with broad resources and far-ranging experience in start-up ventures.


White Males and Management
In exploring the demography of American upper management, a Government commission on Wednesday put its official stamp on what many people have suspected all along: important barriers to the progress of women and minorities are the entrenched stereotypes and prejudices of white men.
Women, the report of the Federal Glass Ceiling Commission said, are perceived by white males as "not being tough enough" and "unable or unwilling to relocate." Black men?
"Undisciplined, always late." Hispanic men are deemed "heavy drinkers and drug users who don't want to work" -- except for Cubans, who are "brave exiles from Communism." Asians?
"More equipped for technical than people-oriented work." And, the report said, white males believe that none of these folks play golf.


Worthington Industries(WTHG,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Hampton Industries(HAI,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Conde Nast 'Freezes' Ad Rates, Puzzling Industry
Conde Nast announced yesterday that it would freeze its basic advertising rates until the end of the year, despite double-digit increases in postal rates and paper costs that are sending shudders through the magazine industry.
These rates, known in the trade as C.P.M.'s, are what a magazine charges for every 1,000 copies that it guarantees to its advertisers.


Art in Review
Christopher Wilmarth
Sidney Janis Gallery  110 West 57th Street  Through March 25
Christopher Wilmarth was a Californian who came to New York as a teen-ager in the 1960's and fell in love with the brutal beauty of the city's architecture of steel, glass and cable.
He combined this love, somewhat paradoxically, with a poet's inclination toward indirection and reverie.
Mallarme meant as much to him as John Roebling.


For Children
Irish Fairy Tales
Dyckman Farmhouse Museum  Broadway at 204th Street  Inwood  (212) 304-9422  Recommended ages: 3 to 10  Tomorrow
Building a house on an Irish fairy's playground can bring the thatched roof down.
Especially if it's a solitary fairy, as opposed to a sociable one.
Solitary fairies are uncharitable, known for making heads disappear and other torments.
Leprechauns, who are shoemakers, fall into this category; they sit under hedges hoarding gold, so never trespass on an Irish hedge.
And never go near Tir-na-n-Og, an underwater land that is the favorite fairy dwelling.
Sociable fairies, either water or land fairies, are usually kind, but they cavort in troops and are quarrelsome.
No matter what, all Irish fairies, who are apparently fallen angels, must be approached with trepidation.


LTX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


First Year of Lopez Era Ends With Humbling Loss
A season that began with hysteria and hype because of the dawning of the Felipe Lopez Era ended with humbled expressions and hushed glances for St.
John's tonight as South Florida roared to a 74-67 victory in the other post-season basketball tournament.
There was no slot in the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament for the Red Storm this season and tonight's performance prevented it from even collecting a triumph in the National Invitation Tournament.
Those who believed Lopez could usher the Red Storm to national prominence as a freshman had already been proven incorrect in a 14-13 regular season.
But tonight's loss in front of 5,342 at the Sundome left St.
John's feeling especially frustrated.


People
*
Arthur Selkowitz, executive vice president and worldwide account director on the Procter &amp; Gamble account at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, New York, was promoted to president of D.M.B.&amp; B./Asia-Pacific.
He succeeds John C. Ferries, who continues as president of D.M.B.&amp; B./Americas and overseeing the agency company's public relations subsidiary, Manning, Selvage &amp; Lee.


Unmasking Horror -- A special report.; Japan Confronting Gruesome War Atrocity
He is a cheerful old farmer who jokes as he serves rice cakes made by his wife, and then he switches easily to explaining what it is like to cut open a 30-year-old man who is tied naked to a bed and dissect him alive, without anesthetic.
"The fellow knew that it was over for him, and so he didn't struggle when they led him into the room and tied him down," recalled the 72-year-old farmer, then a medical assistant in a Japanese Army unit in China in World War II.
"But when I picked up the scalpel, that's when he began screaming.


Club Med Inc.(CMI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


CBS's Basketball Bet Is the Biggest One of All
When pro football was the bell cow of CBS Sports' programming, when John Madden's $2 million paychecks were signed by the CBS chairman Laurence Tisch, the National Collegiate Athletic Assocation men's basketball tournament was an important but secondary event.
But now the road to the Final Four is paved with dollars for CBS -- the $1.725 billion CBS will pay to keep the tournament through 2002 and the advertising required to make the deal pay off.


Tarkanian a Candidate for Fresno State Job
Rumors circulated yesterday that Fresno State's next basketball coach could be JERRY TARKANIAN, who grew up in Fresno, Calif., before coaching Nevada-Las Vegas to national prominence.
Tarkanian, a member of the Fresno State class of 1955, has said he would consider the job if the athletic director, GARY CUNNINGHAM, indicates interest.
GARY COLSON resigned Wednesday after five years of coaching the Bulldogs. (AP)


50-Off Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 3


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.00
6.06
3.24
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.72
5.73
3.44
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.87
5.88
3.76
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.08
7.08
6.40
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.37
7.36
6.82
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.24
8.21
7.67
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.32
6.35
5.96
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 8


Pakistan Ties 6 To Key Suspect In '93 Bombing
Five weeks after the capture of Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, the man charged with masterminding the World Trade Center bombing, a follow-up investigation has led to the arrest of six other men who are said by the Pakistani police to have had links to Mr.
Yousef.
The men seized in police raids in Peshawar included three Sudanese, a Pakistani who was born in Syria, another Pakistani and an Iranian, according to police officials familiar with the case.
They are being held in Adiala jail, near Islamabad, the capital, where Mr.
Yousef was seized on Feb. 7 and deported to the United States.


Scary Mountain Fall Leaves Street Bruised
The American downhill champion PICABO STREET escaped with only bruising after a terrifying fall yesterday in a super-giant slalom race at the World Cup finals in Bormio, Italy.
United States Ski Team officials said Street was flown by helicopter to a hospital in the town of Sondalo, 12 miles from Bormio, after the crash, but was allowed to return to the team hotel later.
LINCOLN AVERY, the team doctor, said Street, of Sun Valley, Idaho, had sustained a badly bruised right shoulder but had not broken any bones.
"She's tired, but there were no fractures," Avery said in a statement.
"It would appear she may have rolled over something when she fell causing the bruising."


INSIDE
Protest by Vietnamese
Several Vietnamese in camps in the Philippines slashed themselves as a protest, raising fears of more such violence as Asian governments send the migrants home.
Page A12.
Stocks Continue Advance
Stocks surged to record highs, with the Dow Jones industrial average climbing 30.78 points, to 4,069.15.
The gains came despite new signs of an economic slowdown.
Page D1.
Javits Center Accusations
The former head of the Javits Convention Center and a labor leader blamed each other for appointing two men said to have mob ties to head a union at the center.
Page B3.
Tongue's Natural Defenses
Scientists say the tongue has natural antibiotics to keep cuts from being infected by the billions of microbes that infest the mouth.
Page A21.
Manhattan Goes Over the Top
Oklahoma never knew what hit it.
Nor did Arizona.
In the first upsets of the college basketball tournament, Manhattan, seeded 13th, ousted No. 4 Oklahoma, 77-67, and Miami (Ohio), seeded 12th, beat No. 5 Arizona, 71-62.
Page B12.


Two Youths Sentenced to Prison For Attack on Homeless People
Lamenting the heartlessness of teen-agers who would attack "the powerless," a judge in Manhattan yesterday gave the maximum sentence of three and a third to seven years to two youths convicted of setting fire to a cardboard box in which a homeless man was sleeping.
Acting Supreme Court Justice Michael A. Corriero, who presides over juvenile offender cases, said he was astonished at "how young people in our city can believe that setting people on fire" and assaulting "the powerless is a source of enjoyment." The homeless victim suffered burns on his hand.
He was treated at a hospital and released.


Police Cleared of False Reporting Charges
A review by New York City's Department of Investigation has rejected accusations, based on internal memorandums publicized last year, that police officers had filed false reports on the effectiveness of community policing.
Instead, it concluded that the memos showed a range of problems that police officials were addressing.
The release of the memos in January 1994 prompted angry exchanges between Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the former Police Commissioner, Raymond W. Kelly, about the effectiveness of community policing.
The strategy, begun in the early 1990's, put more officers on beats in neighborhoods.


When House Killed The 4th Amendment
To the Editor:
Nick Quinn Rosenkranz ("Nobody Is in Favor of Illegal Searches," letter, March 8) might be interested to know that he is not the first in recent weeks to quote from the Fourth Amendment in addressing the recently passed exclusionary rule reform bill's treatment of illegal searches and seizures.


Police Say Store Victim Was Killed By Husband
The investigation into the fatal shooting of a woman in a botched jewelry store robbery in New Jersey took a bizarre turn yesterday when the authorities said that the victim was killed not by a robber but apparently by her own husband.
Prosecutor Nicholas Bissell of Somerset County said the victim, Brenda Wolf, 32, was killed by a bullet fired into her face from a .357 Magnum handgun owned by her husband, Jeffrey, during the robbery Tuesday afternoon in their store in Franklin Township.


Proffitt's Inc.(PRFT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


GENENTECH AND IDEC TO DEVELOP CANCER DRUG
Genentech Inc. said yesterday that it had entered into an agreement with the Idec Pharmaceuticals Corporation of San Diego to jointly develop the Idec drug for the treatment of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, a type of cancer.
The potential value of the deal to Idec is $57 million.
The Idec drug, a monoclonal antibody based on a natural protein, is expected to enter the third of three phases of clinical trials needed to apply for approval by the Food and Drug Administration in the middle of this year.
Genentech, based in San Francisco, and Idec will promote the drug in the United States and Canada, with Idec receiving a share of profits.
Shares of Idec rose 87.5 cents, to $4.50, in Nasdaq trading.


Shredding Documents to Shield Victims of Sexual Assault
As in the United States, the Criminal Code in Canada generally protects victims of sexual assault from direct questioning in court about their sexual past.
But that protection is often circumvented when defense lawyers subpoena the medical and psychological counseling records of a victim, including those kept by rape crisis centers that help women deal with their trauma.
The clash between defendants' rights to secure any evidence that might keep them out of jail and victims' rights to safeguard their privacy has produced a burst of document shredding across Canada.


Post-Grad Politics; A Course on Being a Lobbyist
They got their name by lurking around the halls of legislative chambers, grabbing the lawmakers as they came and went, urging, whispering, promising, threatening, begging.
Of course, they prefer to call themselves "legislative agents" or better yet, "public policy advocates." But whatever they are called (and sometimes it is unprintable), they have become such important fixtures around the Capitol that the state university now offers a course on lobbying and its eternal variant, counter-lobbying.


Don't Stop Now
Scientists say that human evolution may be at an end.
Natural selection is stopping, no doubt as a result of natural selection.
Homo sapiens, always the finest proof of the survival of the fittest, appears to have concluded that it is fit enough.
Evolutionary theorists have their own explanation.
There are no more isolated ecosystems where mutations can evolve, which is a nice way of saying that when people spend a lot of time by themselves they turn very weird.


A Novel About a Novelist and His Messy Life
WONDER BOYS  By Michael Chabon  368 pages. Villard Books. $23.
As his last two books, a best-selling novel called "The Mysteries of Pittsburgh" and a volume of interlinked stories titled "A Model World," so clearly demonstrate, Michael Chabon can write like a magical spider, effortlessly spinning out elaborate webs of words that ensnare the reader with their beauty and their style.


METRO DIGEST
PAKISTAN LINKS 6 TO BOMBING SUSPECT
Five weeks after the capture of Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, the man charged with being the mastermind of the World Trade Center bombing, a follow-up investigation in Pakistan has led to the arrest of six other men who the Pakistani police say have had links to Mr.
Yousef.
It is not clear whether the police suspect the six of involvement in the bombing or other offenses related to Mr.
Yousef's use of Pakistan as a refuge afterward.
A1.


Vietnamese in Philippines Fight Returning
A group of Vietnamese at a detention camp slashed themselves and another tried to set himself on fire today as the Philippine Government evicted them in preparation for sending them home to Vietnam.
Witnesses at the camp in Morong, about 50 miles east of Manila, said they saw at least three men and an elderly woman bleeding from self-inflected wounds to their hands or stomach after they scrambled to the rooftops and threatened suicide.


Destructive Tuition Hikes
Politicians in Albany have discovered to their distress that slashing state aid to New York State's public higher education system would require closing down programs and even campuses as well as stiff tuition increases.
The Legislature thus appears ready to restore some of the disproportionate cuts imposed on higher education in Gov.
George Pataki's budget.
Whatever else is done, the priority should be to ease up on the huge tuition increases proposed by Mr.
Pataki and academic leaders -- even if that means cutting academic programs.
Until this week, many fans of Governor Pataki's calls for austerity lulled themselves into thinking that state aid to the City University and State University of New York could be reduced by nearly a third, with savings achieved from painless tuition increases and a few snips here and there in the mythically bloated administrative bureaucracy.


One Bullet Leads to Another in a Tale of Urban Anger
The playwright Charles Fuller ("A Soldier's Story") has adapted "Zooman," a new movie on Showtime on Sunday, from his 1978 play "Zooman and the Sign," performed off Broadway by the Negro Ensemble Company.
Sadly enough, its title character, a disaffected youth menacing the streets of Brooklyn with a gun, is even more entrenched in today's urban scene.
Zooman (Khalil Kain) gets right to the point.
Speaking directly to the camera after urinating beneath the Brooklyn Bridge, he warns viewers to stay out of his face, noting that he was picked up by the police 21 times last year.
Spotting members of a rival gang on a residential street, he pulls out his gun and begins shooting wildly as everyone runs for cover.
When it's all over, a little girl who had been sitting on one of the stoops is dead.
A mother wails in grief.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-12  UNLOCKING A JAPANESE SECRET  A torrent of information is coming out about long-secret medical experimentation by Japan during World War II on Chinese prisoners, many of whom were infected with disease and killed for testing.
A1  YELTSIN PRESSES FOR VISIT  President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia, in a meeting with international editors, made a new effort to persuade a reluctant President Clinton to visit Russia on V-E day for a summit meeting.
A1  SPACE STATION LANDING  The first American to fly into space with a Russian crew was greeted with hugs, a kiss, bread and salt in a traditional welcome when he landed at the Russian space station.
A1  U.S.
KNEW OF IRAN OIL TALKS  Concoco executives repeatedly told United States officials over the last four years that they were negotiating an oilfield deal with Iran, a State Department official said.
A1  ITALIAN GOVERNMENT VICTORY  Italy's Prime Minister won a showdown in Parliament, winning more time for his Government to carry out reforms and forestalling national elections.
A2  BOSNIAN FEDERATION BOOSTED  President Clinton met with Bosnian Government and Croat leaders to try to strengthen their year-old federation so that it would serve to deter the Bosnian Serbs from continuing its fighting.
A9  VATICAN SUPPORT FOR IRAQ  The Vatican, which has long opposed certain types of sanctions because of their impact on ordinary people, said it would support Iraq's case for lifting United Nations sanctions against it.
A6  A handshake from President Clinton caused a stir.
A3  A change of heart for Ireland's new leader.
A3  Maneuvering over credentials to a United Nations meeting.
A7  American blacks pressed Nigeria to restore democracy.
A10  Vietnamese in the Philippines protest against going home.
A12  Karachi Journal: Kindness in the midst of violence.
A4  National A14-21  HOUSE CUTS DEEPLY INTO SPENDING  The House voted to cut $17.3 billion from the 1995 budget and moved to trim nearly $200 billion over five years to pay for a tax cut.
A1  A WITNESS LEAVES THE STAND  Detective Mark Fuhrman left the stand pretty much intact after three days of defense interrogation in the O. J. Simpson trial.
A14  LOOKING FOR 'TRUE NORTH'  Oliver North, fresh from a failed Senate bid, is taking his brand of conservative politics to the air waves, with a radio talk show.
A14  BIAS AND THE GLASS CEILING  A Government panels says prejudice and stereotypes promoted by a white-male culture are why so few women and minorities make it into the top ranks of industry.
A14  DOUBT ABOUT ANITA HILL'S FUTURE  Associates of Anita Hill and officials at the University of Oklahoma disagree over whether she is resigning as a law professor.
A16  ROUGH-AND-TUMBLE POLITICS  A House Budget Committee meeting took on the air of a bar fight as Republicans and Democrats sparred over spending cuts.A18  A TACTICAL CHOICE  House Democrats began lining up behind a relatively conservative welfare bill to pre-empt an even stricter Republican proposal.
A18  NEW APPROACH TO POLLUTION  The Clinton Administration said it would use a novel method to broaden opportunities for industry to cut the costs of pollution control.
A20  PAYING FOR UNPLANNED MISSIONS  The Senate approved $1.9 billion for unexpected military missions, but took a like amount from existing Pentagon programs.
A20  CABINET OFFICIAL IS CLEARED  Attorney General Janet Reno dropped an inquiry into Transportation Secretary Federico Pena's business dealings.
A20  MAKING EDUCATION PAY  The Edison Project announced it had secured $30 million in financing and would open its first for-profit schools next fall.
A20  AN ALL-NATURAL DEFENSE  Scientists have found that the tongue harbors natural antibiotics to ward off the billions of microbes that infest the mouth.
A21  A VICTORY FOR FOSSIL HUNTERS  A jury in South Dakota has acquitted a group of dinosaur-bone hunters of most of the 149 felony charges brought against them.
A21  California decided to allow logging of giant redwoods.
A20  Law Page A22  Shredding documents to shield victims of sexual assault.
At the Bar: Justice Scalia and his theory of judging, or misjudging.
Uncontrolled rage is grounds for acquittal of assault defendant.
Metro Digest B1  6 LINKED TO TRADE CENTER SUSPECT  Six weeks after the capture of Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, the man charged with masterminding the World Trade Center bombing, a follow-up investigation has led to the arrest of six other men said to have had links to Mr.
Yousef.
A1  WATERSHED LIMITS PROPOSED  The state has proposed restrictions on New York City's ability to acquire land in its upstate watershed, which city officials say could cause them to spend as much as $8 billion on a water filtration plant.
A1  Weekend C1-30  Pitching camp at West Point.
C1  Introducing New York to its heirs.
C1  Richard E. Oldenburg joins Sotheby's.
C3  Theater: On Stage, and Off C2  Film: New Directors series.
C1  "Farinelli." C3  "Losing Isaiah." C8  "Naked Killer." C8  "Bye Bye, Love." C16  Dance: "The Joplin Dances." C3  Restaurants C22  Art: A Swiss outsider.
C23  Photography: Images that defined the Depression.
C26  Books: "Wonder Boy," by Michael Chabon.
C28  Television: TV Weekend D17  Sports B10-16  College Basketball: Manhattan jolts Oklahoma.
B11  Connecticut sends message.
B11  St.
John's loses in N.I.T.
B14  Columns: Rhoden on Jaspers.
B11  Pro Basketball: Knicks suspend Mason.
B11  Fashion Page B7  Obituaries B9  Business Digest D1  Editorials/Op-Ed A28-29  Editorials  Destructive tuition hikes.
Shattering the ceiling.
Don't stop now.
Ireland's great hunger, 1845-1849.
Letters  Anthony Lewis: The price of indecision.
A.
M.
Rosenthal: Kisses for Castro.
Jeffrey Rosen: Mediocrity on the bench.
Connie Zuckerman and David Goldfarb: Death penalty II.
Chronicle B8  Crossword C18


A Correction: Producer Prices
A chart yesterday included incorrect figures for the index of finished goods prices, seasonally adjusted.
Here are the correct figures. 1982 = 100.


Sex Offender Is Arrested Again
A convicted sex offender who registered with the authorities under "Megan's Law" last month has been charged with assaulting a 5-year-old child on Wednesday.
The incident occurred just three weeks after Brandon Jason Longo, 25, registered, under protest, with the Audubon Park Police, the Camden County Prosecutor, Edward F. Borden Jr., told The Associated Press.
Mr.
Longo, of Audubon Park, was sentenced to seven years in prison in 1988 for sexual assault and was released in August 1993, state officials said.


Getty Petroleum (GTY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Frederick Wertz 3d, Psychiatric Chief, 80
Dr.
Frederick J. Wertz 3d, an expert in adolescent psychiatry and a former chief of psychiatry at Mount Sinai Medical Center, died on March 5 at his home in Middlebury, Vt.
He was 80, and had lived and privately practiced in Manhattan before moving to Vermont in the late 1970's.
The cause of death was a pulmonary embolism and a heart attack, said his son, Dr.
Frederick Wertz 4th.
He said Dr.
Wertz had not been well since he suffered a fall while on vacation in Spain last month.


Officer Reports Death Threats
A black East Orange police officer says he has received death threats because he worked to calm citizens in Paterson after a black teen-ager was killed by a white officer last month.


CHRONICLE
DAVID BROWN, the film producer, is one of 11 people who plan to roast his wife, HELEN GURLEY BROWN, at a luncheon on Tuesday to celebrate her 30th anniversary as the editor in chief of Cosmopolitan magazine.
But he's not worried about having to face her if she takes umbrage.
For one thing, Mr.
Brown won't even be at the event, which is being given by the Advertising Women of New York at the Marriott Marquis Hotel.
He is traveling through Russia and Eastern Europe scouting locations for a new version of "The Saint," so his remarks have been videotaped.


Union Threatens U.A.W. With Picket Line
Worker solidarity is a bit strained these days at Solidarity House, the United Automobile Workers' aluminum-and-glass headquarters on the banks of the Detroit River.
Charging that the U.A.W. is abusing the same rights it zealously guards for its own members, the union's clerical and maintenance workers are threatening to strike on Friday morning at Solidarity House and at dozens of other union offices across the country.


Bonds End Mixed After Early Rally Fades
Prices of Treasury securities ended mixed yesterday after a rally set off by signs of an economic slowdown faded.
A series of reports released yesterday indicated the economy had slowed enough to subdue inflation.
These reports, which included a modest pickup in consumer prices in February, suggest that the Federal Reserve is unlikely to raise short-term interest rates when its policy-making committee meets on March 28.


Modern's Ex-Chief Joins Sotheby's
Richard E. Oldenburg, who was director of the Museum of Modern Art for 21 years before resigning in 1993, has been named chairman of Sotheby's America.
Mr.
Oldenburg succeeds John Marion, who retired from Sotheby's at the end of 1994 and is now its honorary chairman.
Unlike Mr.
Marion, who built his 35-year career at Sotheby's as an auctioneer, Mr.
Oldenburg will not conduct sales.
Instead, he will focus on obtaining works of art for sale and will confer with museums on appraisals, acquisitions and sales.
He will also advise Sotheby's on its educational programs.


Democrats See Virtue in Shift To the Right On Welfare
House Democrats appeared to line up today behind a relatively conservative welfare bill after their leaders expressed fear that without such an alternative, many Democrats would vote for an even stricter Republican proposal.
The Republican measure, a keystone of their Contract With America, will be taken up next week by the House.
It would scrap the food stamp program, the school lunch program and Aid to Families With Dependent Children, the main cash welfare program, replacing them with direct payments to states, which could use the money as they wanted to assist the needy.


Trial Details the Selecting of Bomb Targets
Seeking to deflect charges that an informer entrapped Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and 10 other defendants, prosecutors tried to demonstrate yesterday that one suspect who has already pleaded guilty was the first to suggest bombing targets in New York City.
The prosecution's tactic seemed to be intended to contradict the defense's argument that the informer, Emad A. Salem, drew the defendants into a harebrained bombing plot that they had neither the know-how nor the organization to pull off.


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan art shows: ELIZABETH NEWMAN, Galerie Lelong, 20 West 57th Street (through tomorrow).
An exhibition in which shopping and art once more overlap -- to the latter's great detriment -- this time in sculptures exploiting exquisitely patinaed or emotionally charged objects like hand-carved canes or worn toddlers' shoes.
Not everything is purchased, but the overall effect is far too often a tasteful window display (Roberta Smith).


Manhattan, an Invited Guest, Is Life of the Party
When the game clock ticked down to 0:00, and a first-round victory had justified their presence in a tournament they weren't sure would have a place for them, Manhattan College players flooded the court at the Pyramid here.
It was an emotion-filled repeat of last Sunday's scene at the East Hill dormitory on their Bronx campus, where they watched the National Collegiate Athletic Association bids go out on television.
The euphoria of their 77-67 upset of Oklahoma in the Southeast Regional today followed the Jaspers into the locker room.
Their joy was intoxicating.


Ireland's Great Hunger, 1845-1849
This was a fine spring in Ireland 150 years ago.
By summer, farmers were forecasting an abundant potato crop of "the most luxuriant character." But in September came the first reports of a disease that could blacken crops overnight and putrefy an entire field within days.
Ireland's eight million people were overwhelmingly reliant on potatoes.
So began the Great Famine, a catastrophe that devastated Ireland, shamed England and profoundly affected the United States.
Not until 1849 did the disease abate.
By then as many as one million Irish had died of hunger or disease, and an equal number had fled, mostly to the United States and Canada.


National Service Industries(NSI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


New York Strikes a Pose for Its Heirs
THE defining moment of the Municipal Art Society's exhibition "Kid City" for my 8-year-old son, Alex -- and I suspect for a great many other children as well -- came midway in the three-minute video that runs continuously at the entry to the galleries.
The upbeat, brisk video consists of children talking about their favorite elements of New York architecture, and it starts with well-meaning but unsurprising voices of praise for the Empire State Building and the World Trade Center.
But then the camera turns to an in-line skater, who is shown barreling at breakneck speed backward down the huge stone steps beside the Bethesda Fountain in Central Park.
What's the greatest thing about New York? he is asked.
"The stairs," he replies without hesitation.
Alex loved this, and not only because he is a skater himself.
I suspect it is also because he realized that this was the one moment in this ambitious exhibition in which one could actually see children reinventing the city for themselves.
Those monumental stairs have one meaning for their architect, another for the generations who have used them for genteel promenades, and quite another altogether for the in-lane skaters for whom they represent not dignified monumentality, but the athletic challenge of a ski jump.
The skaters have powerfully redefined this aspect of the city, not taking it away from the rest of us, but adding a whole new meaning of their own.


Traffic Alert
Because of the St.
Patrick's Day Parade, these streets will be closed today from 9:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.:s Fifth Avenue from 42d to 90th Streets; 86th Street from Second Avenue to Fifth Avenue; 44th to 47th Streets from Vanderbilt Avenue to Sixth Avenue; 48th Street from Sixth Avenue to Park Avenue; 64th Street from Fifth Avenue to Park Avenue.
No traffic will be allowed eastbound on 50th Street from Madison Avenue.
The Central Park transverse roads will be open, but the north and south drives will be closed from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M.


Herb McCracken; Inventor of Huddle, 95
Herb McCracken, a college football player and coach credited with inventing the huddle and co-founder of the Scholastic publishing company, died last Saturday in Boynton Beach, Fla.
He was 95.
His family said the cause of death was renal impairment.
It was before a game in 1924 that Coach McCracken earned his spot in football lore.
Aware that Penn had scouted his Lafayette team's previous five games and had memorized its offensive signals, he ordered his players not to start each down at the line of scrimmage.
Instead, he told them to gather behind the line to learn the next play in secret, and the huddle was invented.


Look Where Wall St. Stars Are Heading
Kim Fennebresque had it all, doing mega-deals at one of Wall Street's most prestigious investment firms.
But he threw it away last summer to join a Swiss bank with a reputation as little more than a marginal player on Wall Street.
A star performer in the 1980's who rose to become co-head of investment banking at Lazard Freres &amp; Company, Mr.
Fennebresque is in the vanguard of a quiet revolution on Wall Street.
As the securities industry endures its most wrenching downturn since 1990, foreign and regional banks are swooping in to woo away talent.


Conoco Told U.S. Years Ago Of Oil Negotiations With Iran
A senior Administration official acknowledged today that Conoco Inc. had repeatedly told American officials over the last four years that they were negotiating with Iran on the development of a $1 billion oilfield, but that the Government focused on the issue -- and decided to block it -- only after the deal was reached earlier this month.
The official, Peter Tarnoff, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, insisted that lower-level officials of the Clinton and Bush Administrations had told Conoco that "this kind of a deal was not consistent with American policy toward Iran," although it was legal under the rules that prevailed until President Clinton said he would bar the transaction on national security grounds earlier this week.


Interference Irks Lemaire in Devils' Tie
The Devils came up with another mediocre performance tonight, settling for a 2-2 tie with the Hartford Whalers at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Coach Jacques Lemaire blamed his team's low quality on persistent interference by Hartford that went unpenalized by the officials.


Many Happy Returns for LaFontaine
This is what the fans up here have been waiting for the past 16 months for.
Pat LaFontaine made his long-awaited, oft-delayed comeback for the Buffalo Sabres tonight.
Afterward, the beleaguered Islanders were probably wishing their ex-center could have held his homecoming party a couple of nights later.


Javits Center Figures Blame Each Other
The former head of the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center and a local labor leader pointed fingers at each other yesterday for appointing two men said to have ties to organized-crime figures to head the carpenters union at the convention center.
Fabian Palomino, who until January served as chief executive officer of the center, told a State Senate committee that he had nothing to do with Anthony Fiorino's and Leonard Simon's becoming shop stewards --with responsibility for doling out high-paying carpenters jobs and negotiating labor contracts.


Oyster Beds Looking Healthier
Things are looking up in the oyster world, the New Jersey Shellfish Council says, so much so that for the first time in four years oysters are expected to be harvested from the Delaware Bay this spring.
But concerns remain about parasitic infections that have ravaged the bay's beds in recent years.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; At Saatchi's rechristening, angry shareholders are not in the mood for mending fences.
THE Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company tried to begin putting the tumult of the last few months behind it yesterday when shareholders voted as expected to approve a change in its name, to Cordiant P.L.C.
But shareholders -- at least the several dozen individual shareholders who attended a special meeting here to ratify the name change and revised executive compensation policies -- made it clear they were not ready to forgive and forget.


Foodarama Supermarkets Inc.(FSM,A) reports earnings for 13wks to Jan 28


Art in Review
'Garbage!'
Thread Waxing Space  476 Broadway (near Broome Street)  SoHo  Through April 8
At least since Picasso and Braque stuck scraps of newspapers to their canvases, artists have made use, subversive and otherwise, of what other people throw away.
This show picks up the story in the late 50's and early 60's with works by Arman, Daniel Spoerri, Allan Kaprow and Claes Oldenburg.
Arman and Spoerri made Surrealist collages out of urban refuse.
Mr.
Kaprow and Mr.
Oldenburg used junk for installations, represented here in photographs, that ironically referred to Abstract Expressionism.


Consumer Prices Up 0.3%; Data Point to a Slowdown
A variety of fresh Government statistics released today showed that an economic slowdown, becoming more pronounced by the day, was helping to moderate the sting of inflation.
Retail prices climbed three-tenths of 1 percent for the second consecutive month in February, the Labor Department reported, a result that analysts considered in line with expectations that the inflation rate this year will be held to less than 3.5 percent.


First Union to Sell Annuities at Branches
The already weakened barriers between banks and insurance companies were further breached yesterday, when the First Union Corporation of Charlotte, N.C., announced plans to license 800 of its employees to sell annuities through its branch offices.
Annuities, which offer a stream of payments after retirement, are attracting more attention from banks that want to offer investment products that are more attractive than certificates of deposit.
The United States Supreme Court ruled two months ago that banks could sell annuities, but left unanswered questions about who should regulate the activity.


Javits Center Hearing
The former head of the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center and a local labor leader pointed fingers at each other for appointing two men said to have been tied to organized crime to union leadership at the center.


Mutilating, Murderous Lesbians, With a Light Side
"Naked Killer," an amusing action-adventure spoof from Hong Kong, unfolds on territory that is way, way beyond the "Valley of the Dolls." Imagine the erotic world of "Basic Instinct" exaggerated into a kung-fu cartoon of sexy lesbian avengers executing quadruple leaping somersaults in a deadly assault against the opposite sex.
Their campaign of assassination involves not only murder, but castration and genital mutilation as well.
For all its sexual provocation, the movie, directed by Clarence Fok, fits squarely within Hong Kong's giddy action-adventure genre, which is a cinematic world unto itself.
The gore, like the absurdly speeded-up, impossibly balletic martial arts sequences, is transparently fake, and the caricatured soft-core sex utterly devoid of body heat.
There is no place for character in a live-action cartoon that hurtles forward at the speed of light.


No Headline
"This is sweeter than sweet. It's a whole other sweet." JAMAL MARSHALL, a senior on Manhattan's winning basketball team.  [ B11:5. ]


Still Seeking Cuts, Senate Votes Extra $1.9 Billion for Military
The Senate today approved $1.9 billion in emergency Pentagon spending for unexpected overseas missions, but the bill called for a similar amount to be cut from existing Pentagon programs.
The vote was 97 to 3 to approve the spending that military commanders say they need before the end of this month to avoid canceling training exercises and halting purchases of spare parts.


Not a Made-for-TV Holiday
Using the historic Brennan Courthouse for a St.
Patrick's Day celebration seemed like a good idea to the county's Cultural and Heritage Affairs Division.
Bad idea, Judge Arthur N. D'Italia of Superior Court said last week.
He said that televising the 6 to 9 A.M. celebration on the Fox network would violate state rules prohibiting broadcasting in public buildings during business hours.


Leo Kaplan; Lawyer, 90
Leo Kaplan, a lawyer who oversaw the distribution of royalties paid out to songwriters and publishers for nearly 30 years, died on Monday in his Manhattan home.
He was 90.
The cause was complications from a pancreatic tumor, said a son, Theodore.


A Vineyard in Ruin


The Male Perspective On Life After Marriage
"Bye Bye, Love" takes a subject fraught with grief and rancor and sends it aloft like a helium balloon.
This effervescent new comedy about the emotional travails of three divorced fathers aspires to be a hybrid of "Parenthood" and "American Graffiti." But it is so intent on looking on the sunny side of divorce that it often seems shallow and evasive.
The movie alludes to the bitterness of its subject only glancingly, as when a single father grimly remarks to his ex-wife, "I see you're driving a child-support mobile," when she delivers the children for a visit.


Yesterday in Washington
G.O.P.
SUCCESS IN HOUSE -- House Republicans advanced their Contract With America on two fronts, with the full House voting to approve $17.3 billion in cuts in the current budget and the Budget Committee sending to the floor a plan that would reduce Federal spending by nearly $200 billion over five years to pay for a promised tax cut.
A CONTRACT VICTORY -- The House approved a bill requiring the Federal Government to pay for carrying out many rules and regulations it imposes on states and localities.
The vote was 394 to 28, with Democrats casting all the votes against it.
The bill was approved by the Senate on Wednesday by 91 to 9, and President Clinton is expected to sign it.


St. Anthony to Meet Shawnee in Final
Anthony Perry scored 14 points, including the game-clinching layup, as third-seeded St.
Anthony of Jersey City edged second-seeded Christian Brothers Academy, 55-52, in a New Jersey Interscholastic Athletic Association Tournament of Champions semifinal tonight.


Art in Review
Jennifer Bolande
John Gibson Gallery  568 Broadway (at Prince Street)  SoHo  Through March 25
In the past Jennifer Bolande called upon references to film and film technique in her work, and she does so again here with an odd sequence of photographs that might be read as an emblematic narrative.





Other Options Appear Open To Viacom In Cable Sale
Although Congress appears to have blocked Viacom Inc.'s plans to sell its cable television systems to a minority-led group for $2.3 billion, Wall Street still expects Viacom to find another way to structure a sale without a large tax liability.
On Wednesday, the Senate Finance Committee followed the House in voting to eliminate a program that allows big corporations to avoid paying taxes on profits from the sale of television or cable properties to minority groups.


At the Bar; Justice Scalia, cheerfully, tells what's behind following the letter of the law.
In pointed, stylish, occasionally idiosyncratic opinions, Justice Antonin Scalia has carved a distinctive role on the Supreme Court by questioning the conventions of modern statutory and constitutional interpretation.
Judges, he insists, stray too often from the intellectual purity of the text, smuggling personal values into decisions under the rubric of twin will-o'-the-wisps, legislative history and "intent."
Justice Scalia recently expanded on this theory of judging -- or misjudging -- here at Princeton University as he undertook something that Supreme Court Justices rarely do: presenting not an opinion addressed to a particular case, but a formal lecture intended for an academic audience.


Home Video
Recent publicity about movies going directly to video doesn't make the going along that route any easier.
"Opportunity is narrowing," said Jon Peisinger, the president of ABC Video.
On April 4, Summa Video, ABC's movie label, will release "Younger and Younger," a quirky romantic comedy directed by Percy Adlon.
The film stars Donald Sutherland, Lolita Davidovich, Sally Kellerman, Julie Delpy and Brendan Fraser.
Mr.
Adlon is a German film maker whose credits include the offbeat, well-received "Bagdad Cafe," "Sugarbaby" and "Rosalie Goes Shopping," so "Younger and Younger" fits into the high end of a category that is being increasingly squeezed out of video stores.


Note Indicates Resignation Of Anita Hill
Prof.
Anita F. Hill, who testified that Clarence Thomas had sexually harassed her while they both worked in the Federal Government, is planning to leave her tenured job at the University of Oklahoma, where she teaches law, according to a memorandum circulated by the law school dean.
But university officials said yesterday that they had not received any official notification of this.
Professor Hill, who received national attention during the 1992 Senate hearings on Mr.
Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court, is currently on a two-year leave writing books.
She is due back in Oklahoma in September.
Efforts to reach her yesterday through friends were unsuccessful.


On My Mind; Kisses for Castro
No question at all, it was a real fun time for the hosts and the guest at the combination house party and political fund-raiser the Mitterrands threw in Paris for Fidel Castro.
Mr.
Castro got croissants and kisses from Madame Danielle Mitterrand.
And, even more delicious, the wife of the President of France announced on TV that from the moment she laid eyes on Mr.
Castro in 1974 she knew he was not a dictator.


Policing on St. Patrick's Day: Trying to Do More With Less
The St.
Patrick's Day parade today kicks off New York's parade season.
By the end of the year, after the Gay Pride parade, West Indian Day parade and the parade marking the 50th anniversary of the end of World War II, more than 100 marches will have stepped off -- and the city will have spent millions in overtime to police and control them.
How much overtime has become a subject of concern and controversy.
Last year, some $5 million was spent.
This year, the Police Department says it will assign fewer officers to the St.
Patrick's Day march up Fifth Avenue and thus reduce overtime costs.


International Briefs; In Brief
Courtaulds P.L.C., a British chemical company, said its joint venture with Japan's Nippon Paint Co. would buy a privately owned German chemical coatings company for an undisclosed sum.
Courtaulds Nippon Paint Ltd. will acquire Mehnert &amp; Veeck G.m.b.H. for cash.
The sale, to be completed on April 1, is subject to approval from the German cartel office.


En Route the Night the Lights Went Out
To the Editor:
Whether it is good news or not that double-decker cars will return to the Long Island Rail Road (news article, March 11), they did provide a fascinating ambiance for our daily commute a generation ago.


From the Land of St. Patrick, a Dove
A few months ago, John Bruton's political career was at its nadir, his popularity at an all-time low, his party apparently destined to remain in frustrated opposition.
But the man who met with President Clinton in Washington today has changed all that in his three months as Ireland's Prime Minister.
In an interview before he left on Tuesday, Mr.
Bruton said his primary mission on his weeklong visit to the United States would be to advance a political settlement of the 25 years of sectarian guerrilla violence in Northern Ireland, to "get a few messages into the political system about the need to get a balanced approach to this problem, to recognize the rights of both communities" -- Northern Ireland's Protestant majority and its Roman Catholic minority.


Art in Review
Charles Long  Tanya Bonakdar Gallery 130 Prince Street SoHo Through March 25
Charles Long is one of several artists trying to give Joseph Beuys's famous term "social sculpture" some new juice. (Others include Andrea Zittel and Rirkrit Tiravanija, who went first.) For several years, Mr.
Long has used found pieces of scrap and objects to generate oddly extravagant, sometimes Surrealist sculptures.
And earlier this year, he made an abstract shape by casting the negative of his own crouching body.
Now Mr.
Long is making sculpture to listen to music by, literally.


Big Tax Preparers Accused of Misleading Ads
The nation's largest tax preparation company, H &amp; R Block, and two other tax preparation companies were charged yesterday by the New York City Department of Consumer Affairs with deceptive advertising and misleading the public about their electronic filing and rapid refund services.
In each case, the city agency charged in a complaint, the companies had misled customers about their fees.
To provide quick or immediate refunds, the tax preparers often extend short-term loans with interest rates that can exceed 200 percent when computed annually, a practice that city investigators said had not been made clear to the public.


A Stop Sign for the Yankee Regulars
The commissioner's office has informed the Yankees that several striking major leaguers must stop working out at the minor league complex here because it is a violation of league policy.
The Yankees, who have allowed some major leaguers to use the facilities since January, had not fully heeded the demand by today.
Jim Leyritz worked out again today, but General Manager Gene Michael said the Yankees would soon address the issue and he would probably tell the players they must now practice elsewhere.
The commissioner's office said only players rehabilitating from injuries are permitted to be here.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Republicans Use Weight To Approve $17 Billion Cut
House Republicans used their superior numbers to cut $17 billion from the current budget.
The bill would end scores of Federal programs, including summer jobs for youths, and would cut $7.3 billion from low-income housing programs.
A1.


Mail Lottery for Olympics
More than 7 million tickets to the 1996 Summer Olympic Games will go on sale through a mail lottery on May 1, Atlanta Olympic officials said today.
Brochures including ticket order forms will be distributed to some 15,345 stores which sell Coca-Cola products, the officials added.
Although some 11 million seats are available for Olympic events in Atlanta, an estimated 4 million are allotted to corporate sponsors and Olympic committees worldwide.
Officials have not disclosed the precise number of tickets available to American spectators.


Pfizer Will Raise Spending On Drug Research By 20%
Pfizer Inc., announced yesterday that it was raising its research stake by more than 20 percent in the worldwide race to find new drugs.
Pfizer said it would spend $1.4 billion on research this year, up from $1.1 billion in 1984.
Analysts said Pfizer would surge past Merck &amp; Company, the longtime leader, in total research spending, although Merck would still spend a greater share of its research budget on new prescription drugs.
Merck is increasing research spending by 5.7 percent, to about $1.3 billion in 1995.


Feminist Art, 1962 Until Tomorrow Morning and International
Why have there been there no great historical shows of feminist art?
The work is there, 30 rich years of it since the woman's movement caught fire, but no major museum has yet been willing to take up the challenge and tell the story.
Instead, the task falls piecemeal to smaller institutions short on money and space, and the results are mixed.
One of the most ambitious attempts, just by virtue of collecting dozens of feminist artists under one roof, was last year's "Bad Girls" at the New Museum of Contemporary Art in SoHo.
But its curatorial decision to have what amounted to a feel-good party rather than to trace a genealogy was a disappointment.


Sports of The Times; For Jaspers, An Upset In Name Only
THERE was a time, not so long ago, that you could have mailed this one in.
There was a time that I would have left my computer behind and brought a shovel instead.
To bury Manhattan.
Jaspers versus Sooners? Please.


Skyline Corp.(SKY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Line-Item Nitty-Gritty
To the Editor:
Re " 'Line-Item Veto,' Right and Wrong" (editorial, March 13): You draw attention to the crucial difference between two Senate proposals to change the law on Federal budget rescissions -- how much power will shift from Congress to the President if either of these "statutory line-item veto" measures passes.


Rockefeller Drug Plan Is Best in the Country
To the Editor:
Pamala L. Griset's attack on Gov.
George E. Pataki's plans to modify the Rockefeller drug laws (letter, March 6) is wrong on two scores.
Governor Pataki is not planning to replace prisons with state-run treatment facilities.
And Gov.
Nelson A. Rockefeller, while he recognized that the facilities created by his Narcotic Addiction Control Commission had failed to control drug abuse, did not propose "the nation's toughest drug laws" as an alternative.


New York City Watershed Purchases in Danger
In a move that could hinder New York City's plans to protect its upstate watersheds from development it considers harmful, the state has proposed new restrictions on the city's ability to buy land in those watersheds.
City officials said the restrictions would be so burdensome that they could force the city to drop plans to buy 80,000 acres of watershed property and instead turn to a much more expensive alternative for insuring the purity of its water: an $8 billion water filtration system.


Producer of Auto Show Details The Steep Cost of Javits Center
Anyone who thinks automobile prices are high may want to listen to Mark Schienberg, an executive producer of the New York Auto Show.
He knows about sticker shock, too.
Since it opened in 1986, the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center has been the site of the auto show, one of the center's largest events each year.
But in the description of Mr.
Schienberg, the executive vice president of the Greater New York Automobile Dealers Association, "We are longstanding and long-suffering" exhibitors at the exhibition hall, which has been plagued by scandal.


Congressman Opens 2d Office
Representative Bill Martini, Republican from Paterson, willopen an office in freshman Congressman will greet visitors in his new office from noon to 1 P.M.
Mr.
Martini also has an office in Paterson


Market Place; Peso crisis, not Barings price tag, is a big question mark for ING.
IT was audacious but not out of character for the ING Group of the Netherlands to plunk down more than $1 billion earlier this month for the corporate remains of Barings P.L.C., the bankrupt British investment bank.
ING may not be well known outside its home country, but it has proved to be aggressive and willing to take risks as it has become one of the largest banking and insurance companies in Europe and one of the quickest to expand into emerging markets in Asia and Latin America.


Juan Burciaga, 65, Judge Who Ended TV Football 'Cartel'
Judge Juan G. Burciaga, whose 1982 ruling put the National Collegiate Athletic Association out of the business of televised football, died on March 5 at Presbyterian Hospital in Albuquerque, N.M.
He was 65 and lived in Albuquerque.
The cause was an aortic aneurysm, said a spokeswoman for the Federal District Court in Albuquerque, where Judge Burciaga was formerly Chief Judge.


The Spoken Word
NORMAN MAILER, 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue.
The author will be interviewed by the talk-show host Charlie Rose.
Sunday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $16.
Information: (212) 996-1100.
"WOMEN WRITING WOMEN'S LIVES," the Graduate School and University Center of the City University of New York, 33 West 42d Street, Manhattan.
An afternoon conference featuring writers and editors, including Louise Bernikow, Norah Chase, Blanche Wiesen Cook, Louise DeSalvo, Francine du Plessix Gray, Brooke Karoeger, Honor Moore and Nell Irvin Painter.
Today, 1 to 5 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 642-2641.


Underground Film Fare At Anthology Archives
A tribute to the film maker John Waters will highlight the second New York Underground Film Festival, which begins Wednesday and runs through March 26 at Anthology Film Archives, 32 Second Avenue, at Second Street, East Village.
The festival will include screenings of four films by Mr.
Waters: "Multiple Maniacs" (Thursday at 6 P.M.); "Female Trouble" (March 24 at 6 P.M.); "Pink Flamingos" (March 25 at 6 P.M.) and "Desperate Living" (March 26 at 6 P.M.)


Group Technologies Corp.(GRTK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Secretary of Transportation Will Not Face a Prosecutor
Attorney General Janet Reno said today that she had dropped an inquiry into Transportation Secretary Federico F. Pena that involved business dealings between his former investment firm and a pension fund of the Los Angeles transit system.
Ms.
Reno said that a Justice Department review had failed to find any credible evidence of a crime, a finding that under the independent counsel law stops the legal process that could have led to the appointment of an outside prosecutor.


Art in Review
Frank Stella
Gagosian Gallery  136 Wooster Street  SoHo  Through April 15
Frank Stella's latest paintings are spectacular in several senses, including spectacularly gaudy.
Imagine his most elaborate relief paintings of the 80's flattened and you have some sense of the cacophonous imagery, except that these works are tours de force of 3-D illusionism, so they don't actually look flat.
Some aren't precisely flat: they involve elements of collage, which become homey touches in the otherwise high-tech machinery of Mr.
Stella's art.
Nonetheless, tension between flatness and illusory depth is the point.


New York Fed Names No. 2 Official
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York said yesterday that it had promoted Ernest T. Patrikis, its general counsel, to be its No. 2 executive.
Mr.
Patrikis, 51, will succeed James H. Oltman, 64, who is retiring as the first vice president of the bank.


Review/Fashion; Beyond Sweet, Beyond Black, Beyond 2001
It seems the thought of spring has warmed the wintry souls of some of Paris's most tormented spirits, designers who have specialized in bleak fashion for a troubled world.
Rei Kawakubo, for Comme des Garcons; Martin Margiela, and Yohji Yamamoto showed their most lighthearted collections ever today, with bursts of color and, in the case of Mr.
Yamamoto, a sense of the belle epoque.
Rifat Ozbek offered his "ethnic astronauts," his view of what the future might have in store for fashion when the world's borders aren't global but galactic.


Melvin Glasser, 79, Supervisor Of Field Trials of Salk Vaccine
Melvin A. Glasser, a former director of the Health Security Action Council who supervised the medical field trials for the anti-polio Salk vaccine, died on Monday at Washington Home in Washington.
He was 79.
Mr. Glasser, who lived in Washington, suffered a long illness, his family said.


Weapons Contract for Plant
The Martin Marietta plant here was awarded a $73.5 million Navy contract yesterday for technical engineering and computer programming on the Aegis automatic weapon system used on destroyers.


Changes for Pirelli And Princess Cruise
A cruise line and a tire marketer are making changes in their agency rosters.
Princess Cruise Lines in Los Angeles has awarded its account, with billings estimated at $25 million, to J. Walter Thompson Chicago after a six-week review that began with six agencies including the incumbent shop of seven years, Lintas Campbell-Ewald in Los Angeles.
Thompson Chicago was one of three finalists along with Hal Riney &amp; Partners in San Francisco and Temerlin McClain in Dallas.


Sounds Around Town
Celtic Folk-Rock
Rogue's March, Cafe a Go Go, 144 Bleecker Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 475-1241, and Paddy Reilly's, 519 Second Avenue, at 29th Street, Manhattan, (212) 686-1210.
These New York City staples play Celtic-tinged folk-rock with unshakable pop hooks, mixing keyboards and guitars with mandolin and tin whistle.
They celebrate drinking, depression and strife like the Pogues do, with jigs thickly coated in black humor.
Songs like "Shut Up and Drink" and "Amsterdam Mistress" (which rhymes "pints of Guinness" with "lots of slow kisses") make for perfect St.
Patrick's Day wallowing.
The band performs at Paddy Reilly's at noon and at Cafe a Go Go at 10 P.M.; admission is free for the the noon performance and $7 for the later show.
Phil Coulter Goes Southern
Phil Coulter, Carnegie Hall, (212) 247-7800.
The Chieftains perform "Tennessee Waltz" on their new album, "The Long Black Veil," and the long-standing Irish singer, composer and producer Phil Coulter performs "The Yellow Rose of Texas" on his new album, "American Tranquillity." There's a connection between the music of Ireland and of the American South: both were born in farmhouses, at crossroads and under a vast, indifferent sky that promised to reward work with more work, struggle with more struggle and love with nothing.
There are few better places to go tonight to find the connection between American and Irish folk, and between music and myth, than Carnegie Hall at 8 P.M.
Tickets are $15 and $25.
Tempered Rock and Rap
Black 47, Club Expo, 124 West 43d Street, Manhattan, (212) 819-0377.
"Listen, robot, and listen good," Stevie Hero, the rock-and-roll protagonist in "Days of Rage," a play by the Black 47 leader Larry Kirwan, yells shortly before he is shot by the police.
"This song is about someone who's decided to take a stand for what he believes in," Hero continues.
That's a pretty good working definition of the music of Black 47, a proud band of talented New Yorkers who aren't afraid to temper their good-time Celtic rock and rap with lyrics about interracial relationships and Irish martyrs, even if it means resorting to the kind of hackneyed lines that Stevie Hero uses.
The concert also includes the Niagaras and a squad of bagpipers from the New York City Police Department.
Doors open at 5 P.M.; admission is $15.
Promises of a Craic
Brian Conway, John Nolan and Don Meade, Blarney Star, 43 Murray Street, near City Hall, (212) 732-2873.
In Ireland, a good-time jam session in a pub is known as a craic, and that's just how this concert promises to end.
Brian Conway -- a prosecuting attorney by day, a tremendous fiddler by night -- plays in the Sligo style, creating wild, ornate melodies with speed, grace and ease.
He'll be joined by John Nolan on accordion; Don Meade, the Blarney Star's booker, on banjo and guitar, and others.
The music begins at 9 P.M.; admission is $10.


Arizona Waiting Game Benefits Miami of Ohio
The University of Arizona's Damon Stoudamire was eligible today, but the result was the same as the one last Saturday, when he sat out a one-game suspension: defeat.
No. 12-seeded Miami of Ohio, an at-large team from the Mid-American Conference, and its 32-year-old coach, Herb Sendek, found a way to smother Stoudamire and topple Arizona, 71-62, in the National Collegiate Athletic Association Midwest Regional opener before 13,045 at the University of Dayton Arena.


New Directors/New Films Schedule
The New Directors/New Films series, presented by the Film Society of Lincoln Center and the department of film at the Museum of Modern Art, opens today and runs through April 2.
Screenings are in the Roy and Niuta Titus Theater 1 at the museum, 11 West 53d Street, Manhattan.
Individual tickets are $8; $6 for museum or Film Society members; series tickets are $145; $110 for members.
Information: (212) 875-5610; ticket availability: (212) 708-9500.
Here is a schedule of the screenings.
Sold-out shows are noted; occasionally, returned tickets are available at show time.
Some films are already scheduled for commercial release in New York; these are noted.


Scholastic Corp.(SCHL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Hundreds Turn Out to Seek Jobs That Have No Future
When Jeanene Wright got to the Labor Department office here at 7 this morning, the line already stretched for more than two blocks and the jostling for position was so fierce that police barricades were soon thrown up to keep everyone calm.
Like the nearly 900 other people who gathered here today, Ms.
Wright was hoping to secure one of the hundreds of temporary jobs that General Motors Corporation will soon begin offering on the assembly line at its North Tarrytown plant.


Simpson's Lawyer Fails To Crack Crucial Witness
Detective Mark Fuhrman left the witness stand today, far more intact than lawyers for O. J. Simpson and his lawyers would have liked.
In more than three days of intense interrogations, F. Lee Bailey neither laid a very heavy glove on Mr.
Fuhrman nor proved that the detective moved one in a brazen effort to frame Mr.
Simpson.


Robbins &amp; Myers Inc.(ROBN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Corrections
An obituary on Jan. 23 of Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy misstated both the name and the location of the school from which she graduated in 1910.
At that time, it was known as the Academy of the Sacred Heart, not Manhattanville College, and it was located in Manhattanville, N.Y., not Purchase.
A recent letter from a reader pointed out the error.


Corrections
A chart on the front page of Business Day yesterday reporting the Producer Price Index going back to 1993 carried the wrong scale, making the figures incorrect.
A corrected chart appears today on page D2.


Karachi Journal; In a Hellish City, There's Still a Kind of Saintliness
Most people in Karachi would rather have been anywhere but in the Pak Colony on Sunday, but Allah Yar went to work as usual.
In fact for Mr.
Yar, Pak Colony was the only place to be: gang wars had overwhelmed the district overnight, scattering corpses along the narrow lanes and turning virtually every corner into a potential death trap.
Mr.
Yar drives an ambulance for the Edhi Foundation, a do-it-yourself social security system that provides everything from ambulances and morgue services, to hospitals and family planning centers.
Founded 45 years ago by Abdul Sattar Edhi, who has achieved an almost saintly renown, the organization also runs homes for the blind and disabled, orphans, runaways, drug addicts and AIDS patients.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in Manhattan that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "UNCLE VANYA," Circle in the Square Theater, 254 West 50th Street, Manhattan.
Chekhov's play, featuring Tom Courtenay, Amanda Donohoe, James Fox, Werner Klemperer and Elizabeth Franz; directed by Braham Murray.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $45.
Information: (212) 239-6200.


CUNY Doesn't Have Budget Fat to Trim
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal's "Losing Money and Nobels" (column, March 10) pinpoints the likely human and material costs of Gov.
George E. Pataki's proposed budget cuts for the City University of New York.
His midyear cut of $15 million has already exacted a dramatic toll on CUNY.


Charges for Suspects in Subway Robberies
Two men who the police believe are responsible for as many as nine armed robberies on the No. 1 and 9 subway lines were arrested yesterday after they held up a couple and walked away laughing, the police said.
The suspects, Shawn Burnside, 29, and Robert Rumph, 28, both of the Bronx, were caught after the transit police stationed plainclothes officers on several trains and in seven stations in upper Manhattan and the Bronx to look for the men, who had eluded arrest several times in the last month.


Sea Containers Ltd.(SCRA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rev. Joseph P. Fitzpatrick, 82, Fordham Migration Expert, Dies
The Rev.
Joseph P. Fitzpatrick, a Fordham University professor who taught generations of sociologists and earned renown for his studies of immigration, died on Wednesday in the Jesuit infirmary on Fordham's Rose Hill campus in the Bronx.
He was 82.
The cause of death was cardiac arrest, according to the Rev.
Joseph A. O'Hare, the president of Fordham University.


Americans Should Care About an Irish Peace
To the Editor:
Re M. Katja Werlich's letter ("Clinton Shouldn't Meddle in Irish Matters," March 15): The writer obviously has a serious ax to grind with President Clinton, Americans of Irish descent and what she calls "this arrogant country," not to mention democracy.


REPUBLICANS PUSH THEIR PLAN AHEAD WITH BUDGET CUTS
House Republicans advanced their Contract With America on two major fronts today, giving final approval to a record $17.3 billion in cuts from the current budget and taking the first step toward a reduction of nearly $200 billion in Federal spending over five years to pay for a tax cut promised in last year's campaigns.
Central to the success of both bills are plans to cut billions of dollars from social and welfare programs that mostly affect women, children and the elderly.
Republicans brushed aside criticisms that the proposals were callous and used their superior numbers to roll over the opposition, despite the defections of some conservative Democrats who had once seemed certain to vote with the Republicans.


Restaurants
"A luncheon I had at the Four Seasons last Monday was perfect," James Beard wrote to a California friend in early 1960.
"I had blue trout with a spoon of butter sauce on it, one little new potato, a piece of good cheese and a double espresso. The trout had come that morning and was torn from the water when I ordered it."
Thirty-five years later I found myself writing a similar note to a friend in California.
"I had a perfect lunch at the Four Seasons yesterday. Iced Olympia oysters, tiny and tangy with a flavor that resonated in my mind all afternoon. Peppered buffalo steak, the meat as soft as butter and more complex than any beef I've tasted lately. A dense lemon tart with a compote of mixed citruses with an edge of sourness. And finally a bracing cup of espresso. I floated out the door."


On Stage, and Off; Donald G. McNeil Jr.
Getting Your Irish On
In 1947, the Tonys' first year, "Finian's Rainbow" took two, for choreography and best featured actor.
Plans are afoot to return it to Broadway on its 50th anniversary, Jan. 10, 1997.
The songs by Burton Lane and Yip Harburg are very much alive: "How Are Things in Glocca Morra?" is a classic; "When I'm Not Near the Girl I Love, I Love the Girl I'm Near" is sentimental godfather to the defining free-love anthem, Stephen Stills's 1971 "Love the One You're With," and you can't get more hip than having Tony Bennett do "That Ol' Devil Moon" on his "MTV Unplugged" album.


Same Time, Next Year: Knicks Again Suspend the Volatile Mason
Neither the creativity of Anthony Mason on the basketball court, nor the creativity of Anthony Mason's barber on Anthony Mason's head, will be visible in a Knicks uniform for at least five games.
The Knicks yesterday suspended without pay their volatile forward and valuable sixth man after a confrontation with Coach Pat Riley during Tuesday night's game against Denver.
"Anthony Mason has been placed on the suspended list for conduct detrimental to the team and for repeated violations regarding his conduct as a professional on and off the court," Ernie Grunfeld, the Knicks' general manager, announced last night in a prepared statement.
"It is conduct that will not be tolerated."


Filene's Basement (BSMT,NNM) reports earnings for Year to Jan 28


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Named Jim Rice hitting coach.


U.N. Talks On Women Under Fire
Six months before an international conference on women opens in Beijing, the Chinese Government and the Vatican are maneuvering to silence critics by asking the United Nations to deny them credentials to attend the meeting.
At least 200 and possibly 300 nongovernmental groups have been affected, American officials and human rights organizations say.


World Bank Must Snap Out of its Midlife Crisis
To the Editor:
Your March 12 news article on President Clinton's recommendation of James D. Wolfensohn as the new World Bank president was correct that the bank has been the subject of growing criticism, but mistaken in asserting that the "50 Years Is Enough" Campaign has the simple message that the bank "should mark its 50th anniversary by going out of business."


Review/Fashion; Color-Filled Chloe And Rarefied Dior
Designers who show in Paris are an independent lot.
Trying to squeeze them into one mold would be like trying to tie a ribbon around jelly.
There are the modernists, the classicists, the iconoclasts, the intellectuals and even the downright commercial.
And there are some who are a little bit of everything.
Think of Karl Lagerfeld, who mounted a spectacular fur show for Fendi in Milan, Italy, last week and is showing three diverse collections here: one under his own name, one for Chloe and one for Chanel.


Art in Review
Kenneth Noland  Leo Castelli Gallery 420 West Broadway (at Spring Street) SoHo Through March 25
Kenneth Noland began his career as one of the most promising abstract painters of his generation -- a leader of the Color Field school -- but his art has been more or less in decline ever since.
This, at least, is the sad message delivered by his first exhibition at the Leo Castelli Gallery, which celebrates the new association with a haphazard display of 15 canvases from the last 34 years.


U.S. Dealt Setback in Effort to Curb Dinosaur Fossil Hunters
In a setback for Federal prosecutors seeking to curb the activities of commercial excavators and dealers in valuable fossils, a jury in Rapid City, S.D., has acquitted a group of South Dakota dinosaur hunters of most of the 149 felony charges that had been brought against them.
After legal maneuvering and a three-week trial that cost the five defendants about $1 million, the jury either acquitted or failed to reach a verdict on all but eight of the charges against officers and associates of the Black Hills Institute of Geological Research of Hill City, S.D.


Mediocrity on the Bench
As President Clinton struggles to moderate his views on affirmative action, he is less than contrite about his Federal court appointments.
"I've appointed more women and more minorities to the Federal bench than my predecessors combined at this point in our terms," he boasted this month.
Unfortunately, his single-minded pursuit of diversity, combined with an eagerness to avoid controversy, has kept him from appointing the best available legal minds to the courts.
The judge-pickers under Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush, for all their ideological excesses, at least promoted a handful of dynamic legal thinkers: Richard Posner and Frank Easterbrook to the Seventh Circuit; Ralph Winter to the Second Circuit; J. Harvie Wilkinson to the Fourth; Alex Kozinski to the Ninth, and Robert Bork, Antonin Scalia, Douglas Ginsburg and Stephen Williams to the District of Columbia Circuit.


A Valentine to the Perils of Film Making
AN inspired choice opens this year's New Directors/New Films series tonight: "Living in Oblivion," Tom DiCillo's wonderfully funny behind-the-scenes look at the perils of film making, no-budget style.
While he nominally presents the directing process as a series of hellish travails, Mr.
DiCillo captures such delicious mischief that his indictment becomes a valentine.
Smart, raffish and wickedly playful, "Living in Oblivion" sets the perfect tone for this annual series, which is presented jointly by the Film Society of Lincoln Center and the Museum of Modern Art at the museum.
Mr.
DiCillo winds up celebrating film making so wittily that he's sure to encourage other, newer directors to follow suit.


COMPANY BRIEFS
MOTOR WHEEL CORP., Lansing, Mich., a manufacturer of steel and aluminum wheels, said it would shut its Lansing plant in the next 10 to 12 months.
The closing will affect 165 of the company's 1,550 employees.
TRIANGLE CORP., Stamford, Conn., which makes chemicals and other products, said its shareholders had approved a merger with Audits and Surveys Inc., a market research company.


Stock Prices Set Records Once Again
Despite some new and conflicting economic reports, traders sent stock prices to record levels yesterday as bond prices fell slightly and the dollar seemed to steady overseas.
For the second time this week, the leading stock indexes surged past records to hit new highs.
Stocks started out strong, and for the most part rose throughout the day.
But traders said some of the action was most likely prompted by today's quarterly expiration of stock options.


Oliver North on Airwaves: Definitely Not Modulated
Oliver L. North is on the air, reciting teasers over rock-and-roll guitars: "It's no lie -- a shred of truth from Washington -- your dial is set to true North."
The line between politics and show business has ceased to be -- "public life is one big arena," Mr.
North says.
So it follows that the former National Security Council aide and failed candidate for the United States Senate in Virginia now has his own talk-radio show.


Nine West And U.S. Shoe Agree on Deal
The United States Shoe Corporation, which has been battling a surprise hostile takeover offer from an Italian eyewear company, Luxottica S.p.A., said yesterday that it had a definitive deal to sell its shoe division for cash and warrants worth about $600 million to Nine West Group Inc., a suitor it had twice spurned in recent months.
U.S.
Shoe, which also operates the Lenscrafter optical chain and an unprofitable apparel division, rejected Luxottica's $1.1 billion offer for the entire company as inadequate.
Bannus B. Hudson, U.S.
Shoe's president, said the company would continue evaluating alternatives for its other businesses.


Proposed Changes Simplify Rules on Pollution Control
The Clinton Administration today said it would significantly broaden opportunities for industries to cut the costs of pollution control through a novel method that relies on free markets rather than regulations to decide where and how to clean up the environment.
The proposal is one in a broad package of changes in environmental and other regulations the Administration put forth today.
More than a year in the making, the package is a central part of the White House strategy for fending off a campaign by Congressional Republicans to roll back Federal rules governing health, safety and the environment.


What's Wrong With UConn? Not a Thing.
Their fragility was checked at the door.
For one purposeful afternoon in the national collegiate tournament, far from the high expectations of home, the Connecticut Huskies didn't have their psyches probed, their deficiencies analyzed or their chances questioned.
Instead, for one round, Connecticut benefited from as beneficial a matchup of styles as it could face in this tournament, an opponent that could neither withstand a pressure defense nor make enough open 3-point shots.
The Huskies defeated the University of Tennessee at Chattanooga, 100-71, by running to a 15-0 lead and never letting it fall beneath 14 points for the rest of today's West Regional opener.


Art in Review
Nancy Davidson
Richard Anderson Fine Arts  476 Broome Street  SoHo  Through April 8
Nancy Davidson's amusing works consist of big, brilliantly colored balloons dressed in tutus and decorated with ropes that resemble pigtails.
The sexual, not to say erotic, overtones are obvious.
So are references to the era of hot-air balloons, carnivals and world's fairs.
The common thread seems to be Spectacle: the spectacle of the female body, or the body politic, on extravagant display.


Tektronix Inc.(TEK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 25


A Pre-Derby Showdown
Six were entered, four are expected to run, but only two will matter in Sunday's $200,000 San Felipe Stakes at Santa Anita.
The race features a showdown between the Kentucky Derby co-favorites, Afternoon Deelites and Timber Country.
Afternoon Deelites is the challenger, Timber Country the 2-year-old champ of 1994 in a heavyweight bout whose result will establish a clear favorite for the May 6 Kentucky Derby.
The two standout colts drew the outside two post positions for the mile-and-one-sixteenth race.
Timber Country, with Pat Day riding, will carry 122 pounds, three more than Afternoon Deelites, who will have Kent Desormeaux up outside his rival.
Afternoon Deelites is unbeaten in four starts, and his effortless victories are likely to make him the betting choice.


Commission Has Begun Task Of Redefining Role of C.I.A.
A historic inquiry is under way: the work of a Presidential commission charged with rethinking the roles of the nation's intelligence services, in particular the Central Intelligence Agency.
Led by former Defense Secretary Les Aspin, the 17-member commission has started its bottom-up review of the 13 loosely confederated agencies, most of which report to the Pentagon, that conduct espionage and intelligence analysis.
It has a year to complete its task.


Moscow Journal; Freedom Brings Automotive Chaos on the Streets
There are many ways to be miserable in Moscow, but driving is one of the best.
It is also among the most popular, because people here will do anything to get their hands on a car.
Car ownership, once restricted to foreigners, party bureaucrats and their corrupt networks of sycophants and cronies, is no longer a vague dream.
It is a frightening, traffic-stopping, ear-shattering reality.


PHONE COMPANIES CLEAR TV HURDLE
A Federal judge removed one of the last major barriers yesterday to telephone companies' offering nationwide television services through their networks, ruling that the Bell Atlantic Corporation could compete directly with cable operators and broadcasters by transmitting programs anywhere in the country.
Because the judge, Harold H. Greene of Federal District Court in Washington, oversees all seven of the regional Bell companies, the ruling is expected to extend soon to the other Bells.
All of the phone companies have been eager to begin using their copper and fiber optic lines to transmit video programming, but their plans have been restricted by rules that prevent the Bell companies from providing long-distance communications services.


After Losses, Leader Quits At China Investment Firm
The chairman of China's largest investment company resigned this week, in a move that bankers said was part of the Chinese Government's efforts to tighten management and rein in unsupervised derivatives trading by Government-owned investment firms after a series of losses.
Since the chairman of the China International Trust and Investment Corporation, Wei Mingyi, was not really a hands-on leader, bankers said, his decision to step down was symbolic, as was his role.
A spokesman for the company, widely known as Citic, said that Mr.
Wei, 71, asked to resign "for reasons of old age."


Jets Sign Scott, Imperiling Washington
The Jets yesterday positioned themselves to trade or drop BRIAN WASHINGTON, once their most valuable player, when the unrestricted free-agent safety TODD SCOTT of the Minnesota Vikings, a former Pro Bowler, agreed to terms with them.
Scott's arrival could mean his teaming with another free-agent pickup, GARY JONES of Pittsburgh, to give the Jets a new tandem of safeties.
The Jets have released free safety RONNIE LOTT.


Hubert J. Horan, Textile Executive, 61
Hubert J. Horan, a New York textile executive, died on Thursday at his home in Lyme, Conn.
He was 61 and also kept a home on Manhattan's East Side.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Affirmative Action Keeps Door Open for All
To the Editor:
The remarks by Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, the new chairman of the Democratic Leadership Council, that "you can't defend policies that are based on group preferences as opposed to individual opportunities, which is what America has always been about" (news article, March 10), evidence a lack of understanding of affirmative action.
Affirmative action is not a system for preferring unqualified individuals over qualified individuals.
Nor is it a quota system.
What affirmative action goals and timetables do is insure those qualified of all genders, ethnicities, races and abilities or disabilities that they will be fairly included in hiring and other decisions.


CHRONICLE
Arizona law enforcement officials have decided against prosecuting KELSEY GRAMMER, the star of NBC's "Frazier," for sexual misconduct with a minor, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
Yavapai County Attorney Chick Hastings concluded there was insufficient evidence to pursue charges against Mr.
Grammer on claims by a 17-year-old Phoenix girl that they had had sex at a resort in Arizona.
Mr.
Hastings consulted this week with prosecutors in New Jersey, where a grand jury declined to indict Mr.
Grammer last month on claims by the girl that he assaulted her in a Somerset County hotel in 1993.


Observer; The Dickens Awards
Who would have guessed that America is a hotbed of people yearning to write like Charles Dickens?
I didn't, so have been hip-deep for the past seven weeks in urchins, orphans, beadles, lawyers and other standard Dickens paraphernalia.
On Jan. 24 I invited readers to compose lists of 10 well-known living people whose names Dickens, with his passion for fitting the perfect name to each of his characters, might have used in a story.
Plot outlines were invited, but not required.
The prize: tax-free fame!
Winner's name to be published here.


Regents Elect Supporter of Commissioner
The New York State Board of Regents has selected Carl T. Hayden, an Elmira lawyer who has been a vocal defender of the state's embattled Education Commissioner, Thomas Sobol, to be the board's Chancellor.
Mr.
Hayden defeated Saul B. Cohen, the president emeritus of Queens College, by a 9-to-7 vote on Thursday night.
He replaces R. Carlos Carballada, who chose not to stand for re-election but will remain on the board.


Sale of MGM May Not Be Top Priority
Although Credit Lyonnais, the troubled French bank, said yesterday that it would sell $27 billion of assets, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Inc., the troubled film and television company that it inherited, may not be at the top of the list.
Movie industry executives said yesterday that Credit Lyonnais might be best served by waiting to see if the company, now under the leadership of Frank Mancuso, the former chairman of Paramount Pictures, could make a comeback.
"The bank does have a deadline," said one top-level movie executive yesterday.
"But it is better off waiting until the deadline is closer."


In India, a Robin Hood Who's a Goddess
Phoolan Devi (Seema Biswas), the real-life heroine of "Bandit Queen," is a modern-day legend who has achieved a status not even Madonna can claim.
Among a significant percentage of India's poor, Miss Devi, who was born to a lower-caste family of fishermen, is regarded as a goddess with a kind of Robin Hood mystique.
Until her arrest in 1983, Miss Devi, who was known as the Bandit Queen and the Rebel of the Ravines, led an organized band of outlaws that dealt in robbery, kidnapping and murder.
In a notorious blood bath two years before her arrest, she and her gang killed more than 20 men belonging to the upper-caste Thakurs in Behmai, a village in Uttar Pradesh.


Officer Convicted in Beating
It seemed routine: a motorist dozing in his car in a Kmart parking lot.
But what Officer Vincent Sorge of the North Bergen police did was anything but routine.
After questioning the man, he punched and choked him, slammed him head-first into a car and injured his shoulder.
The victim turned out to be an undercover state trooper administering an "integrity test" ordered after complaints that Mr.
Sorge beat and robbed Hispanic people, and yesterday, a jury decided that Mr.
Sorge failed that test badly.
Mr.
Sorge, 32, was convicted of assault and official misconduct for the Jan. 26, 1993, attack.
His career as an officer is over, and he could face 5 to 10 years in jail.


Heroin Mix, New and Free, Hospitalizes 7
The tall, lanky man with the pencil-thin mustache who calls himself Suave had gone out early Thursday evening looking for a $10 bag of heroin.
But when he got to his favorite drug-buying corner in the South Bronx, he found dealers test-marketing a new brand called On Point and giving away free samples -- much like their legitimate counterparts do when trying to generate excitement about a new product.


Alliance Entertainment Corp.(CDS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hearns, on Comeback, Seeks 7th Title
THOMAS HEARNS, a winner of six titles, will come back to try for a seventh.
Hearns, 36, is challenging the International Boxing Council cruiserweight champion, SEAN McCLAIN, on March 31 in Hearns's native Detroit.
"I have no timetable for how long I'll go on," Hearns said yesterday.
Hearns, 53-4-1, has held welterweight, junior middleweight, middleweight, supermiddleweight and light heavyweight titles.
He last fought Feb. 19, 1994. (AP)


Violetta And Alfredo In Their Old Clothes
Gone is the AIDS ward in which Violetta dies her horrible death, gone is the gun-toting Alfredo taking hostages, gone are the pimps, the cellular phone, the cocaine, the suitcase full of cash.
Verdi's "Traviata" was restored to its traditional self at the New York City Opera on Thursday night, the company's gimmick-laden 1991 production unceremoniously retired in favor of a new production whose sole gimmick is that it is directed by the soprano Renata Scotto.
Ms.
Scotto made her directorial debut in Puccini's "Madama Butterfly" at the Metropolitan Opera in 1986, singing the title role as well.
In recent years she has become increasingly interested in opera direction, but she has created a "Traviata" that probably resembles many of the more average productions she has sung in.
It has an almost old-fashioned operatic style.
During Violetta's confrontation with Germont, for example, the courtesan turns several times and sings, with distraught, wide eyes, at the audience, awkwardly reminding everybody that this troubled woman is really a soprano onstage.


Jordan Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


For Filipinos, A Symbol Dies In Singapore
Filipinos reacted with outpourings of rage and grief today over the execution in Singapore of a Philippine woman whose lawyers had pleaded for mercy on the basis of new testimony suggesting that the mother of four had been framed for murder.
The 42-year-old Filipino maid, Flor Contemplacion, was hanged in Singapore for the 1991 deaths of another maid from the Philippines and a four-year-old Singaporean boy.


INSIDE
Charges of Computer Theft
Four Queens and Long Island college students who met on the Internet wanted to get rich quick, the police said, and figured they could use their computers to do it.
Page 25.
The Kasich Diet
The House Budget Committee Chairman, John Kasich, is trying to put the Government on the strict fiscal diet he has long promoted.
Page 8.
Grace Dynasty Is Ended
W.
R.
Grace's board forced its longtime chairman, J. Peter Grace, into involuntary retirement as part of a corporate shake-up.
Page 37.
2 Arts


Catholics and Protestants Parade Together in Ulster for St. Patrick
Patrick Gordon rubbed the stubble on his 65-year-old face, peered up the crowded cobblestone street where the sound of the drums and the brass was getting louder, and said, yes, all things considered, "the peace will hold."
"The longer it lasts, you see, the harder it will be for anyone on either side to pick up a gun," he said.
"We're all getting used to living like this, without the bombs and the killings. Even the normalcy is beginning to seem normal."


Energy Ventures Inc.(EVI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New Frontier for Gangs: Indian Reservations
On the broad plains of the Navajo reservation here the other day, there was talk of war.
In a muddy lot where a group of tough teen-agers had gathered to spend an empty afternoon, their leader, a 19-year-old Navajo who called himself Gee Mony, considered a group of rivals and told his followers: "We can take it all the way to murder. If they want to go to war, if they want to shoot at us, we'll shoot back."


Review/Fashion; Lacroix and Rykiel: Classics
There are designers who manage to surprise the public every season, and others who have such a strong signature that people pretty much know what to expect.
It isn't that these designers don't come up with new ways to please the eye, but every variation, every nuance, is true to their esthetic.
So their clothes are instantly recognizable whether on the runway, in a store window or on a fashionable boulevard.
And that continuity assures them a loyal following season after season, year after year.
Both Christian Lacroix and Sonia Rykiel, in very different ways, fit into that category.
Mr.
Lacroix's show this morning was, as usual, an ode to beautiful fabrics, from the coziness of camel's hair to the richness of embroidered and painted lace.
Few designers can mix patterns and fabrics with as sure a hand.


The Not So Itsy-Bitsy Spider No, it's not the spider that ate the American Museum of Natural History. But a three-foot model of a spider's exoskeleton captivated visitors from Public School 79 in the Bronx. The model is part of a special exhibit that opened yesterday in Gallery 3, on the third floor of the museum on Central Park West. (Jack Manning/The New York Times)


Heroin Test Market Leads to the Hospital
Drug dealers were passing out free samples of heroin in a market test in the Bronx, but within half an hour of inhaling the free heroin, a half-dozen people collapsed and were on their way to the Bronx Municipal Hospital Center.


House Budget Chairman Cuts Deficit With Vigor
Representative John R. Kasich, an Ohio Republican who is chairman of the House Budget Committee, may or may not be the craziest politician ever entrusted with the Federal treasury.
But he is decidedly not stupid.
Watching him in his Capitol Hill office -- the one with the computer that ticks off the national debt, the plastic hatchet that emits maniacal screams and the oversized Three Stooges poster -- it is not always easy to tell.
An interview with Mr.
Kasich (pronounced KAY-sick) is a monologue punctuated by placards yanked from corners and scrolls unfurled across the carpet.
His description of the Federal budget process begins in a Jeep that roars down Syntax Road and gets hopelessly lost.


Beverly Reitz, Interior Designer, 94
Beverly Reitz, an interior designer known for her innovative use of light, died on Sunday in Hightstown, N.J., where she had lived since 1990.
She was 94 and had been a resident of Manhattan for much of her life.
She also had a home in Ridgefield, Conn.


Involuntary Retirement for Grace Chairman
J.
Peter Grace Jr., the longtime chairman of W. R. Grace &amp; Company, was forced into involuntary retirement yesterday, capping a tumultuous fortnight that began when J. P. Bolduc, the company's president and chief executive, abruptly resigned.
Mr.
Grace's decision not to stand for re-election as a board member and to no longer serve as chairman of the company his grandfather founded 141 years ago was but one of a number of significant changes made by the company's board, changes that analysts said were long overdue.


Transactions
Football  National Football League GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Signed Jerry Crafts, offensive tackle, and Brian Bollinger, guard.
NEW YORK JETS -- Agreed to terms with Todd Scott, safety.
SEATTLE SEAHAWKS -- Signed John Friesz, quarterback, to a two-year contract.
Canadian Footabll League BRITISH COLUMBIA LIONS -- Signed Tom Europe, defensive back, to a two-year contract.
HAMILTON TIGER-CATS -- Signed Terry Gray, offensive lineman; Jeff Warner, defensive tackle; and Robert Hatchett, defensive back.
SASKATCHEWAN ROUGHRIDERS -- Signed Scott Dolfi, defensive end, to a two-year contract.
TORONTO ARGONAUTS -- Signed Robert Dougherty, quarterback.


The Crimes of Unit 731
Parades and ceremonies commemorating World War II often make it easy to forget the extraordinary brutality of the conflict.
Some of the war's worst atrocities were committed by the Japanese Army.
It slaughtered Chinese civilians for sport, raped and enslaved young women to improve soldiers' morale and conducted grisly biological warfare experiments.
A powerful report in yesterday's Times recounted the wartime exploits of the Imperial Army's Unit 731 based in China, Japan's principal practitioner of human experiments.
Plague-infected fleas were airdropped over Chinese cities, causing epidemics.
Cholera and typhoid cultures were poured into wells.
Prisoners were dissected alive without anesthetics.
Others were subjected to pressure changes that made their bodies literally explode.
At least 200,000 Chinese are estimated to have died in these experiments.
There were also plans, which were never carried out, to send germs via balloons into the Western United States.


Arkansas and Purdue Squeeze Into 2d Round
Usually when a team meets the Arkansas Razorbacks for the first time, it wilts under the pressure.
It shakes and is shellshocked and tosses the ball away.
It is buried under the defending national champions' arsenal of power inside, potent punch outside and fullcourt, full-throttle, fancy style.
But not Texas Southern.


As Food Runs Short in Rwandan Camps, Fears of Unrest
A shortage of food for refugees displaced last year by Rwanda's civil war has increased tensions in and around the Central African country, stirring fear of renewed violence, relief officials and United Nations officials say.
As many as three million people depend on food delivered by the United Nations and private relief organizations, not only in Rwanda but at refugee camps for Rwandans in neighboring Zaire, Tanzania and Burundi.


A Specter With a Portfolio Of Blood, Honey and Bees
"Sorrow and hate fill his mind; bees buzz about his lips," says a scholar explaining the legend of the Candyman: a onetime slave who was punished for loving his owner's blond daughter by having his hand cut off and the stump smeared with honey, attracting swarms of bees and causing him to haunt present-day New Orleans.
But au contraire, mon frere, as the annoying, French-word-dropping disk jockey in "Candyman: Farewell to the Flesh" might put it.
Bad lines are what buzz about his lips.
"Annie," he says to the pretty blond art teacher he tries to seduce to the land of the dead, "you're mine." Bees are what fill his brain, as we see when Annie scratches his face and bees fly out of the wound, as if Candyman had a hive in his head.
That is just one of the cheesy special effects in this sluggish, predictable, low-rent sequel to the 1992 "Candyman," based on a Clive Barker story.
When the film briefly flashes back to the 19th-century torture, it looks very much as if Candyman (Tony Todd) simulates amputation by sticking his hand in a hole in the ground.


Don't Spend $1 to Move Yankees to Manhattan
To the Editor:
Your March 9 article on the Yankees' dissatisfaction with the most recent plans by New York City for renovating Yankee Stadium highlights the absurd lengths to which the Yankees have been successful in dragging the city in their quest to build a state-of-the-art showplace.


Don't Spend $1 to Move Yankees to Manhattan; Macombs Dam Fields
To the Editor:
Boarding the bus with basketball under arm (one nickel) for the 10-minute ride to 161st Street, and walking three blocks to Macombs Dam Park, was the way I spent most afternoons growing up during the late 40's in the Bronx.


Davis Water &amp; Waste Industries(DWW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Mich. St. And Coach Watch It Slip Away
Jud Heathcote did not allow himself to envision this moment.
He knew it would come, eventually.
He knew it would be sad, perhaps even painful.
He never expected it to be as terrible as this.
Heathcote coached the final game of his 24-year career tonight at Leon County Civic Center, where his Michigan State Spartans, the No. 3-seeded team in the Southeast Regional, suffered a 79-72 upset loss to 14th-seeded Weber State.
Heathcote walked off the court in tears, his bum left knee forcing a slight limp.


National Beverage Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  IRELAND'S DAY A PEACEFUL ONE
For the first time since "the troubles" began 25 years ago, dividing Catholics and Protestants into hostile camps, Northern Ireland was at peace for St.
Patrick's Day.  1  A Protestant leader has claimed St.
Patrick as one of his own.  4  AUTOMOTIVE CHAOS IN MOSCOW
There are many ways to be miserable in Moscow, but driving is one of the best; it is also among the most popular, as people will do anything to get their hands on a car.  4  Clinton is likely to go to Moscow in May, according to aides.  4  NEW STRIFE IN RWANDA FEARED
A shortage of food for refugees displaced by last year's civil war in Rwanda has stirred fear that violence could erupt again.  2  Iraq holds two Americans who crossed the Kuwait border.  3  In the Philippines, rage and grief over an execution in Singapore.  3  Tensions rising on Venezuela-Colombia border.  5  News analysis: Serbian leader in a bind.  5  National 6-9  A NEW VENUE FOR GANGS
Gang life has found its way onto Indian reservations, where young people are adopting the ways of an alien, urban culture.  1  DOLE WOULD REPEAL GUN BAN
The Senate Republican leader, Bob Dole, told the National Rifle Association that a ban on 19 assault weapons should be repealed.  1  PREVENTING CHICKEN POX
The Food and Drug Administration approved the first vaccine against chicken pox, one of the most contagious childhood diseases.  1  INSIDE AND OUTSIDE THE TRIAL
A juror was dismissed, the police destroyed a fake pipe bomb and a detective explained how O. J. Simpson became a murder suspect.  1  PHONE COMPANIES' VICTORY
A Federal judge removed one of the last major barriers to telephone companies' offering nationwide television services, ruling that Bell Atlantic could compete against cable operators and broadcasters.  1  ASSURANCES OF FLIGHT SAFETY
A study commissioned by USAir concluded that the airline was safe to fly, but it also said that improvements could be made.  6  'WORST VOTE OF MY LIFE'
An Oregon official who voted to legalize video poker admits he is now a gambling addict and has used public money to feed his habit.  6  DEEP CUTS FOR EDUCATION
Students would lose many programs under Republican-sponsored legislation, unless local officials found a way to pay for them.  7  SWINGING THE BUDGET AX
A maverick House Republican given the daunting task of trimming spending by $700 billion is making believers out of some doubters.  8  RETHINKING INTELLIGENCE
A Presidential panel has begun rethinking the roles of 13 Federal agencies that conduct espionage and analyze intelligence.  8  Beliefs: Two conferences and two roles for religion.  9  Metro Digest 25  MATH AND SCIENCE TUTORING
Patrelle. 15  Television: On the origins of the Bible.  49  Fashion 29  Sports 30-35  Baseball: N.L.R.B. moves fast.  35  Station sues Yanks.  35  College Basketball: Arkansas barely escapes.  31  UMass downs St.
Peter's.  29  7-2 sub saves North Carolina.  33  New Manhattan challenge.  33  Columns: Vecsey on N.C.A.A.  31  Hockey: Rangers visit the White House.  33  N.B.A.: A Mason grievance.  31  Racing: Pre-Derby showdown.  35  Sports People: 34  Obituaries 10  Ahmed Khomeini, son of the Ayatollah and leading Islamic radical.
Albert Hackett, playwright.
Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23  Editorials  A city asset too precious to sell.
The crimes of Unit 731.
Yale and Mr.
Bass's $20 million.
Disciplining dangerous students.
Letters  Russell Baker: The Dickens awards.
Ted Simon: Land of promises.
Peter S. Temes: Bilingual schools can work.
Richard Wexler: A warehouse is not a home.
Chronicle 24  Bridge 49  Crossword 14


METRO DIGEST
HELPING MINORITIES GET INTO TOP SCHOOLS With whites and Asians dominating enrollment in the city's best high schools, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines proposed opening a new math and science institute to coach 350 seventh and eighth graders, most of whom would be blacks and Hispanics, for the notoriously difficult entrance exams to Stuyvesant High School, Bronx High School of Science and Brooklyn Technical.
By giving special training aimed at enlarging the pool of black and Hispanic candidates eligible for admission to the selective schools, Mr.
Cortines would avoid setting quotas, which are currently under challenge in several cities.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY  THE GREENING OF FIFTH AVENUE With "childlike delight," a rock star's celebrity and sensible black shoes, John Cardinal O'Connor became the first archbishop to lead the Irish up Fifth Avenue for a St.
Patrick's Day Parade.
He drew some of the largest crowds in recent memory, marchers and spectators buoyed by a brightness of spirit that seemed to have absorbed the rancor and divisiveness of the recent past.
Page 27.
OFFICERS NOT CHARGED IN FATAL SHOOTING A grand jury has decided not to file criminal charges against the police officers involved in the fatal shooting of a Brooklyn teen-ager in January 1994, prosecutors said.
The youth, Shu'aib Abdul-Latif, who was 17 and the son of a prominent Muslim cleric in the New York area, was killed after 11 officers responded to a 911 call reporting a man with a gun in the basement of a building in the East New York section of Brooklyn.
Page 27.
THE SWEET PLEASURES OF DOING NOTHING As the weather turned gentle, the Old Guy decided to check out the benches and set an example for the passively challenged.
He had long been aware that New Yorkers, who excel at so many things, are inept at doing nothing.
In terms of watching the world go by, we lag behind many lands.
Many of us do not even know enough to take naps in the afternoon.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman, Page 27.
PORPOISE SPOTTED IN GOWANUS CANAL Far from its open-sea habitat, an apparently sick harbor porpoise wandered into Upper New York Bay and then into the foul waters of Brooklyn's infamous Gowanus Canal, touching off a flurry of rescue efforts by the harbor police, the Coast Guard and marine researchers.
But in the gathering darkness and fog, the search and rescue operation was suspended until daybreak.
Page 26.
REPORT ISSUED ON NEW YORK'S FINANCES The state's Financial Control Board said that Mayor Giuliani had proposed significant steps toward straightening out New York City's finances.
But it also warned that his plan to close a $2.7 billion budget gap relied heavily on risky assumptions and actions by the state that could fall through, forcing deeper cuts.
Page 26.
REGION  KILLERPLANS TO MARRY On Wednesday, the day after Paul Cox was sentenced for killing a couple who lived in the Larchmont, N.Y., home where he had grown up, his girlfriend went to the town clerk's office in Mount Pleasant and applied for a license to marry him.
Katy Davis, an accounting major at Lehigh University in Bethlehem, Pa., has known Mr.
Cox for five years.
She began dating him after his first trial ended in a hung jury in June, while he was under house arrest in his parents' home.
Page 28.


Uggams and Her Memories of Legends
When Leslie Uggams was 8 years old, she recalls in her jubilant new cabaret show at Rainbow and Stars, she won a talent contest at the Apollo Theater and became a regular performer there.
Wearing a pink ensemble "a la Chanel" with a huge pink bow, "I looked like a 747 about to take off," she jokes.
She often performed with Louis Armstrong, whom she remembers calling "Pops." At the time, she says, she didn't realize that "Pops" and other fellow performers like "Aunt Ella" (Ella Fitzgerald) and "Aunt Dinah" (Dinah Washington) were living legends.
Ms.
Uggams's entertaining reminiscences make up the backbone of her new act, which is to play at Rainbow and Stars (30 Rockefeller Plaza) through April 1.
Her anecdotes carry her from child performer to Tony-winning Broadway star (for "Hallelujah, Baby!") to mature nightclub singer who has just released a new album, "Painted Mem'ries" (Sterling).


Rodman Not Penalized for Oversleeping
The San Antonio Spurs have not taken any disciplinary action against forward DENNIS RODMAN for showing up late for a game, the team said yesterday.
Rodman said he overslept before the Spurs' game Thursday night against Philadelphia because his alarm clock failed to go off.
Rodman arrived in the locker room 35 minutes after tipoff and did not dress for the game. (AP)


Police Director Under Scrutiny
The lawyer for William R. Celester, Director of the Newark police, says that just because Mr.
Celester accepted between $3,000 and $10,000 at a party given in his honor in 1993, it did not mean there had been any wrongdoing.
Mr.
Celester is the latest in a long list of city officials whose personal records have been subpoenaed in connection with a growing Federal corruption inquiry, and his lawyer, Anthony J. Pope Jr., said the $100-a-ticket party was being scrutinized by Federal prosecutors.
"The Police Director, as well as anyone else, is entitled to accept a gift," Mr.
Pope said.
"It had no impact on his job, his performance or anything of that nature."


Ply Gem Industries(PGI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


More Incentives to Kick the Meat Habit
To the Editor:
Rockefeller University scientists have found that a dieter's metabolism actually slows down on reaching a set weight level, requiring continued dieting just to maintain that weight (news article, March 9).
However, a low-fat plant-based diet provides wholesome, filling bulk with fewer calories and gradually lowers the set weight level.
Most important, it reduces the risk of chronic diseases at any weight level.


Extra Coverage In Business Day
With today's issue, the Times expands and reorganized its Saturday coverage of business news, including selected weekly weekly tables formerly unavailable until Sunday.
Business Day, page 36.


Death and the Sorrow and Adjustments That Come After It
Pascale Ferran begins her expert first feature with the sight of a painstakingly sculptured sand castle soon to be washed away by the tide.
It's an image that could easily seem banal, but Ms.
Ferran makes it an austere, haunting symbol of mortality.
Each of her characters must deal with the consequences of losing a loved one, and each has constructed some type of emotional edifice to keep death at a distance.
This process is contemplated in a film so handsomely photographed that its beach scenes seem to reveal every grain of sand.
"Coming to Terms" ("Petits Arrangements Avec les Morts"), which won the Camera d'Or as the best first film at last year's Cannes Film Festival, recalls the work of Eric Rohmer in its capacity for finding the beauty of the abstract in everyday life.
Yet Ms.
Ferran's direction (from a screenplay she wrote with Pierre Trividic) has considerable warmth despite its signs of detachment.


CHRONICLE
TYSON BECKFORD, a 24-year-old model who made his name in advertisements for Ralph Lauren that began appearing last August, has signed an exclusive contract for the company's men's wear and accessories line, the company announced yesterday.
This is the first time the company has offered an exclusive modeling contract to a black.


Fiscal Monitors Say Plan For Budget Has Pitfalls
The state's Financial Control Board said yesterday that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani had proposed significant steps toward straightening out New York City's finances.
But it also warned that his plan to close a $2.7 billion budget gap relied heavily on risky assumptions and actions by the state that could fall through, forcing deeper cuts.
In its report on the Mayor's budget plan, the board, which monitors the city's finances, also said the city faced persistent imbalances in the years ahead because spending would continue to outpace revenues, leaving future budget gaps that will require still more austerity.


Stein Mart Inc.(SMRT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Careline Inc.(CRLN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


About 'Your Money'
Starting this weekend, coverage of personal finance and investing, formerly published on Saturday's, will appear in a new sunday section, Money and Business.
Expanded and fully redesigned, the Sunday section will offer new features about earning, investing and spending.


Treasury Market Mixed for Second Day in Slow Trading
Prices of Treasury securities ended mixed yesterday for the second consecutive session.
Trading was lackluster, and a weaker-than-expected consumer sentiment report failed to draw many buyers from the sidelines.


Slovakia Won't Raise Tax on Newspapers
To the Editor:
Re "Slovakia Takes a Wrong Turn" (editorial, March 7):


A Feld Premiere Offering Precision And Beethoven
The dancers are sleek in their leotards, and the music, often from classical symphonies, is swell.
For six years, Eliot Feld has used this formula to varying degrees of creative freshness in a cluster of plotless ballets.
"Ludwig Gambits," whose premiere was given on Thursday night by Feld Ballets/NY, is the best of the genre, an outpouring of inventiveness that marries structure with dynamism.
In short, a winner.


DOLE, IN A 2d NOD TO RIGHT, PLEDGES TO FIGHT GUN BAN
In his second bow to the political right in a week, Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the majority leader, has promised the National Rifle Association that he will make it a legislative priority to repeal "the ill-conceived" ban on assault weapons, a centerpiece of President Clinton's year-old crime bill.
"I hope to have a bill on President Clinton's desk by this summer," Mr.
Dole said in a letter to the N.R.A. that was made public today by Congressional Democrats.


State Auto Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Villanova Takes a Long Night's Journey to a Loss
Five days ago, Villanova was numb with pride after knocking off powerful Connecticut to win the Big East Conference tournament for the first time.
Tonight, third-seeded Villanova was just plain numb after being eliminated from the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament in the first round by unheralded Old Dominion of the Colonial Athletic Association.


E-Z Serve Corp.(EZS,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


Ailing Porpoise Eludes Rescuers in Murky Canal
Far from its open-sea habitat, an apparently sick harbor porpoise wandered into Upper New York Bay and then into the foul waters of Brooklyn's infamous Gowanus Canal late yesterday, touching off a flurry of rescue efforts by the harbor police, the Coast Guard and marine researchers.
But as marine biologists from the Okeanos Ocean Research Foundation on Long Island hurried to the scene at nightfall, police officers and Coast Guardsmen lost sight of the creature in the gathering darkness and fog, and the search and rescue operation was suspended until daybreak today.


The Knicks Survive Life Without Mason
The starting guard Scott Skiles sat on the Washington Bullets' bench in a green suit with a sore wrist, courtesy of punching out one of his teammates in practice on Thursday.
Forward Anthony Mason, the beef of the Knicks' bench, was presumably sitting at home watching tonight's game, courtesy of a five-game suspension.
At least Mason didn't take a swing at Coach Pat Riley.


Albert Hackett, 95, Half of Prolific Drama Team
Albert Hackett, who won a Pulitzer Prize with his first wife and collaborator, Frances Goodrich, for their play "The Diary of Anne Frank," died on Thursday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 95.
The cause was pneumonia, said his wife, Gisele Svetlik Hackett.


Station Sues Yanks Over Replacements
The Yankees' refusal to reduce the TV and radio payments they get if replacements players substitute for major leaguers during the regular season resulted yesterday in WABC-AM suing the team for $10 million.
The MSG Network, also frustrated by the Yankees' position, canceled its telecasts of this weekend's exhibition games in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.


Carry That Weight
To the Editor:
It has been the conventional wisdom that it is harder to keep weight off than lose it.
So it is no surprise that a new study (news article, March 9) shows the body burns calories more slowly after weight is lost.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Pacers Extend Magic's Losing Streak  Rik Smits had 21 points and 11 rebounds last night as the Indiana Pacers beat Orlando, 107-97, giving the Magic its first three-game losing streak of the season.
The Magic has lost 8 of its last 10 road games.
Nick Anderson had 24 points for Orlando, which lost at Market Square Arena for the fifth straight regular-season game and the sixth straight over all.
The Pacers swept the Magic in three games in the first round of last year's National Basketball Association playoffs.
Shaquille O'Neal had 28 points and 14 rebounds and Anfernee Hardaway 20 points for Orlando. (AP) TIMBERWOLVES 80, CAVALIERS 77: Sean Rooks broke a 74-74 tie with a free throw, then made a key steal to help seal Minnesota victory over visiting Cleveland.
Rooks finished with 14 points and 12 rebounds as the battle of the N.B.A.'s two lowest-scoring teams lived up to its billing.
The 80 points by the Timberwolves marked their lowest total ever in a victory. (AP) COLLEGE HOCKEY  Providence Upsets Top-Seeded Maine  Providence College stunned the University of Maine, defeating the top-seeded Black Bears, 7-3, last night in a Hockey East semifinal game at Boston Garden.
The Friars (14-16-6), who finished sixth in the regular season, broke the game open with a five-goal second period while holding Maine (29-5-6) scoreless.
The senior Brady Kramer had three goals for the Friars.
The junior goalie Bob Bell set a Hockey East semifinal record with 47 saves.
In the final, Providence will face either Boston University (26-6-3) or UMass-Lowell (17-17-4), who played in the second game.
A PRINCETON-R.P.I.
FINAL: Princeton stunned top-seeded Clarkson, 2-1, to advance to the final of the Eastern College Athletic Conference's tournament at Lake Placid, N.Y.
The Tigers (18-12-4) advance to championship game against Rensselaer, which defeated Colgate, also by 2-1.
The Princeton-R.P.I. winner will earn an automatic bid to the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.
Clarkson (22-9-4) has qualified by finishing first in the E.C.A.C. regular-season standing.
Princeton's winning goal was scored by Johnathan Kelley, its leading scorer, at 7 minutes 30 seconds of the third period.
The R.P.I.-Colgate game's three goals were scored in the first period, with the tie-breaking one by Kelly Askew, a senior center.
Goalie Mike Tamburro had 37 saves for R.P.I. (18-14-4).
Colgate finished 20-15-1.
COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Rowan Loses to Manchester in Division III  Burt Paddock led a balanced Manchester offense with 26 points as the Spartans beat Rowan, N.J., College, 79-66, last night in a National Collegiate Athletic Association Division III semifinal game at Buffalo.
Manchester's victory set up a meeting of unbeaten teams in the Division III final tonight.
The Spartans (31-0), an Indiana college, will face Wisconsin-Platteville (30-0), which beat Trinity of Connecticut by 82-59 earlier yesterday.
Rowan (26-4), formerly Glassboro State, was unable to convert its advantages in size, quickness and athleticism. (AP) PAN AMERICAN GAMES  St.
John's Baseball Team Is Struggling  Team USA, already assured of being the first United States baseball team to finish with a losing record at the Pan Am Games, might not even win a single game.
The team, represented by St.
John's University, took a giant step in that direction yesterday with a 9-2 loss to Netherland Antilles in Buenos Aires.
It was the first appearance ever by a United States team in baseball's consolation bracket.
The Red Storm fell to 0-5 and has only two more chances to win: It plays Brazil on Monday and Guatemala on Wednesday.
Last night in Mar Del Plata, Argentina, Angel Martino of Americus, Ga., won her fourth Pan Am Games swimming gold medal.
She shattered the games' record of 26.01 seconds in the 50-meter freestyle with a time of 25.40.
Also, two United States fighters, the 119-pounder Carlos Navarro and the lightweight Datris Biagas, were winners as the boxing competition began.
In women's volleyball, the United States moved into the final by sweeping Canada.
The American men joined them as finalists after a marathon match with Cuba, which the United States won by 16-14 in the final set. (AP)


A City Asset Too Precious to Sell
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani is apparently still determined to sell New York City's public TV channel to a private owner.
What a waste.
Selling valuable government property for a one-shot revenue boost is, in general, a bad policy.
Selling an irreplaceable cultural asset like WNYC-TV is also a sad mistake.
But the Mayor believes, and has been forthright in saying publicly, that the city should not be in the broadcast business.
It owns WNYC-TV and two public radio stations -- WNYC-AM and WNYC-FM.
They cost City Hall less than $2 million a year, because they raise more than 90 percent of their budgets through over-the-air "pledge week" fund-raising and private grants.
The WNYC Foundation is the fund-raiser, and has so far opposed commercial sale of any of the properties.


Bridge
Study the diagramed deal, and try to determine the par result, the one achieved when both sides do the best they can on a double-dummy basis.
The deal was played 10 days ago in a Von Zedtwitz Double Knockout Team match at Honors Club, 42 East 74th Street in Manhattan.
It resulted in a loss for a foursome led by Dorothy Truscott, which nevertheless won the match by 15 imps and is one of the last two undefeated teams in the event.
The other is captained by Lapt Chan, whose team won its semifinal match by 4 imps against a group headed by Janos Racz, in play at the Manhattan Club, 27 West 72d Street.


Corrections
An article and a headline on Thursday about a New York State investigation into allegations of illegal segregation in dormitories for black, Hispanic and American Indian students at Cornell University referred imprecisely to the criterion for assignment to those dormitories.
The university maintains that selection is based on students' cultural program choices, not on race.


Hospitals Say Cuts in Medicaid Will Mean Longer Stays
For the last several years, many hospitals in New York have made themselves more efficient by reducing the length of patient stays.
But deep cuts to the Medicaid program threaten to reverse that trend, many hospital officials say.
The cuts, proposed by Gov.
George E. Pataki, would reduce many of the home and community health services that have made it possible for hospitals to release patients quickly.


Doctor's Sentence Delayed
A Federal court has delayed a jail term for a Brooklyn doctor who was convicted of misdemeanor criminal charges and sentenced to serve time at Rikers Island in the death of a nursing home patient, a medical official said.
The official, Thomas Donoghue, a spokesman for the Medical Society of the State of New York, said the court agreed to a hearing in April to consider a challenge to the state law under which the doctor, Gerald Einaugler, was found guilty.


Cortines Has Plan to Coach Minorities Into Top Schools
With white and Asian students dominating enrollment in the city's best high schools, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines yesterday proposed opening a new math and science institute to coach 350 seventh and eighth graders, most of whom would be black and Hispanic, for the notoriously difficult entrance exams to Stuyvesant High School, Bronx High School of Science and Brooklyn Technical High School.
At Stuyvesant, a school nationally renowned for its academic excellence and the most selective of the three, only 4.8 percent of the students are black, down from 12.9 percent in 1979.
Half the students at Stuyvesant are Asian, 40 percent are white and 4.3 percent call themselves Hispanic.
Total enrollment at the three high schools is 10,145.


COMPANY NEWS
TEXTRON INC., Providence, R.I., said it planned to consolidate two of its component units, Aircraft Engine Components Textron and Airfoil Textron.
The combined company, based in Thomasville, Ga., will be called Turbine Engine Components Textron.
UNION PACIFIC CORP., Bethlehem, Pa., a holding company, reached a definitive agreement to buy the 70 percent of Chicago and North Western Corp. it does not own for $35 a share, or $1.2 billion.


Panel Clears Researchers In 5 Deaths
Scientists conducting an experiment on a new drug for hepatitis that proved fatal for at least five people should not be held responsible for the deaths, a panel affiliated with the National Academy of Sciences said on Thursday.
The trial of the drug, called FIAU, or fialuridine, ended in disaster in March 1993 with the deaths of one-third of the 15 patients who had taken it for four weeks or more.


Ameridata Technologies Inc.(ADA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hunt Manufacturing Co.(HUN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 26


Power Deliciously Corrupts A Delighted Lady Macbeth
Francis Patrelle, one of the few contemporary ballet choreographers who are interested in creating full-scale narrative works, has an eye for good dancers.
Engagingly, he also creates a large complement of children's roles in all his ballets.
But in "Macbeth," performed by Dances . . .
Patrelle on Thursday night at Kaye Playhouse, Mr.
Patrelle gave himself the almost insurmountable challenge of telling a complicated story in movement.
He succeeds to a surprising extent, though not entirely.
It takes familiarity with the Shakespeare play to follow the ballet.
There is a good deal too much rushing through the forest for the three witches.
The mime is occasionally a little silly.
And though it was a sensible decision to give the ballet an overarching, stylized theme -- that power corrupts -- the miming of crowns being placed on willing and unwilling heads eventually recalls that wandering bowler hat in Twyla Tharp's "Push Comes to Shove."


Airline Safety Audit Advises 30 Changes
An outside study commissioned by USAir to reassure the flying public that the nation's sixth-largest airline is safe has concluded just that.
But USAir, which had five fatal crashes in five years, was also urged to make 30 changes in its flight, training and maintenance procedures.
Article, page 6.


Whistles and Jazz Too Much for Nets
Sixty personal fouls and seven technical fouls were called, which led P. J. Brown to say it may have been the most tightly officiated game he has ever played in.
With these constrictions, the Nets offered little resistance tonight to the Utah Jazz, the league's second-best road team, losing by 103-98 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Deepest Federal Cuts Since 1981 Proposed for Education
In the deepest cuts proposed for education spending in more than a decade, the nation's public school students, particularly those in cities, would lose many popular remedial and supplemental educational programs unless they found the means to pay for them themselves.
Among the programs in danger of being cut along with $1.4 billion in Federal aid to public education are supplemental lessons in math and science, bilingual programs and programs designed to eliminate violence and drugs in schools.


Ahmed Khomeini Is Dead; Son of Ayatollah Khomeini
Ahmed Khomeini, a leading Islamic radical who was Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini's son and a member of Iran's Supreme National Security Council, died yesterday at a hospital in North Teheran.
He was about 50 and lived in the Teheran area.
Mr.
Khomeini had been in a coma since Sunday, when he suffered cardiac arrest and was admitted to the hospital, the official Islamic Republic News Agency reported.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.94
5.97
3.22
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.72
5.72
3.47
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.86
5.87
3.83
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.10
7.08
6.48
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.36
7.37
6.90
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.24
8.24
7.67
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.34
6.32
5.99
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 8


World News Briefs; Sicily Police Arrest 15 In Raids on the Mafia
With a speed that would once have seemed improbable, the police in Sicily arrested 15 mobsters in a night of raids, accusing them of ordering or carrying out a wave of Mafia killings apparently intended to terrorize informers and settle scores between crime families.
The raids Thursday night, involving 500 officers backed by helicopters, came after investigators bugged the home of one suspect and intercepted conversations about some of the 11 killings that have taken place since Feb. 26 and at least two more that were planned.


Echlin Inc.(ECH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Corrections
The obituary of former Senator J. William Fulbright of Arkansas on Feb. 10 misidentified the politician who derided him as Senator Halfbright.
A reader's letter, initially misdirected at The Times, points out that it was President Harry S. Truman, not Senator Joseph R. McCarthy.


Sports of The Times; Stanford Finally Wins One
FIFTY-THREE years is a long time, even for people who take the long view.
The scholar-athletes of Stanford University are currently taking exams in their hotel rooms here, and you'd like to think their subject matter is a bit weightier than "When was the last time Stanford won a game in the N.C.A.A. tournament?"
You could even say it's trivia.
But the year 1942 stuck in their minds, even though none of them was born then.


Disciplining Dangerous Students
Schools Chancellor Ramon Cortines wants to rid schools of dangerous weapons, like box cutters, which are used as switchblades, and guns.
He would also rid New York City's schools of the students who carry them, suspending for one year any student, even those in kindergarten, caught bringing a weapon to school and placing them in mandatory disciplinary programs.
His efforts to make schools safer deserve support from the Board of Education.
Last year 7,200 weapons were confiscated in schools.
There are only about 50 metal-detection systems in the city's nearly 400 high schools and junior high schools and they often do not scan potentially lethal instruments like box cutters and razor blades.
The weapons of choice among students, many of whom simply want to protect themselves from gangs and thieves, also include guns.
But punishment is uncertain; depending on the circumstances, a student might be suspended for weeks or for only a few days.


Probation for Ex-Tax Assessor
A Federal Court judge told Clyde R. Sherrow, 48, of Clifton, the former tax assessor of Haledon, that he would have to serve four years' probation and repay $1,500 for taking a kickback in return for reducing property taxes at a condominium development.
LAWRENCE VAN GELDER


Yesterday in Washington
ASSAULT-WEAPON BAN -- Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the majority leader, promised to make it a legislative priority to repeal "the ill-conceived" ban on assault weapons, a main element of President Clinton's year-old crime bill.
"I hope to have a bill on President Clinton's desk by this summer," Mr.
Dole said in a letter to the National Rifle Association, an opponent of the ban.
Mr.
Dole is to announce his candidacy for the Republican Presidential nomination on April 11, and his position could reflect his need to attract conservative support in the party.
A White House spokeswoman, Ginny Terzano, said the President was committed to retaining the ban.
G.O.P.
EASES WELFARE CUTBACKS -- Republicans conceded that child-care centers would be stretched to the limit under proposed welfare changes and said they would drop plans to reduce sharply the Federal spending on day care.
Representative Clay E. Shaw Jr., the Florida Republican who heads the House Ways and Means subcommittee on human resources, said the Republican welfare program did not set aside enough money for child care and backed a proposal to increase spending by nearly $1 billion over five years.


Carl H. Voss, 84; Minister Advocated Creation of Israel
The Rev.
Dr.
Carl Hermann Voss, a Congregational minister and vocal campaigner for a secure Jewish state, died on Tuesday at his home in Jacksonville, Fla.
He was 84.
The cause was cardiac arrest, his family said.


Holly Corp.(HOC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Cool and Emotionally Lethal
New casts in three admirable productions added extra excitement to Dance Theater of Harlem's performance on Thursday night at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
Calvin Shawn Landers was once again the rebellious protagonist of George Balanchine's "Prodigal Son." But on this occasion Virginia Johnson portrayed the Siren who lured him.
Ms.
Johnson's cool, imperious and emotionally lethal temptress grew increasingly reptilian as she danced.
When she fixed her gaze on Mr.
Landers, who looked brash yet fundamentally naive as the Prodigal, she could have been one of those venomous serpents that are said to hypnotize their prey.


Beliefs
Religion played a leading role in the story of the United Nations Conference on Population and Development, which was held in Cairo last August.
The Vatican rallied Muslim leaders and some other religious believers to eliminate language in official statements that could have become the basis for an international right to abortion.
That jousting continued this week.
The Religion News Service reported that for the moment, the Vatican had kept an American abortion rights group, Catholics for a Free Choice, and sister organizations in Brazil, Mexico and Uruguay from gaining credentials to September's World Conference on Women, to be held in Beijing.


New Music's Purveyor Of Exotica
George Crumb has been in town this week, haunting new music's narrow corridors of power, for a few days at least.
During the 1960's, Mr.
Crumb provided America's usually dour avant-garde with something it was not used to: music that instantly grabbed the public's imagination.
He was our Krzysztof Penderecki, though on a more effete model.
Mr.
Crumb still composes for exotic instruments, still uses ordinary ones exotically and still relies on breathlessly mysterious titles to make us sit up and take notice.
That first flash of fame, however, has never really returned.
Speculum Musicae celebrated Mr.
Crumb's presence at Merkin Concert Hall on Wednesday with the American premiere of "Quest," a chamber piece featuring David Starobin's guitar solos.
Dispensing its sybaritic pleasures with artful delicacy and always conscious of its powers to surprise, "Quest" made an interesting contrast to the more sober elements of Wednesday's program.


Evolution of the Bible: What Scholars Believe
"Who Wrote the Bible?" begins and ends with the same enduring question: Were the first five books of the Old Testament dictated by God to Moses, as many Jews and Christians believe, or were they produced by unknown scribes over many years and in different places, as most scholars seem to hold?
No answer that can satisfy both the fundamentalist and the secular-minded is forthcoming, but this three-hour explication of biblical scholarship offers many other rewards.
The opening hour tomorrow begins with the finding of the Dead Sea Scrolls, portions of the writings of an isolated Jewish sect that existed some 2,000 years ago.
Scholars of religion speculate on how the tumultuous history of the ancient Jews is reflected in their holiest book.


Model Imperial Inc.(MODL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Plane's Passengers Are Rescued
A 12-hour search through dense fog and woodland for a civilian plane from the Naval Air Engineering Station at Lakehurst ended near noon when its pilot managed to walk from the crash to a working gravel pit and lead a rescue crew to his companion.
The pilot, Donald Ancelin, 58, of Toms River, and Robert Ovel, 35, a Naval reservist, were in critical condition at Jersey Shore Medical Center in Neptune Township.


Dowsing for Inspiration
Keith Jarrett labored mightily over the piano on Sunday night at Avery Fisher Hall.
He grunted and groaned; he stood up, then nearly knelt; he leaned over until his forehead was almost touching the keys, or he kept the piano at arm's length.
For all the effort, the two long improvisations that emerged were only a modest payoff.
In Mr.
Jarrett's solo improvisations, deliberately unplanned, he is dowsing for inspiration, and his solo recordings show that he often finds it.
On Sunday, he poked around his broad variety of approaches: from an open-ended ballad to stately Coplandesque chords, from a wandering single-note line to gospel-chorded richness, from lingering sustained melodies to swift, spiraling arpeggios.
In both improvisations, Mr.
Jarrett spent some time toying with pentatonic lines over unchanging harmony, and he ended the second with a marchlike rhythmic pattern under a roving, modal, flamencolike melody.


G.M. to Delay Introductions of Several Vehicles
The General Motors Corporation said yesterday that several new vehicles, including its next generation of mini-vans, would reach showrooms three to six months later than it had planned.
G.M. portrayed the decision as a result of a routine reappraisal of product schedules.
But Wall Street analysts said G.M.'s seven-month struggle to introduce two new small cars had diverted engineers from the other vehicle programs, contributing to the delay.


NEW JERSEY DAILY BRIEFING;
A new park, walking trails, boat slips, a gazebo, snack bar and security office: right now, they are just part of a scale model in Mayor Peter J. Sica's office.
But the borough has received nearly $1 million from the state toward the $2 million waterfront renovation project and will borrow the rest from the state.
Construction could be completed in two years.


Man Who Killed a Couple In Larchmont Plans to Marry
On Wednesday, the day after Paul Cox was sentenced for killing a couple who lived in the Larchmont, N.Y., home where he had grown up, his girlfriend went to the town clerk's office in Mount Pleasant and applied for a license to marry him.
Katy Davis, a 20-year-old accounting major at Lehigh University in Bethlehem, Pa., has known Mr.
Cox, 27, for five years.
She began dating him after his first trial ended in a hung jury in June, while he was under house arrest in his parents' home.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Bell Atlantic Wins Right To Carry Video Nationally A Federal judge gave Bell Atlantic the right to compete directly with cable television companies by transmitting video programs across the country.
The other six regional telephone companies are expected to win similar permission within a few months.
All of them are already creating television programming operations, either by themselves or in alliances with entertainment companies.


CHRONICLE
WILLIAM KENNEDY SMITH is returning to public life.
On Monday, he will take part in a news conference at the Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago about a curriculum he helped write on fetal alcohol syndrome.


Opening the Fed's Doors From Inside; Alan Blinder Preaches Communication at Tight-Lipped Central Bank
What is most striking about Alan S. Blinder's large, sunny office at the Federal Reserve is how quiet it is.
That's partly tradition.
The men and women who set the nation's interest rates don't drop in on one another very often.
But for Mr.
Blinder, who came aboard last summer as the Fed's vice chairman, hoping to make his voice heard, the isolation was a big obstacle.
"I thought there would be more governor-to-governor chitchat," Mr.
Blinder said in an interview.
"I thought the staff would be walking in to my office more, telling me, 'You ought to know about this; you ought to know about that.' That happens to some extent, but not nearly as much as I had imagined it would."


A Remodeling Tip
To the Editor:
Re "How to Avoid Remodeling Disasters" (Your Money page, March 11): I would suggest another precaution.
Have the contractor or architect prepare a floor plan with elevations and detailed specifications.
A drawing showing locations, dimensions and materials can help a homeowner settle unexpected issues.
The homeowner might post the drawing on the wall for the craftsmen to see.
PETER J. SHERMAN  Atlanta, March 11, 1994


To Our Readers
With this issue, The Times introduces an expanded Saturday business section with increased news coverage and more comprehensive financial tables.
Coming at the beginning of each weekend, the expanded section will offer more thorough analysis and coverage of Friday's events.
Speedier availability of data allows the publication of some weekly financial figures on Saturday rather than Sunday.


Citizens Utilities Co.(CZN.A,N) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Manhattan Has Little Margin for Error
An air of exuberance lingered over the Manhattan Jaspers a day after their stunning first-round upset of Oklahoma.
But reality is beginning to creep in.
Heart and New York City moxie will get you only so far in the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.
The Jaspers (26-4) will have to rely on skill, talent and guile to advance.
Their next challenge will come Saturday (2:20 P.M.) against Arizona State (23-8) at the Pyramid.


Nationalist Fever Helps Heat Up Another Latin Border
In another outbreak of Latin America's new nationalist fever, Venezuelan soldiers swept through a border area this week, rounded up about 1,000 illegal Colombian immigrants, burned some of their houses and crops and deported them to Colombia.
The expulsions were a reprisal for a cross-border raid three weeks ago by Colombian guerrillas that left eight Venezuelan Navy marines dead and four wounded.


On His Day, St. Patrick Is Claimed by All
The only unusual event on St.
Patrick's Day in Ireland today was the assertion by the Rev.
Ian Paisley, the hard-line Protestant political leader, that the eponymous holy man was a Protestant.
"The Roman Catholics believe he was a Roman Catholic," Mr.
Paisley, head of the Democratic Unionist Party in predominantly Protestant Northern Ireland, said in an interview with the overwhelmingly Roman Catholic Irish Republic's national television.
"I know he was a Protestant. So I think we should have St. Patrick's Day as a national holiday, so they can do what they like with facts of history."


Iraq Holding 2 Americans Seized Near Kuwaiti Border
The State Department said today that Iraq is holding two Americans who apparently strayed from Kuwait into Iraq by mistake earlier in the week.
The two civilians were working for an American company in Kuwait, Administration officials said, and were visiting friends near the Iraqi border when they lost their bearings.


After Long Debate, Vaccine For Chicken Pox Is Approved
After years of controversy and delay, Federal officials yesterday approved the first vaccine in the United States to prevent chicken pox, one of the most contagious childhood diseases.
Saying the vaccine was 70 percent to 90 percent effective in preventing the viral infection, the Food and Drug Administration gave Merck &amp; Company of Whitehouse Station, N.J., approval to market the chicken pox vaccine for children 1 or older.
The vaccine, known as Varivax, will be available in about six weeks and cost doctors $39 a shot, the company said.


Diplomacy Can Solve Atlantic Fishing Dispute
To the Editor:
Re "Canada and Spain Face Off Over Fishing Zone" (news article, March 12), concerning the Canadian-European Union fishing conflict, may I point out the following in relation to charges of "overfishing":


On Great Benches, Finding Sweet Pleasures of Doing Nothing
AS the weather turned gentle, the Old Guy decided to check out the benches and set an example for the passively challenged.
He had long been aware that New Yorkers, who excel at so many things, are inept at doing nothing.
By and large they are much too purposeful.
The bitter truth is that not many here appreciate dolce far niente, the sweetness of doing nothing.
They would probably say nothing doing to doing nothing.
In terms of watching the world go by, we lag behind many lands.
Many of us do not even know enough to take naps in the afternoon.


Review/Fashion; A Mature Mugler, Demeulemeester and Lang
When the fake snow had stopped falling and the confetti began instead, someone turned off James Brown's microphone and his lips moved noiselessly.
Four male go-go dancers in diamond G-strings jumped off their pedestals to dance with models in nude diamond-speckled bodysuits, and Tippi Hedren faced a new horror -- of toppling off her stiletto heels.
That was the finale to Thierry Mugler's show.
Mr.
Mugler's 20th-anniversary blowout, which he spent six months preparing, had every insane element that most people in the fashion business might admit, in a moment of weakness, drew them to it in the first place.


France Offers Plan to Bail Out Credit Lyonnais For $27 Billion
In what is almost certain to be the largest single bank bailout in history, the French Government announced today its long-awaited plan to rescue Europe's biggest financial institution, Credit Lyonnais, from an estimated $10 billion in losses.
Economy Minister Edmond Alphandery presented the hotly debated plan at a news conference this afternoon, in which he promised that although it calls for huge long-term loan guarantees by the French Government, Credit Lyonnais would eventually pay back all Government aid out of future earnings.


Four Charged With Theft Via Computer
They met via the Internet, four college students with a common goal: getting rich quick.
Using credit card numbers they had stolen with the aid of a specialized computer program, the four went on a one-year, $100,000 shopping spree, the police said, buying everything from samurai swords and rare coins to peanut brittle and computer systems, piling them up to the ceiling in their homes.


Religion and Frivolity Mingle on Fifth Avenue


Small Rise Gives the Dow Its 3d Record of the Week
It was a bad day for the dollar, but Wall Street did not notice as the Dow Jones industrial average and the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index inched up to new records for the third time this week.
The dollar fell against most leading currencies, as rumors of Spain's imminent withdrawal from Europe's currency system prompted a flight to German marks.


Raid Shuts Down Drug Lab
In one of the largest drug busts in the history of Morris County, detectives raided a so-called speed lab in Parsippany, seizing 64 gallons of amphetamine base that County Prosecutor Michael Murphy said could be used to manufacture narcotics with a street value of over $500,000.
Twelve men and 2 women were arrested.


Corrections
A brief report in the Company News column of Business Day on March 10 about a stock split by Valujet Airlines Inc. misstated the location of the company's headquarters.
It is Atlanta, not Milford, Ohio.


Huskies? Why Worry, Virginia Tech Says
On Thursday night, after its 62-52 victory over St.
Joseph's, the Virginia Tech women's team returned from its locker room to watch Connecticut play Maine.
Virginia Tech's players wanted to stay for the whole game.
At halftime, their coach, Carol Alfano, said enough was enough and took them back to their hotel.
"You didn't need more than a half," Alfano said, "to see what they can do."


Yale and Mr. Bass's $20 Million Gift
No self-respecting educational institution can allow an outsider -- no matter how well-meaning or generous -- to dictate its education priorities.
So Yale University had no choice but to return $20 million to Lee Bass after he insisted on having a say in the hiring of faculty.
The saga of Mr.
Bass's gift promises to become a cautionary primer for both donors and needy universities.
Donors can learn from Mr.
Bass's experience that it is probably a bad idea, especially in dealing with an institution as venerable as Yale, to try to use a gift to influence a school's educational direction.


Bilingual Schools Can Work
The leaders of New York City's public schools have conceded that bilingual education is not working -- a conclusion that many of us with commitments to bilingualism have resisted for years, even as evidence of failure has piled up in the form of more and more young New Yorkers hobbled by their bilingual classes.
The current movement against bilingual education was spurred by a report from the New York City Board of Education released last fall, which confirmed what many in the schools had figured out by watching bilingual education in New York let down student after student.
The report found that students in bilingual programs, which cost the city more than $300 million a year, did not perform as well academically as students in English-only classes.


Corrections
An article in Weekend on Friday about sightseeing at West Point included an erroneous figure supplied by West Point Tours for national presidents among the military academy's graduates.
There were five, not four, including Gen.
Anastasio Somoza Debayle, who graduated in 1946 and became the dictator of Nicaragua.
He was assassinated in Paraguay in 1980.


Safety Audit of USAir Recommends 30 Changes
An independent study commissioned by USAir said today that the airline was operated safely, but it made 30 recommendations for changes in flight, training and maintenance procedures, some echoing findings made by Federal investigators over several years.
The airline ordered the study to reassure the flying public after the crash of USAir Flight 427 in Pittsburgh last Sept. 8, the fifth fatal crash for the airline in five years.
That crash killed all 132 people aboard the Boeing 737-300 flying from Chicago to Pittsburgh.
The cause has yet to be determined.


Moshe Brilliant, 79, A Times Reporter In Israel 38 Years
Moshe Brilliant, a contributing correspondent for The New York Times in Israel for 38 years, died yesterday in Tel-Hashomer Chaim Sheba Hospital in Tel Aviv.
He was 79.
The cause was complications from a series of illnesses, his family said.


No Charges For Officers In '94 Killing
A grand jury has decided not to file criminal charges against police officers involved in the fatal shooting of a Brooklyn teen-ager in early 1994, prosecutors said yesterday.
The youth, Shu'aib Abdul-Latif, who was 17 and the son of a prominent Muslim cleric in the New York area, was killed after 11 officers responded to a 911 call reporting a man with a gun in the basement of a building in the East New York section of Brooklyn.


After 54 Years of Waiting, Rangers Late for President
The Rangers waited 54 years for the Stanley Cup.
Their White House reception was delayed several months by a labor lockout.
When they finally got their date in the Rose Garden this afternoon, President Clinton had to wait 90 minutes to honor them.
"That curse can't leave us," said goalie Glenn Healy.
"Just when you think you've got it beat, it took one last dying bite."


No Headline
"The longer it lasts, you see, the harder it will be for anyone on either side to pick up a gun. We're all getting used to living like this, without the bombs and the killings. Even the normalcy is beginning to seem normal." -- PATRICK GORDON, celebrating peace and St.
Patrick's Day in Northern Ireland.  [ 1:3. ]


Books-A-Million Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Unruly Juror and a Phony Bomb: Simpson Trial Is Disrupted Again
The removal of a juror secretly writing a book on the case slowed down O. J. Simpson's trial today, and a fake St.
Patrick's Day pipe bomb planted 5,000 miles from Ulster briefly stopped it altogether.
But when testimony resumed, a police detective described how blood drops and a swollen knuckle convinced him that Mr.
Simpson was a killer.
Judge Lance A. Ito, citing the stress and strain on all involved, recently decreed that Friday court sessions should be restricted to half days.
But that does not mean that they are any less eventful.


UConn and Bearcats: Pressers vs. Pressers
The field has shrunk, the pretenders sent home, the level of talent balanced and the national collegiate tournament has been reduced to basics.
"Our whole team is confident that no matter who we play or who we draw, we would try to set the tone and try to let them get into a running game with us," said Donny Marshall, the Connecticut co-captain.
"We'll see who can run harder, faster and longer."


N.L.R.B. Moving Fast; Negotiations Are Not
The baseball strike, now in its eighth month, has attracted so much notoriety that the five members of the National Labor Relations Board will depart from their usual procedure in deciding the board's next step.
As expected, Fred Feinstein, the board's general counsel, asked the board today for authorization to seek an injunction in Federal court that would force the owners to restore salary arbitration and competitive bidding for free agents.


Sanderson Farms Inc.(SAFM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Chaparral Steel Co.(CSM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Police, Not Eviction, Can End Clinic Violence
To the Editor:
The eviction case between Long Island Gynecological Services and its landlord (news article, March 10) provides a perfect illustration of the strategy employed by the anti-choice movement to deny women their legal right to abortion.
Using harassment, intimidation and violence, these self-proclaimed arbiters of morality are reducing the availability of abortion services.


Leslie Fay to Sell Dress, Sportswear and Retail Business
The Leslie Fay Companies, the apparel manufacturer operating under bankruptcy protection, said yesterday that it was putting its dress, sportswear and retail businesses on the block.
Leslie Fay's crown jewel, Sassco, which makes the Kasper by A.S.L. line of women's suits, is not being offered, but a spokesman said the company would entertain offers for it as a whole.
Leslie Fay has been negotiating since January to sell Sassco to its president, Arthur S. Levine, and Ira Heckler, a Leslie Fay director.


President of Serbia: A Pendulum Halted in Mid-Arc
During a recent spell in prison, the leader of Serbia's extreme nationalist Radical Party taught wardens and other inmates rousing songs about the day President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia hangs from a pylon in central Belgrade.
"It was my best spell ever in prison," said the party leader, Vojislav Seselj, who was once a close ally of Mr.
Milosevic.
"The songs were really popular with the guards. One had a chorus about Milosevic hanging there and all his secret police were crying."


A Mall With Airs; Will Classical Columns Fill Cash Registers in Westchester?
"The Westchester" sounds more like the name for a developer's colonial-style tract house than a shopping mall, but then again, this place was designed to represent a kind of suburban ideal.
With an eventual roster of 150 mainly upscale stores, including Nordstrom's and Neiman Marcus; a mix of valet parking and self-parking for 3,200 cars; marble floors, marble fountains, Doric columns and three glass-domed atriums, The Westchester is suburbia trying to be both grand and easy.
The problem is that this mall, which opened yesterday, is in a place that is neither grand nor easy: at the edge of White Plains, a troubled city whose downtown has struggled for years with a host of urban problems.
No one is surprised that this $260 million mall was not called "The White Plains." As much as Westchester County connotes the height of suburban affluence, the city itself has come to stand for the suburban downtown's shabbier underside.


To Ride After Midnight
To the Editor:
It would be nice if people like David N. Rackmales (letter, March 9) told the whole story about comparing subways, instead of just the parts they like.
The subways in Moscow, Mexico City and Paris are all subsidized at the national level.
New York City receives less Government subsidy than the smaller, newer, allegedly better-maintained subways in the rest of the United States.


Mom-and-Pop Travel Agencies Fight to Survive
On one wall of the Travel Wise agency here are rows of glossy brochures beckoning adventurers to the Himalayas, lovers to the Caribbean and families to Disney World.
And there are plenty of pictures of Hawaii, Europe and other places that also promise once-in-a-lifetime vacations.
These days, vacations are something Carol A. Poppel, Travel Wise's owner, sends clients on but no longer takes herself.


Jones' First Defense Tonight
ROY JONES JR. makes the first defense of his supermiddleweight championship tonight against ANTOINE BYRD.
Jones has the earning potential of close to $10 million a year from an HBO contract: three fights a year for six years, the cable network's richest outside the heavyweight division.
Jones, the International Boxing Federation champion, is 27-0 with 23 knockouts.


Husband's Gun Killed Wife
A ballistics report confirmed yesterday that the bullet that killed Brenda Wolf in a botched jewelry store holdup on Tuesday was fired by her husband, Jeffrey, not by one of the robbery suspects.
The report was issued on the day that some 50 people attended Mrs.
Wolf's funeral service in East Brunswick and one suspect, Marqis Kinnon, was arraigned in Superior Court in Somerville on charges of felony murder and robbery.
The Somerset County Prosecutor, Nicholas J. Bissell Jr., said his office planned further interviews with Mr.
Wolf.


'Warlock' Draws Prison Term
A self-proclaimed warlock was sentenced in Ocean County Superior Court to a seven-year term in prison and lifetime community supervision for sexually assaulting three teen-age Brick Township girls in 1993.
The man, Carl Truchel of Queens, convinced the girls he was a high priest of a religion whose ceremonial witchcraft included sexual acts.


A Cellist Not Afraid to Share
In a handful of New York recitals since he won the Naumburg Cello Competition in 1986, Andres Diaz has proven to be an individualist who recalculates his approach to color, dynamics and phrasing from piece to piece.
Since 1989, he has performed and recorded regularly with Samuel Sanders, who is also Itzhak Perlman's regular accompanist, and because Mr.
Diaz evidently takes the enlightened view that much of the cello repertory is chamber music, their collaborations are billed as the Diaz-Sanders Duo.
Mr.Diaz and Mr.
Sanders had a few minor obstacles to overcome on Tuesday evening.
The salonlike quality of the Renee Weiler Hall at Greenwich House Music School creates an ideally intimate atmosphere, but the school's piano needs tuning and probably an oil and lube job as well: the loud squeaking of one of its pedals became an intrusive obbligato in an otherwise stunning account of Beethoven's Sonata in G minor (Op. 5, No. 2).


An Ebullient Cardinal Stars in an Irish Parade
With "childlike delight," a rock star's celebrity and sensible black shoes, John Cardinal O'Connor yesterday became the first archbishop to lead the Irish up Fifth Avenue for a St.
Patrick's Day Parade.
He drew some of the most enthusiastic crowds in recent memory, marchers and spectators buoyed by a brightness of spirit that seemed to have absorbed the rancor and divisiveness of the recent past.


CHRONICLE
In a plea agreement, the actor CHRISTIAN SLATER was ordered to spend three days working with homeless children through the Children's Health Project, the A.P. reported yesterday.
The sentence, imposed by Judge James Griffin in Queens Criminal Court, settled an outstanding charge of weapon possession.


Clinton Now Likely to Mark V-E Anniversary in Moscow
After a new gesture by President Boris N. Yeltsin, Administration officials said today that President Clinton was likely to go to Moscow on May 9 to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Allied victory in Europe.
Mr.
Clinton said today that no final decision had been made.
But he told reporters that he appreciated the gesture from Mr.
Yeltsin, who said on Thursday that he would eliminate a show of military force from the main ceremony to satisfy White House concerns.


Corrections
A photograph of a nebula in the "Sunday" pages on March 5 carried an incomplete credit.
The photograph was taken with the NASA Hubble Space Telescope and was digitally enhanced by Roger Ressmeyer.


A Tale of the Holocaust From an Unlikely Source
"MARTHA AND I," A German-French movie voted most popular at the San Francisco International Film Festival in 1991, is finally coming to American movie houses.
During the years since its California screening, the movie has been seen only at film festivals, where it has won acclaim for its stars, Marianne Sagebrecht (who gained recognition for her roles in "Sugarbaby" in 1985 and "Bagdad Cafe" in 1988) and Michel Piccoli ("May Fools," 1990).
Now audiences can see "Martha and I" beginning Friday at the Quad Cinema in Greenwich Village.
For its director, Jiri Weiss, who is 83, an American release is the long-awaited final step for a movie that was steeped in controversy.


To Help the Homebound G.E.D. Is on Television
FOR adults who cannot attend classes, G.E.D. on TV is a new Boces program to prepare students for the General Educational Development test.
The program is primarily for homebound adults, its director at Nassau Tech, Sharon Douglas, said.
The audience includes, she added, mothers with children, people without transportation and people who live in special centers like nursing homes.


Are You Your Own Boss? Only if the I.R.S. Says So
IT'S a question, it might seem, that only an accounting professor could love: when is a job a job, and when is it a business deal?
But for five million Americans who consider themselves their own boss, the issue is much more than an academic curiosity.
It's a matter of money.


2-Year-Old Slovakia Toddling Toward Democracy
Slovakia, which recently celebrated its second anniversary of independence, is stumbling toward democracy and an open economy as Europe's youngest nation.
It has had three Governments, two of which have been led by the current Prime Minister, Vladimir Meciar, who in his determination not to lose power again has shown an authoritarian bent that alarms the opposition, foreign governments and potential investors.


Air Time for Jordan


On Line, and Inside Credit Card Security
It's every bank's headache: a criminal running loose with a fake credit card number.
But imagine if anyone could create numbers that would pass initial scrutiny -- and then churn them out by the thousands.
Over the last year, an obscure computer program designed to create card numbers has begun circulating on major on-line computer services, like America Online and the myriad electronic bulletin boards around the country.


Corrections
A chart on March 7 about the tenures of the presidents of the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation misstated the disposition of a case against John J. McLaughlin, who was president in 1984 and 1985.
Although he was convicted of charges involving the theft of profits from a private investment fund, the verdict was later set aside by an appeals court, which ruled that the prosecutors had not proved jurisdiction in the case.


Restaurant Time Beckons in Hamptons
LAST summer East End restaurants moved eastward, became cheaper and reached the end of the Tuscan trail.
This spring, as the Hamptons start to stir, it looks like more of the same.
Two major restaurants will open in East Hampton in May.
One, the East Coast Oyster Bar and Restaurant, an 80-seat raw bar and fish grill, is to open on May 15, and a landmark restaurant, Spring Close House, is being revived and is planning a May 1 opening.


Q and A
Giving Christo a Hand


Beyond the Shroud
LAST AUTUMN, IN A FLIGHT OF ANGRY rhetoric, I accused the three main television networks of drawing a great shroud across the mind of America and leading the public back toward isolationism.
I observed that the dwindling TV staffs abroad still report an occasional massacre or famine but that most evenings the newscasts and magazine shows treat the five billion folks beyond our borders as inconsequential and irrelevant.
That conclusion now requires well, not correction but, as the old, incorrigible New Yorker magazine would say, amplification.
Many readers reported similar resentment of television's withdrawal from the world and also of the meager diet of international news in most newspapers.
An energetic demurral, however, came from NBC's Tom Brokaw, a frequent foreign flier and student of both the world and its treatment on the tube.
He cited some recent television reports that defied the trend I was bemoaning.
More insistently, he argued that television and journalism are not so much the causes of a new American isolationism as its victims.


Art in Aisle 3, by Lingerie, And Feel Free to Browse
HERE'S A QUIZ:
* Where did the first Cubist art show in America take place?
*
What institution owned the largest collection of French salon paintings at the turn of the century?


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-21  AFRICA'S NEEDS UNMET  As sub-Saharan countries face grave crises of debt, poverty and religious militancy, Western leaders are telling them they will have to rely on their own resources. 1  PROBLEMS FOR CUBAN SPORTS  Cuban officials admit that sports programs are having severe problems because of the country's economic crisis and because the dismantled Eastern bloc is no longer providing free training.  1


Spring Artichokes And Asparagus
ON the cusp of spring, seasonal appetites turn from parsnips and butternut squash to artichokes and asparagus.
Although both of these are sold all year, they are at their most tender and most reasonably priced in spring.
Artichokes and asparagus can enhance scores of dishes.
But at the start of the season simplest is best.
Pencil-slim asparagus can be added raw to a salad or used for dipping.
The tiniest baby artichokes can be sliced paper thin and tossed with lemon juice, olive oil and shavings of Parmesan cheese for a classic Tuscan salad.


Rangers Are Fighting Mad After Third Consecutive Loss
Now, it's serious.
The Rangers have a three-game losing streak, matching their longest of the season, the first time this has happened since January.
After falling by 4-1 to the Capitals tonight at USAir Arena, the defending Stanley Cup champions are just one game above .500.
They are deeper in second place in the Atlantic Division, 4 points behind Philadelphia, and have fallen into fifth place in the Eastern Conference.
How low will they go?
Will there be a trade or a tirade from management or from somewhere in the rank and file?


The Missing Word
To the Editor:
Your reviewer, Paul Johnson, complains that Paul Preston, in his book "Franco: A Biography" (Feb. 19), "can't bring himself to say that Franco was intelligent or even clever." On the other hand, Mr.
Johnson can't bring himself to describe the Spanish dictator as a fascist.
Nowhere in his long review does Mr.
Johnson even use the word, nor does he ever note that the fascist conqueror of Spain subsequently sent his infamous Blue Division to fight alongside Hitler's Wehrmacht on the Eastern Front in World War II against our Soviet ally.
GEORGE F. NELSON  New York


Corrections
An article on page 43 of the Arts and Leisure section today about the link between department stores and museums misstates the location of Takashimaya.
It is on Fifth Avenue, not Madison Avenue.


Harper Makes Difference For Knicks
It was a typical Knicks-Nets game -- competitive, intense and dramatic.
In fact, it took an extra five minutes to settle last night's exciting affair.
The difference was a free throw by Derek Harper with 5.6 seconds to play that gave the Knicks a 92-91 overtime victory at Madison Square Garden.
The Knicks, who have won two consecutive games without Anthony Mason, are 3-1 against the Nets this season.


More Than a Footnote
To the Editor:
In her review of James Campbell's "Exiled in Paris" (Feb. 19), Deirdre Bair sums up the Glaswegian writer Alexander Trocchi as someone "who talked a better game than he wrote and who has become a footnote in literary history for persuading Jane Lougee . . . to invest her small inheritance in founding the literary magazine Merlin in 1952." That summation won't do.


Spring Artichokes And Asparagus
ON the cusp of spring, seasonal appetites turn from parsnips and butternut squash to artichokes and asparagus.
Although both of these are sold all year, they are at their most tender and most reasonably priced in spring.
Artichokes and asparagus can enhance scores of dishes.
But at the start of the season simplest is best.
Pencil-slim asparagus can be added raw to a salad or used for dipping.
The tiniest baby artichokes can be sliced paper thin and tossed with lemon juice, olive oil and shavings of Parmesan cheese for a classic Tuscan salad.


Ideas &amp; Trends: Name That Era; Pinpointing A Moment On the Map Of History
WHEN does an era end?
Sometimes a momentous event -- the beginning of the Civil War, the death of Franklin D. Roosevelt -- provides the definitive finale to what historians can later give a name -- the Antebellum period, the Age of Roosevelt.
The end of the Cold War had a literal end: on Dec. 25, 1991, the Soviet Union "went out of business," as the historian Michael Beschloss puts it, and the red flag was lowered over the Kremlin, never to be raised again.
But what about the era we find ourselves in now?
Historians and journalists operate on the assumption that world politics has entered a new phase, that we find ourselves in a pattern of events radically distinct from that of the last 50 years.
The trouble is, it doesn't yet have a compelling name.
The phrase routinely employed by political pundits -- the post-cold war era -- is tentative, vague; it lacks authority.
Unlike, say, the Era of Good Feelings (1815-1825), when the United States dwelled in apparent harmony, untroubled by foreign wars and prosperous at home, the tepid label we reflexively invoke these days carries a suggestion of self-doubt.
It's as if our own historical moment is somehow after the fact, overshadowed by the more significant era that preceded it.


March 12-18: Horror at Sea; Death Flights of a Dirty War: An Argentine Confesses
For 18 years, a retired Argentine Navy officer, Adolfo Francisco Scilingo, lived with a secret so horrible that he drank heavily and took tranquilizers to sleep.
Last week, Mr.
Scilingo came clean and confirmed what many Argentines have long suspected: that during the "dirty war" against subversion in the 1970's the military dictatorship disposed of hundreds of dissidents by throwing them, unconscious but alive, into the Atlantic Ocean.
Mr.
Scilingo, the first military person to publicly disclose details of such atrocities, said in an interview that he personally shoved 30 people into the sea from aircraft in 1977.
He estimates that between 1,500 and 2,000 people were killed during these "death flights."


The Oscars Upstaged (Almost)
IF 1994 WERE A MOVIE, IT WOULD HAVE BEEN called "Revenge of the Little Ones." Thirty-three Academy Award nominations this year -- including two for best picture, two for best actor, all five nominations for best supporting actress and all five for original screenplay -- went to films that were not made by the major studios.
And that's not counting all five nominees for best foreign-language film.
Paramount Pictures, a major studio with 17 nominations, had to settle for second to scrappy Miramax, an independent that had 22.
Those nominations and the box-office success of movies like Miramax's "Pulp Fiction" and Gramercy's "Four Weddings and a Funeral" have pushed independent films, not for the first time, into the spotlight.
Paradoxically, this has happened when the line separating studio and independent has become blurred.


Defense Against the Black-Legged Tick
THE threat of Lyme disease is real.
It demands that those who work outdoors take practical precautions, without ceasing to enjoy being outdoors.
Recognition of the illness began 20 years ago when the disease was identified by Allen Steere of the Yale University School of Medicine.
Dr.
Steere learned about several juvenile rheumatoid arthritis cases in the area of Old Lyme, many of them preceded by a bull's eye rash.
Further studies showed that the disease was caused by a bite from a particular black-legged tick.
The name of the region where the disease was first identified gave it its name.


A Familiar Ring
To the Editor:
In his article "In New Zealand, This Film Beats 'Jurassic Park,' "  [ Feb. 19 ] , Peter Brunette denies that Maoris in New Zealand have been treated the way blacks were in the United States and says that intermarriage has been common ever since Maoris and whites signed a peace treaty in 1940.


Isles Say Goodbye to Another One in Garden Farewell
What a fitting way to end this road trip.
In what will probably be their last visit to the relic known as Boston Garden, the Islanders today squandered their second 3-0 lead in three games and lost to the Bruins, 4-3.


Fertilize Trees, Test Soil for Acidity and Keep Seeding
Fertilize shade trees and evergreens, if you didn't last fall.
Take samples of soil from the garden to your local cooperative extension service to test its pH (a measure of alkalinity and acidity: 6.5 is good for vegetables) and fertility.
If the pH is below 6, which is too acidic for vegetables, spread ground limestone over the garden.
Ask for the name of a laboratory that tests for lead, if you are near old buildings with chipped paint.


Gardening Plots For City Families
A recent gardening column prompts these thoughts:
There's a growing trend of cities providing garden plots for families who live in apartments, condominiums, town houses and trailers and have no place to put their hands in the good earth.
At one such community garden project, the volunteer supervisor told me that each year there is a waiting list of people anxious to rent a plot.


Corrections
The Streetscapes column on March 5, consisting of questions and answers, referred incorrectly to the institution located in the 1890's on the block from 70th to 71st Streets between Madison and Park Avenues.
It was Presbyterian Hospital, not New York Hospital.
New York Hospital was then on 15th Street between Fifth and Sixth Avenues.


The Soul Needs Nourishment, Too
To the Editor:
When Edward Rothstein states that National Endowment for the Arts funding criteria should be "elite and nontherapeutic"  [ "The N.E.A. Is Elitist, True. It Should Be," Feb. 26 ] , he means that art should be judged and financed on a purely esthetic basis without considering social policy and utilitarian criteria, including art's "therapeutic" value.


Eleanor Holdridge, David Donaldson
Eleanor Holdridge, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence B. Holdridge of Owings Mills, Md., was married yesterday in Baltimore to David J. Donaldson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
David P. Donaldson of Ipswich, Mass.
Dr.
Michael S. Franch, a leader of the Ethical Culture Society, performed the ceremony at the Belvedere.
Ms.
Holdridge, 30, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College and is studying for a master's degree in theater directing at the Yale University School of Drama.
She is also a co-founder and the producing artistic director of the Red Heel Theater Company in Philadelphia.


POSTINGS: 118 Markers for Historic District; In Jackson Heights, Signs of the Old Times
The first two of 118 terra cotta-colored street signs are to go up in the Jackson Heights Historic District in Queens on Wednesday.
More than 4,500 similar signs, which identify every intersection as part of a historic district, have been put up along the streets of 61 of the city's 66 such districts by the New York Landmarks Preservation Foundation, which began doing so in 1989. (Queens's other historic district, tiny Hunters Point, has only three signs.)


You Mean, She Gets the Cutest Boy? Oh, Go On
Circle of Friends  Minnie Driver, Chris O'Donnell, Saffron Burrows, Geraldine O'Rawe, Colin Firth Directed by Pat O'Connor  PG 104 minutes


The Yen Bubble Keeps Growing
It is the bubble of the decade, and there is no telling when it will stop expanding.
But someday it will, and then it will burst.
The bubble is in the Japanese yen, a currency that, on the basis of comparative purchasing power, has gone from unreasonably high to ridiculously overvalued.


Golf Courses Proliferate, But Welcome Isn't Assured
PING.
The sound is everywhere these days.
Even here, hard by the Hudson River, with the Manhattan skyline looming like a scoreboard, on a blustery, bone-chilling March afternoon.
"It's like this every weekend," said David Borngesser, the manager of Port Imperial Golf Center, a deluxe two-tiered driving range, putting green and miniature golf course that can be reached by ferry from Manhattan.
"Sometimes even at lunchtime during the week."


Study Abroad: How, Where
STUDENTS entering college increasingly expect overseas study to be a part of the experience, according to Gary M. Rhodes, program coordinator for overseas studies at the University of Southern California.
The Institute for International Education says the number has risen for 10 years and that 71,000 students in a recent count were attending school abroad.
The number and diversity of the programs is increasing, which in turn makes a wise choice more difficult.
Mr.
Rhodes said that criteria for choosing should start with the student's academic and personal goals, and how these relate to the location of the program.
Next come the issue of getting credit; the level of language required; the type of housing; the cost; the administration of the program (including adequate insurance coverage); its application procedures, and what sort of cross-cultural preparation and re-entry guidance is provided.


From Bronx to Big Sky, Weber State Guard Makes It Big
It was not a school they talked about in Echo Park, where Ruben Nembhard learned his basketball on a New York City playground.
Malik Sealy went to St.
John's to play for Lou Carnesecca.
Adrian Autry went upstate to play for Syracuse in the Carrier Dome.
Jerry Walker signed on with Seton Hall.
Always, the Big East was the conference that got the big talk.
On that playground, no one had heard of Weber State.
Not Sealy, or Autry, and definitely not Nembhard.
They did not know how to pronounce the name -- people tend to call it "Webber," rather than the correct "Wee-ber" -- and they certainly did not know that Ogden, Utah, was the school's hometown.


Spring Rite: The 5 A.M. Line for Kindergarten
Bertha Pantoja stood alone in front of Public School 69 in Jackson Heights at 4 A.M. on Monday.
Surrounded by darkness and wrapped in a wool blanket and scarf, she looked a little odd.
But as the hours passed, and the line behind her grew, she looked smarter and smarter.
And at 9 A.M., with more than 200 people behind her as the official kindergarten registration process began, she smiled.


3d Outpost for Trattoria With a Pedigree
TRATTORIA Grasso has gone from pretty and petite to elegant and spacious.
What began as a jewel-box cafe on a side street in Huntington Village two years ago is now a family of three.
Last year Trattoria Grasso Due, a storefront, opened in Cold Spring Harbor.
The latest Grasso has settled into a lovely 137-year-old Italianate mansion in Roslyn Village.
The newcomer is a charmer with rose walls, carpeting and plush seating on the second floor and a more casual country look featuring floral fabrics and tile floors downstairs.
Wood-framed antique mirrors attract attention throughout.


The Nation; Abortion Foes Worry About Welfare Cutoffs
THE debate over abortion has been a fault line in American life for more than two decades, separating friend from friend, feminist from fundamentalist, Democrat from Republican -- and increasingly, Republican from Republican.
But now a dispute about what consequences proposed welfare revisions portend for abortion threatens not only to splinter conservative Republicans but to strain their ties to traditional allies like the Catholic Church and the National Right to Life Committee.
The dispute also is creating common ground for new partnerships.


Northern Italian at the Westport Station
WHEN the modest little storefront restaurant called Maria's Trattoria opened in Norwalk some years ago, no one could have guessed it would spawn four offshoots.
But entering Osteria della Stazione, across from the railroad station in Westport, was like going home.
The Osteria has kept the same configuration as its predecessors: a bar area at the entrance, a small dining room with two large niches for floral displays, and banquettes beneath a large mirror.
And, like the rest of the Maria family, the Osteria features an Italian menu that highlights northern Italian favorites, with several pleasing surprises.


Nancie J. Ellis, Geoffrey S. Domm
Nancie Jean Ellis, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James H. Ellis of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday evening in New York to Geoffrey Shepherd Domm, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Harry Domm of Glenside, Pa.
Rabbi Ellen Greenspan performed the ceremony in the Rainbow Room's Pegasus Suite.
The bride, 33, is keeping her name.
She is a director of market research at New York Life Insurance Company.
She graduated from Haverford College and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.


Change Found in Subways: Panhandling Is Down; 14-Month Transit Crackdown Removes Aggressive Beggars and Annoying Regulars
Larry Connor, a muscular man who worked the F train, is gone now.
Sometimes wearing aluminum-foil antennae on his head, he always played the saxophone -- badly -- and would threaten to continue until passengers donated money.
Then there was Dean Mandel, who rode the No. 1 train demanding money, angrily throwing back dimes and quarters if he deemed the contributions inadequate.
And Maria Deluca, a well-dressed woman who went car to car on the No. 4, claiming daily that she had been robbed and needed money to get home.


For Police, It's Now Queens North and South
For as long as anyone can remember, Manhattan and Brooklyn have been divided into two police commands, north and south.
Now Queens has followed suit.
Since March 1, the borough's 16 precincts have been split between two chiefs.
Chief Gertrude LaForgia, a former precinct commander in the Bronx and the department's highest-ranking woman, leads Queens North.
Her Queens South counterpart is Chief Robert F. Burke, who had led the Queens Patrol Borough.


Corrections
The Streetscapes column on Feb. 19, about the Park Avenue railroad viaduct, misstated the date of the replacement of the rail bridge over the Harlem River.
It was 1956, not 1940.


Miss Holtz, Mr. Cooperman
Jodi Beth Holtz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Holtz of St.
James, L.I., was married last evening to Wayne Manning Cooperman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leon G. Cooperman of Short Hills, N.J.
Rabbi Elliott T. Spar performed the ceremony at the Pierre in New York.
Mrs.
Cooperman, 28, teaches the fifth grade at the Brooklyn Friends School.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a master's degree in education from the Bank Street College of Education.
Her father is the managing partner of Holtz Rubenstein &amp; Company, an accounting firm in Melville, L.I.


Ecomania: Reprive for The Trees
Pesticide use has been banned in Berkeley, Calif., for more than 10 years, so to fight aphids the city frequently sprays water on 344 infested tulip poplar trees that line University Avenue, the city's main thoroughfare.
But the aphids keep coming back, and Berkeley merchants and the public have been distressed by the offensive dribble of sticky aphid secretions on sidewalks, cars and customers.
So the city proposed removing the trees, and putting something else in their place.


What? Pork Bellies Back in Fashion?
SOME things are just too painful to remember -- like the 1970's.
Sure, "Saturday Night Live" was funny back then.
But Barry Manilow was king, pet rocks were hot and everyone who was anyone sported a white suit spun from petroleum distillates.
As for investing, well, double-digit inflation, the energy crisis and the 1973-74 stock market meltdown made it, for most people, a decade to forget.
But there was one way to make big bucks in the '70's -- and like John Travolta, Jimmy Carter and the entire egregious Brady Bunch, it seems to be making a comeback.
The trick, back then, was to invest in "stuff" -- art and real estate and diamonds, but especially the things that Wall Street lumps together and calls "commodities," like pork bellies and gold bullion and soy beans and barrels of oil.


Johnson Handled Nominations Better
To the Editor:
Re "Nominee for C.I.A., in a Controversy, Abandons His Bid" (front page, March 11):


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
SOUP AT A BENEFIT
Belva Plain, who dealt with domestic violence in her novel "Whispers," will be among those attending the Soup Kitchen Fund Raiser on Tuesday in New Brunswick.
It is sponsored by Women Aware, a nonprofit group offering shelter and support to victims of domestic violence.
Ms.
Plain will be one of the judges who will choose the blue-ribbon winner from among 15 restaurants supplying soups that will be served at the event.
Radio personalities will also be among the judges.
Breads and cookies donated by 12 bakeries will also be served during the event from 6 to 8 P.M. at the Hyatt Regency Hotel, 2 Albany Street.


In the Bronx, Geometry to Expressionism, With a Few Detours
THE Prezant Gallery here is like none other, if only for being in the uncommonly cozy house of Jack Prezant and his wife, Toby.
But it has also been the setting for several lively exhibitions of which "Selected Artists" is the current example.
Given the proximity of Lehman College and Mr.
Prezant's position as a docent in its art gallery, there is no surprise in finding that most of the exhibitors are connected with the college -- as teachers, former students or as members of the art gallery's staff.
Still, the relationship ends there, for the work of the artists, most of whom have shown in Manhattan, runs the gamut from geometric representation to Expressionism, abstract and figural, with a few detours in between.


Support for A.&amp;.P. Plan In Tenafly
This letter is in response to the Feb. 19 Tenafly Journal article, "Residents Sue to Stop Plans for a Giant A.&amp;P."
I can unequivocally state that the majority of Tenafly residents are in solid support behind the A.&amp;P. project and offer more than 3,000 petition signatures gathered through neighborhood canvassing as evidence.
Moreover, in a recent Bergen County daily newspaper poll where borough citizens were asked to register their position on the project, the A.&amp;P. received a 98 percent approval rating.


UConn Cruises Past Cincinnati and Into the Sweet 16
The Connecticut Huskies have become the accidental tourists, finding themselves in that giddy location somewhere between oblivion and awareness, a helpful place to be during the National Collegiate Athletic Association basketball tournament.
They may never know how dangerous their West Regional game today could have been.
With their season reduced to as little as 40 fateful minutes, the Huskies performed as efficiently as they have all along in a 96-91 second-round victory over Cincinnati.


Haunting Visions From Peruvian Fields of the Dead
SKELETAL FIGURES WITH painted faces, hair dyed in a rainbow of hues and boldly striped miniskirts appear to float in space.
Their heads are spun backward; their hair is streaming behind them.
Holding aloft fan-shaped hearts, they look triumphant.
Modern fantasy or ancient myth?


SURFACING
FASHION  To cut or to cuff?
Since corduroys are fast becoming the alternative-of-choice to jeans, a little variety may be in order.
To put a spin on a flared leg or on a boot cut, downtowners turn the cuff up a few inches or cut the fabric and let it fray. (Frances Roberts for The New York Times)


A Chorus of Boos for the House of Blues


Five Retreats Among the Palazzi
ASK for assistance at a hotel desk in Florence, and rare is the blase stare that may greet visitors elsewhere.
Drop your key as you go out in the morning and the desk clerk may ask if you've heard about the latest exhibit at the Pitti Palace or the new lighting at the Accademia.
During a February visit, wonderfully peaceful in the off-season, I stayed in four hotels and visited one more, the Villa Cora.
The prices ranged widely, but all offered a gracious experience -- partly, perhaps, because there are fewer tourists at that time of year, but also, no doubt, because of the genuine courtesy and professionalism that prevail in the city's hotels.
Double rooms were $125 to $375 a night (prices calculated at 1,550 lire to the dollar).
Unless otherwise noted, breakfast (usually Continental) is the only meal served in the hotel; except at the Grand Hotel, it is included in the rate, along with tax and service.
It is always wise to reserve rooms as early as possible.


Parents, Schools And the 'Extras'
Re: "A New Way to Pay for School Extras" (Feb. 26): The energetic, enthusiastic fund-raising efforts of all these volunteers for their children and the schools they attend are commendable but misguided.


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday with an article about harpists rehearsing for a St.
Patrick's Day program misidentified the one shown alone at the left.
She was Teresa Cahill Principe, not Christina Livelli.


As Stocks Rally, So Do Funds
AFTER running in place for more than a year, stocks have finally surged, setting new highs and shrugging off stings like the collapse of Mexico and the diving dollar.
Indeed, in the last six weeks, mutual funds that mimic the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index have jumped 6.2 percent -- far more than they gained in all of 1994, according to data from Lipper Analytical Services.
In the vanguard of this rally has been a handful of funds that invest in the stocks of small companies.
The leaders also tend to share a liking for technology issues, which are maintaining their momentum after turning in the only strong performance in the market last year.
And most of them go in for stocks with rapidly growing earnings, rather than stocks that they can buy at bargain prices.


THE READINESS GAP. WHAT GAP?
Lawrence Korb correctly states that the exorbitant size and cost of our military cannot be justified by any realistic evaluation of potential threats to the United States.
Notwithstanding our need to downsize gradually and orderly, the "readiness gap" is a rhetorical device meant to obscure the mismatch between expenditures and threats in order to secure "make-work" programs for the military industrial complex.
Korb believes that this mismatch is the product of dishonesty in the military and inadequate control by "its civilian superiors" (due to Bill Clinton's political vulnerability).


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
AMONG THE LOWEST  OF THE DEAD  The Culture of Death Row.
By David Von Drehle.
Times Books/Random House, $25.


If the Market Hates It, He's Buying
Over the last decade, the Clipper Fund, a no-load growth fund run from Beverly Hills, Calif., by James A. Gipson, has put together a good record by searching for value, often among the stocks that Wall Street hates.
The fund stumbled a bit in 1994, losing 2.4 percent in a year when the hot sector was technology, an area where the fund rarely ventures.
But this year, through Friday, the fund is up 11.1percent.
When asked last week, Mr.
Gipson said he loved brokerage houses, thought some health care stocks were still good values despite their recent rally and generally found that some of the best companies were the best buys.
Floyd Norris


THE READINESS GAP. WHAT GAP?
Bravo for Lawrence J. Korb's article on the myth of the so-called "readiness gap" ("The Readiness Gap. What Gap?" Feb. 26).
I've had a bumper sticker I had printed on my car for some years now that says succintly what Korb says: "Reduce the Pentagon to a Triangle." TIM DYAS Ridgewood, N.J.


Washington Memo; Past Haunts Republicans On Set-Asides
As some Republicans step up their criticism of Federal affirmative-action efforts, they find themselves running into a potentially embarrassing problem: their own past.
Supporters of programs that seek to give minorities and women preferences for jobs, educational opportunities and government contracts point almost gleefully to a gentler racial climate of the past, when Republicans supported the programs almost as much as did Democrats and their allies in the civil-rights and feminist movements.


Mexico's Reforms Need Closer Scrutiny
To the Editor:
In a call for American support of Mexico's President, Ernesto Zedillo, Thomas Friedman (column, March 12) offers a summary of efforts to combat longstanding institutional problems and emerging challenges to the Zedillo administration.


New Tales From Old Americans
COMING TO LIGHT Contemporary Translations of the Native Literatures of North America.
Edited by Brian Swann. 801 pp.
New York: Random House. $30.


Sports of The Times; Who Thinks Jordan Can't Win It All?
IT was the fall of Michael Jordan's retirement, his temporary retirement, as it turns out.
He and some pals were tooling around California, just having fun, when they came upon a basketball court.
Jordan, who had been bored playing against Barkley and Ewing, decided he wanted to play a game of hoops.
"How is that done?" a corporate type asked.
Like, maybe you hand somebody your business card.
Or send a fax.


Excerpts From Statement by the Bishops
Following are excerpts from the statement by the Administrative Board of the United States Catholic Conference.
We strongly support genuine welfare reform which strengthens families, encourages productive work and protects vulnerable children.
We are not defenders of the welfare status quo, which sometimes relies on bureaucratic approaches, discourages work and breaks up families.
However, we oppose abandonment of the Federal Government's necessary role in helping families overcome poverty and meet their children's basic needs. . . .


3 Frequent Flier Plans Get New Partners
Three new partnership agreements among frequent flier plans have recently taken effect.
United Airlines has entered into a reciprocal arrangement with Thai Airways International.
Effective Feb. 1, members of United's Mileage Plus Program, (800) 421-4655, may accrue miles for flights taken on Thai Airways in business and first class, and may redeem air awards on all classes of service.
In return, members of Thai Airways' frequent flier program, Royal Orchid Plus, (800) 426-5204, may earn mileage and obtain awards on United flights in all classes of service.
Thai Airways has four weekly flights between Bangkok and Los Angeles via Seoul.


Cuba's Financial Crisis Erodes Sports Programs
As the Cuban weight lifter Rafael Gomez stood on a podium to hear his country's national anthem, the three gold medals around his neck clinked like champagne glasses raised in a toast.
Halfway through the 16-day Pan American Games, a hemispheric version of the Olympics, Cuba is exerting its usual dominance in sports like baseball and weight lifting.
It trails only the United States in the hunt for gold medals.
But a far more dramatic story is unfolding: the unprecedented admission by Cuban officials and athletes of the severity of the problems caused in sports by the island nation's worsening economic crisis and its political isolation.


BEST SELLERS: March 19, 1995
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
55
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
2
2
4
BORDER MUSIC, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A Texas rancher, trying to erase his Vietnam trauma, takes to the road with an exotic dancer.
3
3
39
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
4
4
6
ORIGINAL SIN, by P.D.
James. (Knopf, $24.) Adam Dalgliesh probes a case involving intrigue, malice and murder in a prestigious London publishing house.
5
1
OUR GAME, by John le Carre. (Knopf, $24.) Espionage, larceny and murder in Eastern and Western Europe in the post-cold war era.
6
5
5
DAISY-HEAD MAYZIE, by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $15.) In words and pictures, the story of a girl whose head unexpectedly sprouts a daisy.
7
14
2
THE GLASS LAKE, by Maeve Binchy. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The unspoken ties that bind a woman and her mother in a small Irish town.
8
12
4
THE CAT WHO BLEW THE WHISTLE, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Putnam, $21.95.) Aided by his two cats, Jim Qwilleran investigates embezzlement and a murder.
9
7
6
HOME SONG, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $23.95.) The appearance of his unknown biological son threatens the serenity of a man's family life.
10
8
136
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
11
9
6
ALWAYS A RECKONING, by Jimmy Carter. (Times Books/Random House, $18.) A collection of poems by the former President.
12
11
23
MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins, $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about aboriginal philosophy.
13*
2
ROGUE WARRIOR: GREEN TEAM, by Richard Marcinko and John Weisman. (Pocket, $23.) Navy Seals contend with a violent religious movement.
14
6
9
KISS THE GIRLS, by James Patterson. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The police detective Alex Cross pursues a serial killer and the kidnapper of his niece.
15
10
3
THE CUNNING MAN, by Robertson Davies. (Viking, $23.95.) A doctor uses shamanism and Platonism as well as scientific medicine in his practice.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
BREAKING THE SURFACE, by Greg Louganis with Eric Marcus. (Random House, $23.) The memoirs of the former Olympic diving champion.
2
3
23
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
3
2
12
SISTERS, by Carol Saline.
Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of sisters, reported in words and pictures.
4
4
5
THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House, $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the lives of all Americans.
5
1
6
I WANT TO TELL YOU, by O.J.
Simpson. (Little, Brown, $17.95.) The former football star, now on trial for murder, responds to letters he has received.
6
1
AN ANTHROPOLOGIST ON MARS, by Oliver Sacks. (Knopf, $24.) Seven tales about people who compensated for their neurological afflictions by constructing worlds of their own.
7*
9
54
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
8
10
28
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up comedian.
9
6
4
THE DISCIPLINE OF MARKET LEADERS, by Michael Treacy and Fred Wiersema. (Addison-Wesley, $25.) A discussion of marketing techniques.
10
5
6
RAGING HEART, by Sheila Weller. (Pocket, $18.) An account of the marriage of O.J. and Nicole Simpson.
11
7
8
INSIDE THE WHITE HOUSE, by Ronald Kessler. (Pocket, $23.) Anecdotes about events at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue during the past 30 years.
12
8
16
THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY, by Robert G. Hagstrom Jr. (Wiley, $24.95.) An account of the career of the man said to be the world's most successful investor.
13
11
65
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
14
13
24
JAMES HERRIOT'S CAT STORIES, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $16.95.) A collection of tales by the late Yorkshire veterinarian.
15
1
BEING DIGITAL, by Nicholas Negroponte. (Knopf, $23.) A discussion of ways computers will change our lives in the future.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
95
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
2
2
5
THE BEARDSTOWN LADIES' COMMON-SENSE INVESTMENT GUIDE. (Godin/Hyperion, $19.95.) Tips for successful investing from 16 Illinois women.
3
3
47
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
4
1
THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra. (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $12.95.) How to "generate wealth in all its forms."
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending March 4, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL: The Definitive Edition, by Anne Frank.
Edited by Otto H. Frank and Mirjam Pressler. (Doubleday, $25.) An expanded version that restores entries from the original diary, giving more texture and nuance to this renowned personal account of the Holocaust.
DREAMING: Hard Luck and Good Times in America, by Carolyn See. (Random House, $23.) The novelist's memoir of her family revels in a woman's point of view as it paints a portrait of drugs, drink and zany freedom set in California.
THE END OF REFORM: New Deal Liberalism in Recession and War, by Alan Brinkley. (Knopf, $27.50.) In the late 1930's, a distinguished historian argues, liberal interventionism lost its nerve and settled for underwriting consumer demand, with the results we now see around us.
FRANCO: A Biography, by Paul Preston. (Basic Books, $37.50.) A huge, all-inclusive life of the outright winner of Spain's civil war, the shrewd, lucky dictator of his country for almost 40 years.
IN LOVE WITH DAYLIGHT: A Memoir of Recovery, by Wilfrid Sheed. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) This writer's account of his battles with alcohol, drugs and cancer is grim, but it's told with whimsical wisdom and good-natured resolve.
MOVING HOUSE: Stories, by Pawel Huelle. (Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace, $18.95.) These tales by a Polish writer, which turn on the longings and workings of memory, are rooted in the highly idiosyncratic history of Gdansk.
SIX MYTHS OF OUR TIME: Little Angels, Little Monsters, Beautiful Beasts, and More, by Marina Warner. (Vintage, paper, $10.) Humorous, urgent essays on how myth and fiction enshrine and fix categories like the moral condition of children.
TERRIBLE HONESTY: Mongrel Manhattan in the 1920s, by Ann Douglas. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $25.) New York analyzed with broad scope and minute complexity as the locus of the national psyche when Americans attacked the conditioned responses of the pre-1914 world.
TOMORROW IS ANOTHER COUNTRY: The Inside Story of South Africa's Road to Change, by Allister Sparks. (Hill &amp; Wang, $22.) A South African journalist's fast-paced, gripping account of the process that led to the end of apartheid.
TOM PAINE: A Political Life, by John Keane. (Little, Brown, $27.95.) A good introduction to a difficult, often unlovable character, an effective propagandist of revolution (and, on the whole, liberty) in America, France and even England.
THE TUNNEL, by William H. Gass. (Knopf, $30.) This sprawling novel (652 pages) by an American master is all spun out of the head of its monstrous protagonist, a language-driven professor of fascist views who is as dreadful as he is plausible.
A VOID, by Georges Perec. (Harvill/HarperCollins, $24.) The letter E never occurs in this 1969 French novel or in its translation by Gilbert Adair; what does occur is a wildly amusing feast of puzzles, mind games and rules broken just to exhibit their latent existence.


Kara E. Keenan, Theodore Goldin
Kara Ellen Keenan, a daughter of William and Kay Keenan of Tempe, Ariz., and Theodore Goldin, a son of Dr.
Howard and Edna Goldin of Scarsdale, N.Y., were married yesterday at the Wrigley Mansion in Phoenix.
The Rev.
Alonso, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated, and Cantor Andrew Mayer took part in the ceremony.
The bride, 27, is the national accounts manager for 2Market, a computer-based shopping service in San Mateo, Calif.
She graduated from Arizona State University.
Her father retired as the general manager for distribution for the Armour Food Company in Phoenix.


Poland's Jews
To the Editor: In addition to Ruth Ellen Gruber's fine guide to "Remembering Poland's Jews" (Jan. 29), there is a collection of photographs at Auschwitz that should not be missed.
They show prisoners and their loved ones in better times.
The pictures were taken to Auschwitz by the prisoners in the belief, created by the Nazis, that they were being transported to the east for resettlement.
The pictures are now mounted on large album pages and stored in the first red brick barracks on the left past the gate with the slogan "Arbeit Mach Frei" -- "Work Makes You Free." In the Nazi period, the building was used as a brothel for the SS where Jewish women were compelled to serve before they were murdered.


Ecuador Is Reported to Hold 60 Peruvians Despite Cease-Fire
More than two weeks after Peru and Ecuador signed a cease-fire in their border dispute, human rights groups and the Peruvian Government estimate that over 60 Peruvians are still being detained in Ecuador, some on charges of spying and lacking proper identification, and others without any stated reason.
"There is no logical explanation for the way these people are being treated," said Francisco Soberon, director of the Association for Human Rights in Lima.


To Our Readers
With this section, The New York Times introduces expanded coverage of business on Sunday, and a special emphasis on personal finance.
The themes -- investing, spending and earning money -- reflect the growing importance of financial management in people's lives.
As working people become more responsible for their own retirement plans and as expectations of financial security recede, Americans increasingly need to grapple with complex spending and saving decisions.
This section seeks to help.
The section also includes stock tables and expanded weekly mutual fund tables, with more information on thousands of funds. (An explanation of the tables is on page 10.) Other weekly tables now appear on Saturdays in Business Day.


CRIME
Just for the record, I am tired of the Inner Circle, a secret society of English aristocrats, financiers and merchants who commit all sorts of skulduggery in Anne Perry's late-Victorian mystery series featuring the police superintendent Thomas Pitt and his wife, Charlotte.
Whenever these rapacious villains are abroad -- as they are in TRAITORS GATE (Fawcett Columbine, $21.50), posing as philanthropists but scheming like mad to plunder the riches of Africa -- the evils of the age lose a good deal of their human dimension and social complexity.
Pitt is drawn into a dangerous case of international intrigue when his childhood benefactor is murdered by a sinister cabal within the Inner Circle.
"He criticized their general morality," the victim's son tells Pitt, who suspects a stronger motive in the nobleman's attempts to expose a dastardly act of treason.
So much for plot.


Misguided Coverage
To the Sports Editor:
The Times made the same mistake other journalists have previously made in the sad article about Greg Louganis's admission that he has AIDS ("Louganis, Olympic Champion, Says He Has AIDS," The Times, Feb. 23).
Over half a page was devoted to the risk associated with the transmission of H.I.V. resulting from Louganis's head injury during the Olympics.
This is a nonissue and the articles say so.
By writing extensively on the subject, you give credence to ignorance.
You reinforce the idea that there was reason enough for concern and discussion.
A large number of your readers have already been touched by this disease through their friends and family and therefore understand the facts.


Uptown Fans of the M18 Fight to Keep Beleaguered Bus Line
As people who ride the M18 bus through Harlem have learned, sometimes the Transit Authority giveth, and sometimes the Transit Authority taketh away.
In 1987, the authority took away the bus, which had run for years on Convent Avenue between 114th and 152d Street.
The route was suspended for reconstruction of a water tunnel on Convent Avenue, and the bus -- then called the M3 -- was rerouted onto St.
Nicholas Avenue, a change that some riders found inconvenient.


Two Die in Apartment Fire On the Upper West Side
An early-morning fire that filled an Upper West Side apartment with smoke killed two men and injured three others yesterday, two of them seriously, fire officials said.
The men who died were found in the rear of the apartment by firefighters who arrived around 4:20 A.M.
The men were apparently overcome by smoke, the officials said.
Both were pronounced dead on arrival at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.


A Star Is Built
NEW YORK 1960 Architecture and Urbanism Between the Second World War and the Bicentennial.
By Robert A. M. Stern, Thomas Mellins and David Fishman.
Illustrated. 1,374 pp.
New York: The Monacelli Press/Penguin. $125.


Poland's Jews
To the Editor: In the summer of 1993, I visited Budapest, Cracow and Prague for a month.
My constant companion was Ruth Ellen Gruber, for I was using her book "Jewish Heritage Travel: A Guide to Central and Eastern Europe" (John Wiley &amp; Sons).
I was visiting once-vibrant learning and religious centers that were now too often locked, under renovation, or, in the case of the Remuh Synagogue in Cracow, a meeting place for a few Jewish men over 70 years of age, who willingly gave spontaneous tours and told the history of the Jewish Quarter.


Verbal Persuasion for Police
THE way George J. Thompson sees it, the only thing that stood between him and his prevention of the riots in Los Angeles last year was one week.
The four police officers pictured in the videotape of the Rodney King beating were scheduled to take Dr.
Thompson's training course on communication the following Monday; instead, they found themselves the focus of national attention.
"I had been at the L.A.P.D. for six months, but I hadn't taught the Foothill division yet," Dr.
Thompson said.
"Otherwise, that would not have happened."


Suit Rage
UNTIL THAT DAY in early March, I thought that some of the warning posters in the subway were absurd.
To illustrate the hazards of sneaking past turnstiles or riding between cars, the Metropolitan Transit Authority put up staged photographs of perpetrators who looked like mild-mannered businessmen on the way home from the office.
The posters made me want to ask the M.T.A.: Exactly how many middle-aged guys in suits have you caught riding between cars or hopping turnstiles?
Of all the evils that patriarchal white males with briefcases have visited on our society, is subway joy riding really near the top of the list?
But I no longer scoff, not after the incident.
Here's what happened: On March 3, at 6:20 in the evening, the No. 2 downtown express train comes to an unscheduled stop beneath Broadway, a little south of 66th Street.
We passengers sit there in the dark tunnel submitting to the customary long moment of quiet reflection.
Is the driver of our train dead, we wonder, or is he merely observing his profession's traditional code of silence -- the M.T.A.'s loose-lips-sink-trains philosophy of public relations?
After 10 minutes, the motorman finally deigns to address us, but the M.T.A.'s trademark acoustical system leaves us confused.
One theory in our car is that the motorman has mentioned a stalled train up ahead; another theory is that he has been practicing gargling.


The Dented, the Drooping and the Dead
IN the 19th century, Romantics extolled the beauty of ruins.
In the 20th, the German artist Kurt Schwitters used discarded ticket stubs to create groundbreaking collages while French and Italian artists based works on billboards layered with ripped posters.
Since then, countless artists, for reasons subversive and otherwise, have turned to urban detritus for inspiration.
By now, it's taken for granted that one man's junk can be another's chef d'oeuvre.
You don't have to be Claes Oldenburg to appreciate the jaunty zig of a bent fire alarm box or the crumbled splendor of a garbage can that looks as if it has been wrung like a wet cloth.
A railing crushed so that its bars resemble toppling dominoes may not exactly be fit for the Metropolitan's galleries.
But you'll see worse in some of SoHo's.
MICHAEL KIMMELMAN


New Markets
To the Sports Editor:
After reading "Sponsors Aren't Buying Replacement Game," (The Times, March 6), perhaps all is not lost.
The huckstering of soft drinks, autos, beer and running shoes by replacement players is not viable to sponsors now.
However a new advertising market is now available: The weight loss, arthritic pill, liposuction, ginseng, adult diapers and other appropriate vendors all have built-in role models currently on the playing field.
Of course, the size of baseball may have to be increased.
FRED SORKIN  Howard Beach, Queens


The Not-So-Still Night
Creaky old houses are supposed to be scary.
In horror movies, even the most innocent-sounding noises -- a flapping shutter or, worse, the tinkle of a music box in the nursery -- usually mean that heads are about to roll.
But what about sounds that don't terrify but soothe and cajole?
I don't mean the whir of a fan or the thwang of a screen door.
These old-fashioned sounds are almost extinct.
No, today's houses are plugged into a different soundtrack.
In my apartment, for instance, there is a chorus line of spontaneous noisemakers.
The stove clock is the most grating, and I have no idea why or when it's going to sound off.
The clock doesn't tell time and the built-in timer defies use.
And still it keeps on ticking, loudly, sometimes for minutes, sometimes for weeks.
By comparison, the regulated hum of the refrigerator is balm to my ear.
I know it's working, even when I am not and turn to it to find edible solace.
Steam coming up through the radiator has always calmed me, too.
In college, I was convinced that that clanking cacophony was the purest expression of pent-up sexual rage.
Now, it just means old-fashioned relief from the cold.
Fortunately, I've never been bothered by the irritating sound of high heels overhead or hard rock next door.
My ear whites them out, tuning instead into the zzz-sound of a slightly defective fluorescent light in the bathroom.
Unaccountably, it makes me think I'm in a cheesy, romantic hotel overlooking the Mediterranean.
The matriarch of house sounds, however, is the dishwasher.
It says: "You go to bed, dear. Don't worry about me; I'll just finish up here." (A bit of a nag now that I think about it.)


Corrections
A picture caption on page 14 of The Times Book Review today, with a review of "New York 1960," carries an erroneous address obtained from the book.
The building shown is at 20 Broad Street, not 20 Broadway.


David Livingston, 80, Labor Advocate, Dies
David Livingston, former president of District 65 of the United Auto Workers and a longtime proponent of civil rights, died yesterday at St.
Francis Hospital in Roslyn, L.I.
He was 80 and lived in Manhasset, L.I.
The cause was lymphoma, said his son Daniel.


Rowland Casts Himself as Regular Guy
Last month, on the day the new Republican Governor, John G. Rowland, delivered his budget address, he personally called a dozen conservative Democratic lawmakers to give them a briefing.
The move so surprised one Representative, Stephen Dargan, who was persona non grata under the previous administration, that he picked up the phone, snarling, "Who the hell is this?"


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
FLUSHING  Jamaica Kincaid Previews Her Newest Novel
Does a writer scrawl on a yellow legal pad or type on a computer keyboard?
Does he or she write every day or only when inspired?


What Do I Hear for This 1988 Burgundy? Fine Wine on the Block.
LOOKING for an insouciant little Bordeaux with a supple body -- something, perhaps, with an unadorned bouquet, a hint of humus on the tongue and a finish of ripe pear with overtones of persimmon, plum and clover?
Until recently, the only place New Yorkers could hope to buy such a bottle (with or without that elusive persimmon overtone) was ye olde friendlie neighborhood spirits shoppe.
For after the end of Prohibition the State Legislature endowed liquor retailers with a monopoly on the wine trade, much the way 16th century monarchs parceled out monopolies in spices.
But in 1993 New York retailers specializing in upscale wines hammered out a deal with New York's two international art auction houses, which run wine exchanges in Europe and have long been lobbying Albany for a piece of the local action.
Now anyone can auction wines if they can find an established retailer to serve as a partner.
Indeed, New York City is on the verge of becoming the wine auction capital of America, rivaling the markets in Chicago and California in both variety and dollar volume.


Ideas &amp; Trends; NASA's New Guide to Space Exploration (On $25 a Day)
IN the heavens, NASA shone like a star last week, but on earth the space agency fought to avoid a tailspin that could one day end in crash landings and catastrophic explosions.
On Tuesday, Norman E. Thagard became the first American to ride into space on a Russian rocket, flying up to the Russian Mir Space station to help start a long-term collaboration between Russian and American astronauts.
Dr.
Thagard fulfilled all the Russian traditions -- he urinated on the wheels of the truck that led him to the spaceship, he got weightless welcoming hugs from his fellow astronauts and he received a gift of bread and salt.


Noblesse Oblige
Dresses of the moment, as if seen through the eyes of John Singer Sargent and Giovanni Boldini.
A gallery of portraits becomes a hall of mirrors in which the beauty and elegance of a bygone era are reflected in the yearnings of our own.


UMass Guards Need A Revival
Stanford guard Brevin Knight may be playing his college basketball on the West Coast, but his attitude toward the game is all East Coast.
Take, for example, his thoughts on the problems the Massachusetts backcourt had in an opening-round victory over St.
Peter's on Friday.
The UMass guards were 3 of 14 from the field and 1 of 10 from 3-point range -- a sign that the Minutemen are still patching themselves together after the mid-February suspension of their talented shooter, Mike Williams.


ALSO INSIDE
URBAN VISTAS 3  It's broken, it has an interesting shape, but is it art?
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  Where the Easter bunny hardly scampers any more: Hard times for a stuffed toy factory in East New York.


CATHOLIC BISHOPS CHALLENGE PIECES OF WELFARE BILL
As the House prepares for debate on welfare legislation next week, the leaders of the nation's Roman Catholic bishops today denounced parts of the Republican bill that could end cash assistance for many children born out of wedlock, unmarried teen-agers who have children and legal immigrants.
The bishops said they were speaking not as partisan political lobbyists but in an effort to illuminate "the moral dimensions and human consequences of this debate."


Invaders From the North Hit the Beaches


Block Association Chief Agrees to Move, Ending Eviction Battle
Elaine Schechter, a longtime community advocate and the president of the Perry Street Block Association, has reached an out-of-court settlement with her landlord, Arnold Saltzman, who had been trying to evict her for more than two years.
She has agreed to vacate her $315.11 a month studio apartment at 78 Perry Street by June 1 in exchange for an undisclosed sum of money.


The Wienermobile (Here, on a Hard Roll)
On Thursday, Jeanne Higgins and Dan Duff spent two hours in a city Bureau of Traffic Violations office, trying to beat a $65 traffic ticket.
Parked outside, on Astor Place, was their vehicle, the Wienermobile, a 1988 Chevrolet van dressed up like a 23-foot-long hot dog on wheels.
Ms.
Higgins and Mr.
Duff, who stopped in town last week en route to Boston, earn their living traveling up and down the East Coast, promoting Oscar Mayer frankfurters.


Communism: Two Autopsies
THE DREAM THAT FAILED Reflections on the Soviet Union.
By Walter Laqueur. 231 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press. $25.
RUSSIA/USSR/RUSSIA  The Drive and Drift of a Superstate.
By Moshe Lewin. 368 pp.
New York: The New Press. $30.


Sabrina Diggs and Serigne N'Diaye
SEQUINS and lame for day never looked so right.
At the afternoon wedding of Sabrina Diggs and Serigne N'Diaye at the Community Church of New York on East 35th Street, some of the women wore glittering shoes and jackets.
Others had hairdos as elaborate as wedding cakes.
Even the ushers and the best man wore shiny gold cummerbunds and bow ties.


Return of the Retronyms
DID YOU RECEIVE my hard fax?"
If yours is a lightning-like mind, equipped with a Dixium chip (32 times as fast as the snaily Pentium now in computers), a phased array of synapses will fire off in your brain to place in context and figure out what a hard fax is.
Opposite of an easy fax?
No; no such thing as an easy fax.
Must be a retronym.


March 12-18; The Net Is Getting, Like, Really Stupid
I have seen the future . . . and it is Tom's toilet.
It's nothing fancy, mind you, just a plain bowl, white ceramic, chrome flush handle, ashtray on top.
But through the wonders of modern technology, Tom has placed a digital image of his toilet for the viewing pleasure of millions of computer users.


P. J. Harvey Goes Back to Basics And Finds More
IN POLLY JEAN HARVEY'S new songs, love is a monsoon, a tryst with the Devil, a sea to drown in.
That's when it's going well.
When her lover is absent, as he is for most of the songs, "this love becomes my torture/ this love my only crime." P. J. Harvey's third album, "To Bring You My Love" (Island; CD and cassette), has nothing to say about pop romance and everything to do with Romantic obsession.
It presents love as a purifying ordeal and a spiritual quest, as both a state of grace and a fall from grace, in songs delivered with the austere deliberation of the blues.
Love, faith, power and terror have always been tangled in Harvey's songs, and "To Bring You My Love" just knots them tighter.
Her lyrics have left behind the modern world for the terrain of the elements -- deserts and rivers, wind and rain -- and the sphere of allegory and revelation.
She doesn't separate sacred and earthly love; both are cataclysmic.


You Mean, She Gets the Cutest Boy? Oh, Go On
Flipper  A revival at the Walter Reade Theater, 165 West 65th Street, Manhattan, March 25 and 26 at 2 P.M.
Chuck Connors, Luke Halpin, Kathleen Maguire Directed by James B. Clark Not rated 91 minutes


By Any Measure, Jones Prevails
That was no mythical fighter in the ring tonight.
It was Roy Jones Jr., who made a statement about being the world's best fighter, pound for pound, inch for inch, or by any other measurement.


Corrections
An article on Jan. 1 about the New Jersey Performing Arts Center in Newark referred incompletely to one contractor.
Construction management is being performed by the Turner Construction Company in association with Adventus II Inc.
A letter dated March 7 from a construction executive pointed out the omission.


A Course Called 'Murder' (And It's Tough, Too)
It's right there in the Bible.
It's in Shakespeare, in Sophocles and in Dostoyevsky, of course.
Murder, it turns out, is not only a recurring theme in the great works of literature, but is proving to be a crafty way to lure students to class.


FUNDS WATCH
History Repeats
It's part of the standard advertising pitch: the mutual fund brags about its record and then lets the air out of the balloon with the disclaimer, "Past performance is no guarantee of future performance."


How the City Defines Sex and Sex Shops
Last Monday, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the City Council agreed to strict new zoning rules for sex-related businesses.
Which targets are affected -- be they X-rated video stores, topless bars or other "adult" establishemnts -- hinges on the city's definition of "specified sexual activities" and "specified anatomical areas." The rules are expected to take effect before the end of the year.
THE DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of defining "adult establishments", "specified sexual activities" are: (i) human genitals in a state of sexual simulation or arousal; (ii) actual or simulated acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; or (iii) fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus or female breast.
"Specified anatomical areas" are: (i) less than completely and opaquely concealed: (a) human genitals, pubic region, (b) human buttock, anus, or (c) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or (ii) human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, evein if completely and apaquely concealed.
HOW THEY ARE USED
(c) An adult eating or drinking establishment is an eating or drinking establishment which regularly features any one or more of the following:
(1) live performances that are characterized by an emphasis on "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities"; or,
(2) films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or,
(3) employees who, as part of their employment, customarily expose to patrons "specified anatomical areas."  (d) An adult theater is a commercial establishment that regularly features one or more of the following:
(1) films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or,
(2) live performances characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or,
(3) for any form of consideration, live performances, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions characterized by an emphasis on the depction or description or "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for viewing from an individual enclosure.


Julia Edmondson And David Luce
Julia N. Edmondson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Richard Edmondson of New Milford, Conn., was married yesterday to David D. Luce, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William S. Luce of Clinton Township, N.J.
The Rev.
John A. Lucal performed the ceremony at the chapel of the Convent of the Sacred Heart in New York.
Mrs.
Luce, 27, graduated from Georgetown University and received a master's degree in elementary education from Hunter College.
She is a head teacher at the International Preschools in New York.
Her father retired as a senior vice president at the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, the pharmaceuticals company in New York.
Her mother, Rozanne Hume Edmondson, retired as the director of admissions at the Convent of the Sacred Heart.


Topics of The Times; Mr. Wertheimer's Contribution
There were countless occasions during his 14-year tenure as president of Common Cause when Fred Wertheimer might have been voted the least popular lobbyist on Capitol Hill.
Mr.
Wertheimer, who stepped down last week as president of the group, worked to expose the incestuous ties between lawmakers and special interests, and to prod Congress to clean up its disgraceful campaign financing system.


New! Improved? TV's Bell Telephone Hour.
HOWARD STRINGER drew a crowd everywhere he went in his first visit to the futuristic new production center of Bell Atlantic Video Services in Reston, Va.
Partly, it was his sheer presence.
At 6 feet 4 inches, with a booming laugh, Welsh accent and fondness for boldly striped shirts and vivid red ties, Mr.
Stringer cuts a striking figure in the grey-flannel world of telephone executives.
But for the young employees who spilled out of their offices on a recent morning to meet Mr.
Stringer, their new boss, his credentials were the real draw.
He had just ended a 30-year career at CBS, where he was an Emmy Award-winning producer for CBS News.
He had risen to be president of the CBS Broadcast Group and earned a place in the TV pantheon as the man who lured David Letterman from NBC.


Charles Tyroler, 80, Monitor Of U.S. Intelligence Activities
Charles Tyroler 2d, a member of the President's Intelligence Oversight Board during the Reagan and Bush Administrations and a longtime Democratic Party strategist, died last Monday at Fernwood House, a nursing home in Bethesda, Md.
He was 80 and had lived in Bluemont, Va.
The cause was pneumonia, his family said.


Separating History From Conditions of Religion
WE were in the first century.
A blizzard was blowing outside, lending the mid-morning an eerie air of half-night.
In the wall-wide brick fireplace, an oversized fire was blazing, orange and amber on our gesturing hands and half of Joel Carmichael's face, so that again we seemed to go backwards in time, to the time before artificial light.
The room was rudimentary, a lamp on a table and a telephone, a few earthenware jugs.
Only on one of the old slab walls inside this century-old Amagansett Coast Guard station, bought for 75 cents and transported across the road, was a picture of itself, a watercolor of sorts, showing a rather unique architecture that put one in mind of Eastern churches, except it had a wooden decked porch going all around it on all sides.


A Kiss From the Devil And Toasts All Around
UPTOWN -- He said "La-aa-dy" in that way of his.
He made buck teeth.
He crossed his eyes.
He didn't hog the stage and he sang on key, even though he never played Broadway before.
What more could anybody want from Jerry Lewis, who stepped into the role of the Devil in "Damn Yankees" on March 12?
Just his soul and a sound bite, perhaps.


March 12-18: Affirmative Action; Should People With Ceilings Of Glass Throw Stones?
Bob Dole of Kansas, alert to the white male votes that helped the Republicans take over Congress and him the seat of Senate majority leader, promised legislation last week to abolish the affirmative action programs for jobs and Federal contracts.
But a sweeping survey of the demography of the executive suite suggests that Congress still faces some unpalatable facts.
After nearly four years of research, the Federal Glass Ceiling Commission, a bipartisan group that Mr.
Dole helped create, said women and minorities are still largely absent from the upper reaches of American business.


Why Should I Pay for Art I Don't Like and TV I Can't Bear?; Where Americans Meet
To the Editor:
In the Congressional debate about funding for National Public Radio, the charge of "elitism" keeps surfacing.
It seems to me that the impact of N.P.R. goes just in the opposite direction.
N.P.R.'s flagship news and features program "All Things Considered" is the closest thing we have to a national forum -- the radio equivalent to an op-ed page, a features and entertainment section, with some doses of humor, of practical advice, of inspiration.


Defense Against the Black-Legged Tick
THE threat of Lyme disease is real.
It demands that those who work outdoors take practical precautions, without ceasing to enjoy being outdoors.
Recognition of the illness began 20 years ago when the disease was identified by Allen Steere of the Yale University School of Medicine.
Dr.
Steere learned about several juvenile rheumatoid arthritis cases in the area of Old Lyme, many of them preceded by a bull's eye rash.
Further studies showed that the disease was caused by a bite from a particular black-legged tick.
The name of the region where the disease was first identified gave it its name.


Q and A
Giving Christo a Hand


Allison Y. Turner, Scott A. Saffran
Allison Yvonne Turner, the daughter of Gail and Stuart Turner of Rye Brook, N.Y., was married last evening to Scott Anthony Saffran, the son of Risa Saffran of Great Neck, L.I., and the late Henry Saffran.
Rabbi Alfredo Winter performed the ceremony at the Plaza in New York.
Mrs.
Saffran, 26, is a manager at Citicorp Credit Services in Long Island City, Queens.
She graduated from Union College in Schenectady, N.Y., and she and the bridegroom received M.B.A. degrees from New York University.
Her father retired as the executive vice president and treasurer of the Western Publishing Group in New York.


March 12-18: Drip, Drip of Scandal; Cisneros Is on the Spot; Pena Is Off the Hook
The sight of another Clinton Cabinet member under the glare of a criminal investigation looked, well, familiar.
This time, it was Housing Secretary Henry G. Cisneros, who had spent years trying to move beyond the damage of a highly public extramarital affair with a one-time campaign volunteer in San Antonio.
Attorney General Janet Reno concluded that Mr.
Cisneros lied to F.B.I. agents during a background check before his appointment.
Ms.
Reno said Mr.
Cisneros understated -- by tens of thousands of dollars -- how much money he had paid to his former mistress after they parted in 1990.
That finding was based on tapes of conversations between Mr.
Cisneros and the woman, Linda Medlar, which she secretly recorded.
Ms.
Reno said an outside prosecutor must decide if Mr.
Cisneros's false statements were a crime.


Javits Center's Chronic Problems Go Beyond the Mob, Experts Say
For unions, the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center has been an employment bonanza because of its notorious but legal work rules: nine workers for jobs that require three or fewer elsewhere.
For campaign contributors, it has been a source of lucrative contracts for work that is frequently badly done.
For friends of politicians with little experience in the convention industry, it has meant management posts.
The Mafia has recently been getting the most attention for troubles at the Javits Center, but experts who have studied it, as well as those who have worked or participated in shows there, say the mob does not deserve all the blame.
Many law-abiding citizens have been making money there as well.
The experts and workers say it will take much more than a crackdown on organized crime to eliminate New York's reputation as the least hospitable convention city in America.


Defense Against the Black-Legged Tick
THE threat of Lyme disease is real.
It demands that those who work outdoors take practical precautions, without ceasing to enjoy being outdoors.
Recognition of the illness began 20 years ago when the disease was identified by Allen Steere of the Yale University School of Medicine.
Dr.
Steere learned about several juvenile rheumatoid arthritis cases in the area of Old Lyme, many of them preceded by a bull's eye rash.
Further studies showed that the disease was caused by a bite from a particular black-legged tick.
The name of the region where the disease was first identified gave it its name.


In the Region/Connecticut; Historic Brass Mill Giving Way to a Waterbury Mall
THE Scovill Brass Works in Waterbury, a 200-year-old icon of the Naugatuck Valley's glory days as the industrial engine of Connecticut's economy, is being dismantled to make way for a $120 million shopping mall that will be built by the Homart Company of Chicago.
Occupying 87 acres off Interstate 84 adjacent to the business district, Scovill's 63 deteriorated, empty buildings are being turned into recyclable piles of steel, brick, wood and concrete.


In Bombing Trial, a Deluge of Details
The prosecutor, sensing that the torrent of plots, outrageous weapons and foreign names pouring out of his star witness risked bewildering the courtroom, urged a more measured pace.
"I want to ask you to try to speak more slowly," Andrew McCarthy admonished.


A Human Blender Creates an Arcadia
SUPPOSE YOU WERE IN THE market for a farce about black holes, the theology of David Koresh, the melting of Antarctica, deconstructionist criticism and the nurture of killer bees.
Or imagine your whim was to see a comedy about lamasery Buddhism, the GATT talks, tulip growing and the thinking of Stephen Hawking.
Britain has just the man to fill your order, a human blender who can be relied on to mix a theatrical alloy that may rock your head but won't leave indigestible lumps in your stomach.
He is Tom Stoppard, 55 years old and still writing with exceptional ambition.
Take his "Arcadia," which is now in previews and opens on March 30 at the Vivian Beaumont Theater at Lincoln Center starring Blair Brown, Victor Garber and Robert Sean Leonard under the direction of Trevor Nunn.
It involves landscape gardening, romantic poetry, chaos theory, sex and the end of the world.
Or take his "Hapgood," which is still at Lincoln Center.
Its interests and inspirations include quantum mechanics, Heisenberg's uncertainty principle, rugby and John le Carre's spy thrillers.


F.Y.I.
The Sky, Upside Down
Q.
I was told years ago at home in Australia that the mural depicting the constellations on the ceiling of Grand Central Terminal is incorrect.
Rumor is that it is reversed.
I'm no astronomer so I am turning to you to dispel or confirm this tale.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
ISSUES OF AGING
A free program addressing three major issues confronting older people is to be held on Friday from 1 to 4 P.M. in the Hugh A. Doyle Senior Center at 94 Davis Avenue, New Rochelle.
Billed as a White House Mini-Conference on Aging, the conclusions drawn will be presented as recommendations to the National White House Conference on Aging, which is to convene in May in Washington.
Rose Noonan, executive director of the Housing Action Council in Tarrytown, will focus on various housing arrangements and opportunities, followed by Sarajane C. Henze, senior vice president of Home Care Associates of New York State in Albany, who will speak on community-based services like Meals-on-Wheels, property tax abatements and home care.


INSIDE
To Be Gay, and Anglican A militant gay rights group pressured the Bishop of London to declare his sexuality.
His candor has drawn support and ignited a new debate on homosexuality.
Page 10.
Subway Crackdown
After 14 months, transit officials have begun to deliver on a promise to rid the New York City subways of panhandlers.
Page 37.
Looking Askance at Gingrich
In interviews and in polls, people say Speaker Newt Gingrich has made a strong impression but for the most part, not a good one.
Page 24.


POSTINGS: In an Old Automat, New Music and Memories; A Motown Beat For 57th Street
It's not too far from "Funky Broadway," and when the Motown Cafe opens at 106 West 57th Street around Labor Day, it should add a decidedly funky beat to the melange of music halls and music-themed restaurants between the Avenue of the Americas and Broadway.
From Carnegie Hall to the Hard Rock Cafe to Planet Hollywood, and the Harley-Davidson Cafe around the corner on West 56th, the street has become a music lover's (or hater's, depending on taste) mecca.
Motown's arrival is no coincidence.
Brian Daneman, the chief operating officer of the concern that is building the club, with backing from Boston Ventures, which once owned Motown and sold it to Polygram Records, another backer, was operating director for Planet Hollywood's foray onto West 57th.
His architect is Jay Haverson, former partner of David Rockwell, who now designs for Planet Hollywood's worldwide group of clubs.


Corrections
An article on March 5 about the artist Bruce Nauman included an erroneous given name provided by an art gallery for a collector who has bought his work.
She is Ydessa Hendeles, not Ydeffa.


Is That a Bunny On Your Back?
Don't be surprised if you see Mickey Mouse, Bugs Bunny, a tiger, a lion or a cuddly bear clinging to a grown woman.
It's all part of the backpack explosion from purely functional to decorative.
Cartoon backpacks, originally made for youngsters and teen-agers, have been picked up by the older set.
They also signal the influence of the new Warner Brothers store on Fifth Avenue and 57th Street and the soon-to-arrive Disney store nearby.
These inexpensive grown-up toys ($25 to $30) are not the only departure from the more traditional backpacks; there are others in the shape of sneakers (top, third from right), and rubber hearts with soft spikes (top right) that look like passion flowers.
And for the do-it-yourself crowd, an old license plate attached to a leather backpack (top, second from right) for sidewalk traffic.


Prospect of an April Lockout by Owners Leaves Many Questions
With the scheduled start of the 1995 season two weeks from Sunday, about the only thing certain is that neither a negotiated agreement nor National Labor Relations Board action will get the striking players back in uniform by opening day.
The most intriguing development that could occur would have the players offering to return to work, with or without an injunction obtained by the labor board from a Federal court judge, and the owners refusing to let them do so and instead locking them out while continuing to use replacement players.


A Double-Edge Sword Faces the Mid-Majors
There were no heads buried in hands yesterday.
No tears, no blank faces staring into space.
Manhattan's fanciful National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament run ended with a 10-point loss to an Arizona State team that was 10 points better.
Manhattan proved that it deserved to be in the tournament and sent a message to N.C.A.A. officials to stop rewarding larger conferences with bids they don't deserve.


Laparoscopic Surgery Is Not Brand New
I was amazed to read the article on Feb. 12 "Shorter Gynecological Surgery Recovery" by Dr.
Harry Reich.
Laparoscopic surgery has been used for more than 20 years.
All the major hospitals in the metropolitan area are extremely familiar with such procedures as described in this article.
He describes laparoscopy as if it were brand new and unknown in the medical field.


Classes in English Drawing Large Numbers
THERE was not an empty seat in the windowless classroom.
On the walls were an American flag, maps and posters with the Pledge of Allegiance and messages like, "Celebrate America!" and, "Here we speak English only!"
At the Adult Learning Center at Nassau Tech in Carle Place in a building that used to house a Korvettes Department Store, 30 adults listened as Lynn Fain, the teacher of their class in English as a Second Language, explained what she called "time words."


Dynamic Duo


Cleric, in Jail, Declares His Conscience Clear
Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman leaned back in a plastic chair in the visiting room of the downtown Metropolitan Correctional Center on Friday, slowly rubbing his hands across the stomach of his Government-issue blue khaki uniform, his red fez, wrapped in white cloth, the only outward sign that he was a Muslim preacher.
He had prepared carefully for the interview, printing notes in Arabic Braille on a large piece of paper, which he now read with his fingers.


Impressionism Meets Symbolism


Driving Miss Desmond: The Car's a Scene-Stealer
THE road to the theater no longer ends at the front door.
Cars, or at least parts of them, are cropping up on a number of Broadway stages.
A 1959 Cadillac convertible graces "Miss Saigon." A mid-30's limousine rolls onstage in "Crazy for You," as does a 1925 Ford Model T pickup.
The grille, hood and headlights of a beat-up 50's car appear in "Grease!" and the trunk of a nondescript sedan -- one with a lid that opens and closes -- is a featured performer in "Cats."


Hard-to-Choose Day for Listeners
CONCERTGOERS who want to attend a birthday party for the United Nations, meet young prize-winners in recital or hear a choir sing for joy while another sings of sadness will have to choose an event, because they are all scheduled this afternoon.
The Bronx Arts Ensemble says "Happy Birthday, U.N." with a concert at 2 P.M. today at the Russian Mission Residence on Mosholu Avenue at 255th Street in the Bronx.
The guest pianist Joel Sachs and the cellist Ye Kyung Lim are featured in music by Russian and American composers: Glinka, Cowell, Tchaikovsky, Conlon Nancarrow, Galina Ustvolskaya and Stravinsky.
For information call (718) 601-7399.


Tampa Deepens Devils' Slide
Coach Jacques Lemaire has every right to be concerned about the Devils missing the playoffs in a season they were considered to be a challenger for the Stanley Cup.
"Sure, I'm worried," Lemaire said after the Devils' 2-1 loss to the Tampa Bay Lightning this afternoon.
"I was worried in the first game. I'm more worried now."


WHAT, US WORRY?
Their names -- Cuomo, Richards and Weicker -- were among the best-known in government.
Now they're private citizens again.
On a recent Saturday morning, they arrived at The New York Times without their customary entourages.
Weicker came with his wife, Richards with an aide and Cuomo alone.
They remain closely informed and fiercely opinionated.
In a two-hour conversation, Democrats Mario M. Cuomo and Ann W. Richards and Republican-turned-Independent Lowell P. Weicker Jr. looked back at the November election and looked forward to what the results are likely to mean for the country.
They offered some guesses about the 1996 election; they appraised the obligations of ex-officeholders; and most of all, they talked about the angry middle class.


The Way to Pay
To the Sports Editor:
Having just received a third invoice for my Yankee season tickets, I find myself in a pickle.
Is it me, or are they nuts: paying full price for a product admittedly inferior?


California Governor Ready to Try For G.O.P. Presidential Nomination
Gov. Pete Wilson is ready to go.
After months of careful, deliberate preparation, he has everything in place for a run for the Presidency.


On the Brink of a Movement
SPEAK NOW AGAINST THE DAY The Generation Before the Civil Rights Movement  in the South.
By John Egerton.
Illustrated. 704 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $35.


Vanessa Smith, Andrew Pienkny
Dr.
Vanessa Debra Lee Smith, a daughter of Dr.
Harry Smith of San Jose, Calif., and Gloria Croll of Pacific Grove, Calif., is to be married today to Dr.
Andrew Joseph Pienkny, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Pienkny of Melville, L.I.
Rabbi Norman Mendel is to perform the ceremony at the Highlands Inn in Carmel, Calif.
The bride graduated from Stanford University.
She received a medical degree from Harvard University, as did the bridegroom.
They are residents at the Cleveland Clinic in Cleveland, she in otolaryngology and he in urology.
The bridegroom graduated magna cum laude from Brown University.


He No Longer Has to Make Points. He Just Makes Them.
WHEN SIR COLIN DAVIS and the London Symphony Orchestra performed the seven symphonies of Jean Sibelius in a series of concerts at the Barbican Center two years ago, the reviewers reached for superlatives.
Andrew Porter, widely regarded as the dean of North Atlantic music critics, proclaimed in The Observer that Sir Colin's conducting had attained the level of greatness.
And when Sir Colin's recent recording of Sibelius's Third and Fifth Symphonies with the London Symphony was released last year by BMG Classics, Robert Layton, who contributed the Sibelius entry to The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, praised it for the best version of the Third that he had ever heard.
"Oh, did he?" said Sir Colin during a recent chat in his dressing room, backstage at the Barbican.
"How nice. I don't read those things, you know. I don't pretend I don't. I actually don't."


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Nonprofit Helps Debt-Ridden Escape Tyranny of Red Ink
Budget &amp; Credit Counseling Services, a nonprofit group, is conducting free seminars to teach women how to handle money and credit and to get out of debt.


Rebels in Mexico Welcome New Law to Advance Talks
Little more than a month after Government troops recovered territory controlled for more than a year by peasant rebels in the south, efforts at peace talks between the two sides are gathering momentum.
In a communique published on Friday, rebel leaders from the area, in Chiapas state, welcomed the promulgation of a new law that offers a framework for talks and a temporary amnesty for the insurgents.


Two Ways of Seeing Mongolia
Mongolia, a Central Asian country of vast natural beauty and diversity of wildlife, is the focus of two itineraries being offered for late spring through early fall.
The Massachusetts Audubon Society, along with a New Jersey-based company, Nomadic Expeditions, has planned a 22-day journey across Mongolia with a focus on the country's flora and fauna.
Led by Christopher W. Leahy, the author of "The Birdwatcher's Companion" and the director of the society's Center for Biological Conservation, and Dr.
Ayurzaryn Bold, one of Mongolia's leading ornithologists, the tour will coincide with the end of the migration of birds that passes through the region from tropical Asian wintering grounds.


Poland's Jews
To the Editor: Ruth Gruber's article is misleading.
Without doubt, Poland has unsurpassed Judaica resources, but it is a difficult environment in which to recover Jewish history.
As documented in news reports covering the 50th anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz, many Poles are concerned with what they call Polish suffering during World War II (which was certainly enormous), but not with Jewish.
I was in Cracow recently and visited the "galleries and cafes" mentioned by Ms.
Gruber.
They do indeed feature Jewish food, art objects and music; all that is lacking are Jews.


SUNDAY, MARCH 19, 1995


Already Pale, Winter Fades At the Finish
A year ago, there were gaping potholes, broken bones and a misery that seized thousands of snow-weary souls.
Uglier than battle scars, mementos of winter lingered for months.
This year, there is only road salt.
Strewn in mammoth anthills on hundreds of public lots, it offers testament to the winter that never was.


An Eclectic Repertory That Handel Still Fits
WHEN the Pro Arte Singers sing a hallelujah chorus at the grand finale of their 20th-anniversary season, it won't be Handel's.
Rather audiences can tap their toes to the "Hallelujah" that Vincent Youmans wrote for a Sailors Show during World War I, then recycled a decade later for his hit musical "Hit the Deck."
The group's music director, Arthur Sjogren, has also scheduled Handel's "Dixit Dominus," and true to his penchant for presenting offbeat repertory along with the tried and true, music by Bach and Brahms will be topped by Robert Convery's "Mish Nash Madrigals" after limericks by the irrepressible Ogden Nash.


Files Show Bank Aided Nazi Cause
Documents kept secret for 50 years have shown that Germany's largest bank actively aided the Nazi regime beginning in 1933 in expropriating Jewish businesses, and helped Hitler secure economic control over the neighboring lands he had conquered.
The documents, which came to light when East German files were opened, were used for an authorized history of the bank, Deutsche Bank A.G.
The newly released book concludes that in the years leading up to the war, the bank was involved in 330 cases of what was called "Aryanization." Major Jewish businesses either were forced to sell out to non-Jewish investors at reduced prices, or the bank bought the assets itself.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: March 19, 1995
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
8
TOM CLANCY'S OP-CENTER, created by Tom Clancy and Steve Pieczenik. (Berkley, $6.99.) The operations of a secret Government agency.
2
5
ACCIDENT, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) A car collision involving four teen-agers tragically alters the lives of five families.
3
3
INCA GOLD, by Clive Cussler. (Pocket, $6.99.) Dirk Pitt contends with a ring of thieves for possession of ancient artifacts in the Andes.
4
8
THE DAY AFTER TOMORROW, by Allan Folsom. (Warner Vision, $6.99.) A doctor stumbles into a tangle of conspiracies.
5
3
NIGHT PREY, by John Sandford. (Berkley, $6.99.) Lucas Davenport investigates a case involving a body found in a wildlife preserve.
6
4
THE CAT WHO CAME TO BREAKFAST, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Jove, $5.99.) Jim Qwilleran and his cats investigate catastrophes.
7
2
LORD OF FALCON RIDGE, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $6.50.) Romance and adventure among vikings living in 10th-century Britain.
8
4
HEARTSTONE, by Phillip Margolin. (Bantam, $6.50.) A New Hampshire detective and district attorney probe a seven-year-old murder.
9
1
MISTRESS, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $5.99.) A former schoolteacher's efforts to unmask her aunt's blackmailer in London.
10*
8
ICEBOUND, by Dean Koontz. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The world's future is threatened by a tidal wave, storms and a psychopathic killer.
11
40
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
12*
3
THE ROBBER BRIDE, by Margaret Atwood. (Bantam, $6.50.) A woman who long manipulated three friends suddenly reappears.
13
7
FAMILY BLESSINGS, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove, $6.50.) A widow's affection for the close friend of her late son creates familial tension.
14
21
CONGO, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An American team seeks to discover why a group of archeologists died among ruins.
15
5
AMBUSH AT CORELLIA, by Roger MacBride Allen. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The first volume of a new "Star Wars" trilogy.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
26
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
3
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Pocket, $5.99.) An analysis of canine behavior.
3
62
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Everyday spirituality.
4
25
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) The reminiscences of two black sisters.
5
2
SAVED BY THE LIGHT, by Dannion Brinkley with Paul Perry. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) An account of two near-death experiences.
6
8
HOW WE DIE, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Vintage, $13.) A surgeon reflects on "life's final chapter."
7*
14
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Love and relationships.
8
13
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $5.99.) Observations by the star of "Seinfeld."
9
4
MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Vintage, $12.) The life of a young black man in America.
10
593
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott
Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
11*
21
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $5.50.) Essays on life and death, good and evil.
12
29
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.
13
107
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
14*
35
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) Innovation in business.
15*
1
HUSBAND, LOVER, SPY, by Janice Pennington with Carlos de Abreu. (St. Martin's, $5.99.) A television celebrity's 17-year search for her husband, a mountain climber who disappeared.
16*
10
CONTRACT WITH AMERICA, by Newt Gingrich, Dick Armey, et al. (Times Books/Random House, $10.) The Republican program.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
25
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) Stories meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."
2
203
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
3
5
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY: An Experiential Guide, by James Redfield and Carol Adrienne. (Warner, $8.99.) Ways to apply the inspirational message of the novel "The Celestine Prophecy."
4
6
WHAT TO EXPECT THE TODDLER YEARS, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $15.95.) Counsel.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending March 4, at 3,050 bookstores and wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Shameless Homophobia And the 'Jenny Jones' Murder
SCOTT AMEDURE'S crush on another man apparently cost him his life.
Three days after disclosing, during a taping of "The Jenny Jones Show," that he was attracted to Jonathan Schmitz, Mr.
Amedure was killed at his home near Detroit.
Mr.
Schmitz was charged with murder.
Immediately, hands were being wrung about the state of television talk shows.
But the circumstances of the killing seemed almost to be taken for granted, as if there was nothing all that mysterious or confounding about so violent a response to an expression of unrequited affection -- man to man.


Progressive Dodgers
To the Sports Editor:
With regard to the role of baseball in maintaining the spirits of the Japanese-Americans unjustly expelled from the West Coast during World War II2 ("A Way Out of Nowhere Through Baseball," The Times, Feb. 27), New Yorkers will be proud to know that the Brooklyn Dodgers' manager held tryouts in the internment camps in 1943 and 1944, looking for qualified players for his team.
By that time, internees with the promise of a job were allowed to leave the camps for the East or the Midwest.
Responding to criticism about this recruitment, Branch Rickey replied, "The fact that these boys are American boys is good enough for the Brooklyn club."


Your Future Offers Visual Stimulation, But Little Substance
YOUR FUTURE, a new magazine from Time Inc. aimed at readers 40 and younger who are just discovering the importance of personal finance, is anything but tedious -- visually.
The first issue, on sale now through June 4, looks like a knock-off of the hot cyber journal, Wired, with articles framed by huge red headlines and sidebars set in greenish type.
Obviously the design editors borrowed from Time's Money magazine worked hard to make Your Future inviting, at least to people they think of as visual sophisticates.
But Your Future is a snoozer where it counts.
Most of the articles are quick takes, and the magazine wastes an amazing amount of ink on feeble attempts at humor.
In a feature called Moneysomethings -- "Ideas to fill your head and your wallet" -- Your Future includes a Washington man who's serving a life sentence in prison for running a $2-million-a-week drug ring.


THE ART OF HIS CHOOSING
As the parent of a becoming-well-recognized artist, I was delighted to read Klaus Kertess's view of my daughter's studio "looking like an explosion in a thrift shop."


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS By Elizabeth Marshall Thomas.
Pocket Books, $5.99.
An anthropologist and novelist imparts a canine view of the world, gleaned from her own dogs, whose daily peregrinations she followed.
Her close observations support the theory that our pets do indeed think and feel.
In 1993 our reviewer, Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson, described the book as "informative, delightful, innovative and full of an intimate knowledge." Also reissued is the groundbreaking MAN MEETS DOG, by Konrad Lorenz, translated by Marjorie Kerr Wilson (Kodansha, $12), which looks at the origins of the bond between animal and master.
"Anyone with a minimum interest in either cats or dogs can spend a rewarding and entertaining evening with this book," Thomas Foster said in The New York Times in 1955.


RECORD BRIEFS
Becker: 'Soundpieces' 1 and 5, 'Concerto Arabesque,' 'At Dieppe'  Anthony de Mare, pianist; Susan Narucki, soprano; Monadnock Music Festival Orchestra conducted by James Bolle.
Koch International Classics 3-7207-2H1; CD.


Dr. Korenstein and Dr. Glickman
Dr.
Deborah Korenstein, a daughter of Susan and Howard Korenstein of Millburn, N.J., and Dr.
Michael Glickman, a son of Mary and Dr.
Robert Glickman of Weston, Mass., were married last evening in Newark.
Rabbi Michael Paley officiated at the Newark Club.
Dr.
Korenstein, 27, is keeping her name.
A cum laude graduate of the University of Pennsylvania, she received a medical degree from Columbia University, as did the bridegroom.
They are residents in internal medicine at Boston hospitals, she at Beth Israel and he at Massachusetts General.
The bridegroom, 27, graduated cum laude from Dartmouth College.


Look Also at Who Profits From Sweatshops
To the Editor:
Re "Week in Sweatshop Reveals Grim Conspiracy of the Poor" (front page, March 12): As advocates for garment workers, we thank you for your expose of sweatshop conditions in the garment industry.
Your reporter's account of her week working undercover as a seamstress for a Brooklyn contractor provided a personal and moving vision of the horrific workplace conditions many garment workers experience.


Overachiever
FIRST IN HIS CLASS A Biography of Bill Clinton.
By David Maraniss.
Illustrated. 512 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.


I'm No Frank Lloyd Wright, but I Can Dream
I WANT TO BUILD A HOUSE WHERE none has stood before.
I've found the spot: five acres of desert hillside with a distant view of the Las Vegas Strip, from which, at night, the great black pyramid beams its message to the stars.
I have bought the land, and soon it will be time to hire an architect.
But first, I'm playing at architecture on my own.
Oh, I know that no matter how hard I study Palladio, I'm not going to design a Monticello.
That takes a Jefferson.


Q. &amp; A.
Can Co-ops Lend Money?
Q I am a shareholder in a co-op apartment house with 142 units, the majority of which are owned by other shareholders.
Around 20 percent of the shares, though, are owned by an investor group.
Can the co-op corporation legally lend money to shareholders or others, with or without interest? . . .
Stan Korson, Manhattan.


THE PHIL GRAMM JUGGERNAUT
Richard L. Berke's description of Senator Phil Gramm as "a clear-headed man of ideas" is astonishing ("The Phil Gramm Juggernaut," Feb. 19).
While Berke provided several examples of Gramm's great personal ambition, he gave no examples of Gramm seriously analyzing arguments or data before reaching conclusions -- what any serious person of ideas must do.


IN SHORT: FICTION
RED THE FIEND  By Gilbert Sorrentino. Fromm, $19.95.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS By Elizabeth Marshall Thomas.
Pocket Books, $5.99.
An anthropologist and novelist imparts a canine view of the world, gleaned from her own dogs, whose daily peregrinations she followed.
Her close observations support the theory that our pets do indeed think and feel.
In 1993 our reviewer, Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson, described the book as "informative, delightful, innovative and full of an intimate knowledge." Also reissued is the groundbreaking MAN MEETS DOG, by Konrad Lorenz, translated by Marjorie Kerr Wilson (Kodansha, $12), which looks at the origins of the bond between animal and master.
"Anyone with a minimum interest in either cats or dogs can spend a rewarding and entertaining evening with this book," Thomas Foster said in The New York Times in 1955.


DIARY
TRADE  Conoco Gets Its Wrist Slapped  Boy hits little sister on head.
Father scolds him.
Boy, a budding defense lawyer, says, "You didn't tell me not to hit little sister on the head." Conoco's recent oil deal with Iran had a bit of that flavor: Iran has been firmly in the doghouse for a decade and a half, but no, nobody said, "Thou shalt not make this kind of deal." Conoco went ahead.
So last week, after cries of anger on many fronts, the Administration made it perfectly clear: Don't hit little sisters on the head, don't stick beans in your ears and don't make such deals with Iran.
Conoco promptly backed off.


Gay Travel
To the Editor: It is unfortunate that the name of my company, Hanns Ebensten Travel, was omitted from the Practical Traveler column "More Options for Gay Travelers" (Jan. 29).
We originated travel programs for gay men and since we opened our office -- then in New York -- in 1972 we have operated more than 300 tours to Brazil, Morocco, Thailand, India, China, Japan, Russia, Tahiti and other islands of French Polynesia, the United Arab Emirates, and across the Canadian Rockies; cruises on our privately chartered ships to the Galapagos Islands, along the southern coast of Turkey, on the Amazon and the Nile, and on the Mahakam River in Borneo, and dozens of other places.


March 12-18; Singapore, the Rope and Frayed Relations
It is one thing for Singapore to insult the United States, which the Government-controlled media there portray as a decadent giant.
But it is something else for the island-state to insult one of its Southeast Asian neighbors in a region that prides itself on diplomatic harmony.
That is just what happened last week, when Singapore hanged a 42-year-old Philippine maid for the murder of another Philippine maid and the woman's charge, a 4-year-old boy.
President Fidel V. Ramos, human rights groups and church leaders in the Philippines had asked that Singapore stay the execution of Flor Contemplacion, citing new testimony suggesting that she was framed after the boy drowned during an epileptic fit in a bathtub and his enraged father killed the maid.


STUFF: If the Glove Fits. . .
It's a paradox.
The Hot Hand basketball glove is "the officially licensed glove of the N.B.A." But it's banned for National Basketball Association use; no gloves are allowed in N.B.A. games.
It's a bit like someone selling the official Major League Baseball corked bat.
But that isn't stopping the N.B.A. or Hot Wear, the makers of the glove.
And the Puerto Rican Basketball Federation has just approved use of the glove for the coming season, which starts in May.


P. J. Sikes, P. A. Danishefsky
Peggy Jo Sikes, the daughter of Stuart and Marlene Sikes of Chicago, is to be married today to Philip Alan Danishefsky, a son of Joel and Jaelene Danishefsky of Hillside, N.J.
The bridegroom's father, who was ordained as a rabbi, is to perform the ceremony at the Drake Hotel in Chicago.
The bride, 28, graduated from the University of Michigan.
She is studying for master's degrees in taxation and accounting at Fordham University.
Her father is a lawyer in Chicago.
Her mother teaches the sixth grade at the Burley School there.


Veteran Jazzman Swings With the Young
BILLY MITCHELL does not refer to his traditional weekly engagement at Sonny's Place in Seaford as a jam session.
"At a jam session," said the 65-year-old tenor saxophonist, "a guy will choose a tune he's been practicing all week, play his solo, and then walk away and start a conversation on the other side of the room."


A Rough New Neighbor in a Rough Old Neighborhood
Corrine Jennings points to the fresh blood splattered on her steps, and shakes her head.
"I keep a supply of bleach and ammonia on hand to clean up the blood," said Ms.
Jennings, who has lived on Second Street for more than a decade.
"They also defecate, urinate, and vomit right here."
Ms.
Jennings is referring to drug abusers whom she says have flocked to her neighborhood since the Lower East Side Harm Reduction Center's needle exchange program opened at 39 Avenue C, between Third and Fourth Streets, in July 1992.


Turmoil on Fleet St.
To the Editor:
In your March 12 news article about British newspapers on the defensive, you state that I regarded the story about Michael Foot published in The Sunday Times as "utter rubbish." This is not the case.
The phrase was in response to a question asking whether I regarded Mr.
Foot as an "agent." Clearly, Mr.
Foot was never an agent in the sense of being a spy.
This was subsequently distorted by other British newspapers.


Unsettling Social Commentary With Materials as 'Victims'
ABUSE, real and imagined, is very much in the news these days.
Usually, the victims are humans or animals, but in the case of "Material Abuse," at the Trans Hudson Gallery here, they are the makings of art.
The title may be a case of abuse abuse, but it could as easily reflect what Joseph Szoecs, the owner of Trans Hudson, calls "borrowed values," of which one example might be a collage of clips taken from the O. J. Simpson trial.


Remembering Is Child's Play (Yeah, Right!)
THINK OF THE CONCERT STAGE AS ITS own Trial of the Century and every musician as a witness in the hot seat.
Testimony to the facts is worth little if you can't remember them.
Forgetting is the professional's nightmare.
Memory, which makes no music by itself, plays a curiously central part in musical life.
We seem to expect it of soloists and often of conductors.
There are exceptions: for example, if the piece is new and especially complex.
Scores appear on stage mainly when accompanists are at work, be they pianists with singers or conductors with soloists.
Strong personalities can diverge, the thinking goes.
The chances of derailment increase.
Best to have a common reference in black and white to keep both parties on the track.


Novel Cafe: A Deadbeat Poets Society
In the four-and-a-half years that Diana Birchall and her kin have warmed seats at The Novel Cafe, she has produced five novels, none published.
Her son, Paul, has written one play, to no avail.
And her husband, Peter, has scribbled several volumes of poetry, without any intention of showing them to anyone.
Upstairs, David Carver is on his 23d year writing a memoir about being a homeless Vietnam veteran.
And across from the fiction section, a place where books find their own uneasy order, Doug -- nicknamed "Dogfood" Doug because of an earlier failed script, not the cafe's food -- worries over his latest attempt at screenwriting, "Banana Rose." The title recently appeared in hardcover, written by someone else.


INSIDE
INVESTING IT/Page 5/If it's highbrow beer and it's on the Internet, so it must be cool, right?
A look at an initial public stock offering.
By Reed Abelson.
MUTUAL FUNDS/Page 9/Mutual fund statements have a lot of words and numbers, but often they don't say much.
Here are some things to look for.
By Reed Abelson.
MUTUAL FUNDS/Page 10/After a gruesome 1994, mutual funds that invest in stocks are moving up smartly this year.
But don't forget: whatever goes up must come down.
By Leslie Eaton.
SPENDING IT/Page 11/Now that wine can be sold in New York at auction, here's the question: Is it easier to find a fine bottle at a good price?
By Peter Passell.


Plight of Historic Area Houses
WHEN Polly Hough sits in the living room of her home in the historic section of this town, where the houses are still known by the names of the original Quaker settlers, it's hard for her to avoid seeing the mold that has been steadily creeping up her walls for the last two years.
Nor is there any solace when she steps outside to work in her garden or use her backyard.
"I can't even mow in the summertime," said Mrs.
Hough, who has lived here for 37 years.
"My poor mowing machine and I just sink into the ground. In the last two years, what has happened is that the land has been eroding. It has been very frustrating."


Roberts Is Proving to Be A Wizard of the Greens
He is the best putter in professional golf, the Boss of the Moss to the caddies and the scourge of the greens to his fellow touring pros.
He is not Ben Crenshaw and he is not Phil Mickelson.
Neither is he Greg Norman.
Nor David Frost, Corey Pavin or Jose Maria Olazabal.
He is Loren Roberts, 39, the man whose strokes of genius had gone largely unnoticed until exactly one year ago, when he won the Nestle Invitational at Bay Hill and joined -- rather late in his career -- the ranks of winners on the PGA Tour.
When that happened, the golf world discovered him.
Later in the year, when he lost in a three-way playoff for the United States Open championship at Oakmont Country Club, the rest of the world followed.


SUNY Puts Grim Face On Cuts In Budget
THREATENED with more than $50 million in cuts for state-supported colleges on Long Island under Gov.
George E. Pataki's proposed budget, educators and legislators have raised the ante in the debate by proposing to raise tuition, cut certain programs severely and offer early retirements.
Mr.
Pataki's budget, which has to be approved by April 1, would cut $290 million for the State University system.
The SUNY trustees have proposed a $1,600 increase in the annual tuition, from $2,650, for state residents attending the 34 state-financed colleges and raised the specter of closing several campuses.
The 30 community colleges, financed in part by the state, are also examining plans to raise tuition.


No Trace of Lost Porpoise
The New York harbor police and marine researchers yesterday found no trace of an apparently sick harbor porpoise that wandered into Upper New York Bay and the Gowanus Canal in Brooklyn late Friday, then disappeared in darkness and fog before a rescue team arrived.
The gray, four-foot-long, torpedo-shaped mammal -- a whale family member that frequents the open sea or the eastern reaches of Long Island Sound but is almost never seen near the city -- was breathing rapidly and swimming in tight circles, signs of serious illness, experts said.


Funny Farms
Both parties have known for years that farm subsidies are a boondoggle.
But Southern, Midwestern and West Coast conservatives have been a lot more eager to take milk from welfare babies than to end welfare for milk producers.
A computer analysis by the Washington-based Environmental Working Group has pointed out anew the fiscal and ethical bankruptcy of Government subsidies for fat-cat farmers.
For the past 10 years, the Agriculture Department has been sending farm subsidy checks to a host of unlikely addresses, from Beverly Hills to Manhattan -- places where the total farm experience consists of picking out arugula at the local green grocer.
The revealing study, titled "City Slickers," shows that from 1985 to 1994 the agency doled out more than $1.8 billion to individuals living in or around the nation's 50 most populous cities, including $14.2 million to New York City and surrounding suburbs.
The leading Manhattan recipient, who lives in a Fifth Avenue apartment near Greenwich Village, collected $558,000 in taxpayer money for a farm in Holt County, Neb.
More than $1.4 million went to 36 residents of Marco Island, a wealthy vacation paradise in South Florida.
Washington, D.C.-area recipients included Sam Donaldson, ABC's sharp-tongued critic of Government folly.


Upper East Side: From Posh to Cozy
BARKING DOG LUNCHEONETTE ++ (212) 831-1800; 1678 Third Avenue, at 94th Street; $; no credit cards
With its dark wood paneling, bookcases and soft lighting, this engaging spot has the cozy feeling of a library.
It is one of the more pleasant spots for breakfast, brunch, lunch or dinner.
The gratifying, straightforward fare includes soups, salads, sandwiches and a selection of hot-plate dinners.
For starters there are fried, cornmeal-coated oysters with remoulade, shrimp and chicken sate with a peanut sauce, and a vegetable plate combining grilled zucchini, roast peppers and fresh mozzarella.
Salads include grilled chicken with sun-dried tomato, arugula and radicchio, and mixed greens with warm goat cheese croutons and shallot mustard vinaigrette.
Sandwiches include roast turkey breast on focaccia with cranberry mayonnaise, smoked bacon, sprouts and tomato, and grilled salmon on whole grain bread with a dill and caper sauce, cucumbers and marinated fennel.
Among the entrees are grilled leg of lamb with a potato-horseradish gratin, and meatloaf with mushroom gravy and mashed potatoes. ($25 and Under: 2/13/93)


Corrections
Because of a computer processing error, the fiction best-seller list on page 34 of The Times Book Review today ranks seven books incorrectly.
"Kiss the Girls," by James Patterson, should be No. 8, not No. 14; the books listed as No. 8 through No. 13 should each appear one position lower.


Lighten Up!
To the Editor:
Maybe it's just that I was overtired, but reading the Feb. 26 Book Review late at night, I found myself becoming more and more depressed.
The following morning I ran an analysis of the headlines, subheads and book titles in that issue, to see if I might just have imagined a distinctly down trend.


Word for Word / Winning Songs; Slices of Life, Love and Death Up the Volume at the 37th Grammys
YEAR after year, Grammy awards go to love songs -- ardent, decorous affirmations of undying devotion.
But popular music speaks in myriad voices, from the political to the pathological, and this year the Grammys noticed.
Old-fashioned love songs are hardly an endangered species.
One high-flown promise, "I Swear," won awards in country and pop because it was released in 1994 by both a country singer, John Michael Montgomery, and a vocal group, All-4-One.
"I'll Make Love to You," another suave come-on in four-part harmony, also won multiple awards.
But death and despair, feminist resentment and faith claimed awards, too.


No Headline
"At other cities' convention centers, the Zeitgeist is: Let's be reasonable so that everyone comes out ahead. In New York, the Zeitgeist is: My guy gets the contract for the paper towels in the men's room." WILLIAM J. STERN, on the Javits Convention Center.  [ 1:4. ]


Southern Touches in 'Scrap-Bag Tradition'
THEY are made out of pajama bottoms, burlap and old curtains.
They are warm, comfortable and practical.
And they represent the history, diversity and continuity of a traditional American craft.
They are quilts.
Eight Brooklyn quilters, who learned the craft from their mothers and grandmothers in the South, are showing their work in "It's Like a Joy in the House," at Brooklyn Borough Hall. (Above, Howard Golden, the Brooklyn Borough President, with Virginia Hall and her quilt.)


On Sunday; 1,361 Executed Here, and Fear Restarts Count
EVEN with New York coming back on line more slowly than anticipated, Watt Espy, the nation's foremost historian of the gallows, remains confident that the United States will soon be breaking the single-year record of 199 executions set in 1935.
That was a desperate time economically and criminally, but a good one for tabloid stories of cameras sequestered into the Sing Sing death house in carnival pursuit of the justly living's peeking at the condemned.
New York's actual return to capital punishment will take some time, and the impatience is palpable in some quarters.
Still, Mr.
Espy anticipates the nation's getting beyond that 1935 record by the year 2000.
Splurging millennially, we will be dispatching close to 300 criminals a year, versus the 75 expected to go this year by electrocution, gunfire, hanging and the increasingly popular lethal injection, with its antiseptic gurney and trappings of social triage.


Correction
A front-page contents entry on March 5 for an article about Jefferson's travels in Paris misspelled the author's family name.
She is Diana Ketcham, not Ketchum.


Margaret Levine and Bruce Upbin
Margaret Merrill Levine, a daughter of Ruth Miller Levine of Sarasota, Fla., and the late William V. Levine, is to be married today to Bruce Stuart Upbin, the son of Michele Barst Davis of Long Pond, Pa., and Solomon J. Upbin of Bangall, N.Y.
Rabbi Sue Ann Wasserman is to perform the ceremony in the SoHo loft of Adam Guettel, a friend of the couple.
The bride, 31, is keeping her name.
She is a graduate of Barnard College and received a master's degree in fine arts from the University of Arizona, as did the bridegroom.
She teaches English at the Chapin School in New York.
Her father owned a corporate communications concern in New York that bore his name.


Playing Cowboy Family Style In Texas
THE knock on the door came at 7:12 A.M on a Saturday.
It was the first full day of our five-day family vacation last June in the Hill Country of Texas.
"Good morning, saddle buddies!" came the relentlessly cheery voice of a young woman who, upon inspection as we opened the door, was outfitted in full Western regalia, bearing cups of coffee for us and orange juice for our two young children.
"Trail ride in 20 minutes!" she said.
"Everybody up and out for the cowboy breakfast!" She went on her way, knocking on other cabins with the same ebullient tidings.
So our day began at the Mayan Dude Ranch, a 350-acre, family-oriented resort, 45 miles northwest of San Antonio, that stops at nothing to make the Old West fun for children as well as adults.
And in a few minutes, we -- my wife, Lisa, our then 6-year-old, Gordon, and then 3-year-old, Alice (who rode with my wife or me on one of our horses) -- were all saddled up for a very slow meander across fields alive with thistle, Indian paintbrush and other late-spring wildflowers.
Jack rabbits darted out of the way; peacocks strutted about; an armadillo just watched as we passed by along rough, parched tracks amid low hills marked with live oak, cedar and mesquite trees.
Nearby we could see cypress along the Medina River.


Warsaw Bans a Clinic's In-Vitro Fertilization Treatments
The Warsaw medical authorities have ordered a private fertility clinic to stop in-vitro fertilization treatments on grounds that the doctors there were violating Poland's anti-abortion law.
The action against the Novum clinic, a high-tech set of laboratories and treatment rooms in a country with dilapidated state-run medical institutions, has caused a furor among doctors, legislators and patients.


Look Also at Who Profits From Sweatshops; A Child-Labor History
To the Editor:
Children working alongside their mothers in sweatshops ("Week in Sweatshop Reveals Grim Conspiracy of the Poor," March 12), in mills and in their own homes are part of a long American tradition.


THE ART OF HIS CHOOSING
As a result of our exhibition of Kerry James Marshall's intriguing paintings in December 1994, our entire docent council was unanimous in expressing one wish: that somehow this talented artist would get some national exposure.
And, thanks to the article by Paul Goldberger, that wish has come true.
It is the Whitney Biennial's loss that Marshall's luscious, narrative paintings will be absent; but certainly curiosity and interest in Kerry James Marshall has been aroused by Goldberger's article, and we in Cleveland hope that patrons of contemporary art will soon see him exhibited in accessible galleries.
RUTH DANCYGER Cleveland Center for Contemporary Art Cleveland


Hot Dogs, Volleyball Courts and Waterfront Access
VOLLEYBALL players of Queens, take comfort.
Thanks to the efforts of Vincent Luccisano, you will have three new sand-surfaced courts to play on this summer.
To find them, take a spin down to Howard Beach on Cross Bay Boulevard, that speedway to the Rockaways.
While there, stop in for clams or a frankfurter at his 50-seat restaurant, now in construction.
Nonplayers will be welcome too.


New Jersey


Republicans' Vow of Budget Cuts Carries Risks Down on the Farm
Clutching a briefcase stuffed with business papers, Dwayne Schmeissner, a bottom-line conservative who cheered the Republican takeover of Congress last fall, spoke insistently about the need to slash Government spending.
He pointed to some fat targets: welfare, foreign aid, academic research.
But when asked about cuts in agricultural subsidies, the 35-year-old wheat farmer sighed apprehensively, pulling on his thick red beard, and said, "Well now, that's a scary proposition."


Exhibition in Memory of a Photographer
A PORTRAIT as evocative as her own art emerged from a memorial service held for the photographer Harriet Gans last May.
Friends and colleagues from such diverse fields as literature, medicine and theology spoke of her probing mind, radiant personality and passion for life.
Her photographs, displayed at the front of the chapel, were allowed to speak for themselves.
Ghostly images of statues, juxtaposed with vibrant fruit and flowers that seemed to float in space, hinted at Ms.
Gans's four-and-a-half-year struggle with ovarian cancer, the disease that took her life at age 55.


Jeffrey MacDonald's New Jury
FATAL JUSTICE  Reinvestigating the MacDonald Murders.
By Jerry Allen Potter and Fred Bost.
Illustrated. 463 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $25.


QUESTIONS FOR: John Cleese
Q: Were you always funny?
A: I became funny when I was about 10, when I discovered it was a very good way to be popular.
People said to me, oh, you should become a comic, but people from my small town didn't do things like that.


Alaska Cruise-Ship Plan Stirs Environmentalists
A PROPOSED increase in the number of cruise ships allowed into Glacier Bay in Alaska is raising concerns among environmentalists as well as some employees of the man behind the plan, Interior Secretary Bruce Babbit.
The bay is one of the continent's prime breeding and feeding grounds for endangered humpback whales.
Cruise lines, though, are celebrating the idea, saying it represents an opportunity for Alaska to increase its revenues from tourism without harming either the whales or the environment.
As a lure for visitors, few scenes in all of North America rival Glacier Bay, the centerpiece of the 3.2 million-acre Glacier Bay National Park, which was established in 1980.
Snowcapped mountains, some 15,000 feet tall, rise straight out of its crystal blue waters.
About 65 miles inland from the mouth of the bay are the massive faces of two glaciers that in summer periodically produce icebergs as big as office buildings.
Sea lions, seals, eagles, bears and moose share the space with killer, minke and humpback whales.
Glacier Bay attracted 250,000 visitors last year, double the number of a decade ago.


2 Faces of Paris Bistros: Classic and Provencal
WHILE Paris of the 1930's popularized the culinary age of Lyons and its classic bistro fare, Paris of the 1990's has turned its eye and palate toward Provence and the Mediterranean for simple, hearty eating.
The 1930's was the era of mom-and-pop restaurants where homey dishes and trencherman-size portions were de rigueur.
The 1990's finds us in the age of sensible eating and good value.
Considering ways of life, health consciousness and changing dietary trends away from meat, butter and cream and toward fish, olive oil and vegetables, the shift is a natural one.
Yet, not surprisingly, Parisians still embrace the two distinct styles of bistro cuisine with equal fervor.


Istanbul Dining
To the Editor: I would like to relate my experience at the Sureyya restaurant in Istanbul, the subject of a letter to the editor (Jan. 22) that may have left readers with negative impressions.
Because of the original article by Alan Cowell, "What's Doing in Istanbul" (May 22, 1994), my wife and two friends dined there on Sept. 30.
I do admit that we were surprised when we were ushered out on the terrace and saw the Mobil sign, but it was obscured behind hedges once we were seated.


A Season Eases Its Gentle Grip


An Alternative To a New Area Code
"A Problem for Regulators: How Does 860 Go Into 203?" (Feb. 26), concerning plans to introduce a second area code in Connecticut, missed the bigger story of how this long-term inconvenience could have been avoided.
Last year the five members of the state's Department of Public Utility Control approved by a 3-2 vote Southern New England Telephone's recommendation to make it necessary to dial 11 digits to make in-state long distance calls.
In doing so they narrowly rejected an alternative that would have enabled callers to reach anywhere in the state by dialing only seven digits.


Clash of the Old-Movie Titans
WHEN AMERICAN MOVIE Classics first appeared on cable television networks in late 1984, people scoffed at the idea.
A channel showing old black-and-white movies, around the clock, won't last long, cable programmers predicted.
AMC has proved them very wrong.
Its audience for films of the 1930's, 40's and 50's is not only substantial but unusually dedicated, with cable-system operators consistently identifying AMC as one of their viewers' favorite channels.


Spring Artichokes And Asparagus
ON the cusp of spring, seasonal appetites turn from parsnips and butternut squash to artichokes and asparagus.
Although both of these are sold all year, they are at their most tender and most reasonably priced in spring.
Artichokes and asparagus can enhance scores of dishes.
But at the start of the season simplest is best.
Pencil-slim asparagus can be added raw to a salad or used for dipping.
The tiniest baby artichokes can be sliced paper thin and tossed with lemon juice, olive oil and shavings of Parmesan cheese for a classic Tuscan salad.


Hot Dogs, Volleyball Courts and Waterfront Access
VOLLEYBALL players of Queens, take comfort.
Thanks to the efforts of Vincent Luccisano, you will have three new sand-surfaced courts to play on this summer.
To find them, take a spin down to Howard Beach on Cross Bay Boulevard, that speedway to the Rockaways.
While there, stop in for clams or a frankfurter at his 50-seat restaurant, now in construction.
Nonplayers will be welcome too.


Inflationary
To the Editor:
One thing is certain: If funding for the N.E.A. is abolished, art will become ever more elitist, because only society's elite will be able to afford it.
W.
STUART MCDOWELL  Dayton, Ohio


Harry Specht, 65; Taught Social Work
Harry Specht, an advocate for strengthening social work's commitment to the poor, died last Sunday at the Alta Bates Hospital in Berkeley, Calif., where he lived.
He was 65.
The cause was pneumonia brought on by complications from throat cancer, said a son, Dan Specht.


Fractured Families: Dealing With Multiple Divorce -- A special report.; Struggling to Find Stability When Divorce Is a Pattern
First, Annie and Ivan married.
They had two children.
They divorced.
Later, Barry moved into Annie's house.
Annie loved him.
Her children did not.
Three years passed, and he was gone.
Two years later, Annie moved her children into Lee's house.
Annie loved him.
Her children did not.
For nearly three years, Annie and Lee and her children have circled one another warily, trying to decide whether this newest family could endure.


A Peach of a Deal, But for the Aftertaste
TRUST us -- we know what's best for you.
That's the age-old mantra for corporations trying to shove some seemingly nonsensical deal down investors' throats.
Too often, investors shrug and give their approval.
Then, surprise!
Corporate insiders walk away with sacks of cash that once belonged in the investors' pockets.
Only then do the investors realize that maybe their interests weren't the driving force behind the deal after all.


Miami Gets Oh, So Close, In Overtime Loss to Virginia
Junior Burrough and his senior teammates had never lost an overtime basketball game in their University of Virginia careers.
They didn't want today to be the first.
Burrough scored 9 of his 28 points in overtime to power Virginia to a 60-54 triumph over surprisingly tough Miami of Ohio in the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament Midwest Regional before 13,045 at the University of Dayton Arena.


New Armani Facade Draws a Frown
Community Board 8 wants Giorgio Armani's latest design -- for a new boutique at 760 Madison Avenue -- sent back for some alterations.
And Mr.
Armani says he is eager to work something out.
With its stark, geometric lines and dazzling white limestone facade, the proposed building, designed by Peter Marino and Associates, makes a bold fashion statement.
But would it clash with its more traditional surroundings, particularly the ornate, dark brownstones next door?
Would it violate the Upper East East Side Historic District?


Dawn Greene and Charles Norchi
Dawn Mary Greene, an associate policy analyst at the Wildlife Conservation Society in the Bronx, and Charles Howard Norchi, the executive director of the International League for Human Rights in New York, were married on Friday at the Chapelle du St.-Barthelemy in Verbier, Switzerland.
The Rev.
Louis-Ernest Fellay performed the Roman Catholic ceremony.
Mrs.
Norchi, 29, graduated from Columbia University and received a master's degree in environmental studies from Yale University.
She is the daughter of Jerome P. Greene and Veronica T. Greene, both of New York.
The bride's father is a partner in Benedetto, Gartland &amp; Greene, an investment bank in New York.


HOUSE TO HOUSE
In reference to Judith Stone's Endpaper ("House to House," Feb. 26): How could you?
Where were your editors, your minds?
One House of Commons?
Not only does Canada have a House of Commons, but your very own President spoke there just a few days ago.


Wrestling a Virus to the Screen
HIS 15TH-FLOOR OFFICE ON Wilshire Boulevard offers a panoramic view of Los Angeles.
Fresh tulips, lilies and irises are placed daily in vases beside his desk.
There's a silver bowl of such immaculate, ripened strawberries that it seems criminal to actually eat one.
Everything in the office symbolizes Hollywood-style power and luxury -- the blood-red and ebony walls and matching carpet, the leather chairs, the Oscar on the desk.
Then, of course, there are the personally inscribed photographs on the wall, of movie stars like Harrison Ford, Michael Douglas and Tommy Lee Jones, taken by the producer himself.


Topics of The Times; Virtual Flora
The promenade at Rockefeller Center is aglow with polyester flowers this month -- yes, polyester.
Several neat signs proclaim the plastic is "just for the fun of it!" Real flowers have a hard time coping with the "variable and often quite cold" weather in March, they explain.
But polyester is polyester, in a garden spot where New Yorkers and visitors from around the world have become accustomed to finding a tranquil island of natural beauty -- in March, evergreens and ivy until the spring blooms blossom.
The polyester plantings run the half-block from Fifth Avenue down to the ice skating rink.
There are daffodils, hyacinth, azalea, dogwood and more.
They add vibrant spring color to the place, no doubt about it.
They even have the smell of spring, thanks to a dousing of flowery perfume.


Among Silent Stars, A Design for Living
REVEALING that Rudolph Valentino was homosexual may hardly induce a shrug but Kevin Connors means to cause a stir with "Lover: The Valentino Musical," if only to awaken Fairfield County to the reemergence of Music Theater of Connecticut after a two-year break.
Mr.
Connors is the composer and the director of the new musical, which is to play at the Westport Country Playhouse (454-3883) for five performances from Thursdays through next Sunday.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE HOCKEY  Title Goes to R.P.I.
In a 12-team tournament, Rensselaer was ranked only sixth best.
But once the skating began the Engineers from Troy, N.Y., exploited their speed to emerge as the Eastern College Athletic Conference tournament champion.
They beat Princeton, 5-1, last night before a crowd of 6,562 at the Olympic Arena in Lake Placid, N.Y., and earned an automatic berth to the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.
R.P.I. (19-13-4) was clearly superior to Princeton (18-13-4) throughout and the Tigers' goal was the last of the contest.
Clarkson took third place in the tournament by defeating Colgate, 10-5.
Chris Lipsett had four goals for the Golden Knights.


Milton Cramer Goes to Heaven
THE AFTERLIFE DIET By Daniel Pinkwater. 259 pp. New York: Random House. $21.


Russell W. Raitt, 87, a Scientist Who Helped Map the Sea Floor
Russell W. Raitt, an oceanographer who helped define the structure and evolution of the sea floor, died on March 6 in the Pacific Regent Health Center in San Diego.
He was 87 and lived in San Diego.
The cause was heart failure, the family said.


Commercial Property/United Nations; Other Cities and Countries Woo the U.N.'s Agencies
IT must be a strange feeling: courted by so many, yet still waiting for concrete overtures from the one whose courtship would be most welcomed -- and, in fact, most expected.
That is the position that many United Nations agencies find themselves in these days.
Bonn, facing the specter of empty buildings as the German Government moves to Berlin, wooed Unicef, and now is wooing the United Nations Development Program.
Vienna and Geneva have made rich offers to agencies as well.


Deane M. Allen, John D. Gilliam
Deane Meredith Allen, formerly the vice president of operations at the Research Board, a computer industry consulting firm in New York, was married yesterday to John Drews Gilliam, a former deputy controller of New York City.
The Rev.
Dr.
Mark S. Anschutz performed the ceremony at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
Gilliam graduated from Wellesley College.
She is the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Edward Allen of Colonia, N.J.
Her father was the president of the California Oil Company in Perth Amboy, N.J.


Microbrew Stock Offer: Mostly Foam
BOUTIQUE beer is hot.
Cyberspace is hot.
So what could be more hip than a microbrewer that takes itself public over the Internet?
The Spring Street Brewing Company, a New York start-up, is currently hawking its shares on line.
But investors who let themselves be swayed by this techno-financial novelty may soon be crying in their beer.
Selling the stock, certainly, won't be simple.
Because of the deal's microscopic size -- only 2.7 million shares are being offered at $1.85 each -- Spring Street will escape the stiffest requirements of the Securities and Exchange Commission and will not be listed on an exchange.
The stock is registered for sale in New York, New Jersey, Connecticut and 12 other states, but that leaves out potential buyers in the other 35 states (including California and Massachusetts).


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
FLATIRON DISTRICT  $355,000  117 East 24th Street11 3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. condo in a loft building; elevator, dining area, 12-ft.-ceilings, maple floors, 2 exposures; common charge $459, taxes $5,580, listed at $365,000, 13 weeks on market (Broker: Selena Goudeau)


If Elected, They'll Do This (Unless They Don't)
"Promises and pie crust are made to be broken." Jonathan Swift
WHEN Gov.
Pete Wilson of California pledged during his re-election campaign last year that he would not run for President in 1996, only to say in recent days that, well, he didn't really mean it, he was practicing a familiar political ritual.


Pamela W. Haft, Abner P. Slatt
Pamela W. Haft, the director of music at the Birch Wathen Lenox School in New York, and Abner P. Slatt, a partner at Slatt &amp; Lane, a law firm in New York, are to be married today.
Rabbi Robert Levine is to perform the ceremony at the bride's home in Sharon, Conn.
The bride, 52, graduated from Indiana University.
She is the daughter of the late Selig and Helen Whinston.


Marylee Jenkins, Paul G. Petrylak
Marylee Jenkins, the daughter of Mary Ann and Charles Jenkins of Trumbull, Conn., and Paul Gregory Petrylak, a son of Irene and Nicholas Petrylak of Whitestone, Queens, were married yesterday at St.
Paul's Chapel of Columbia University in Manhattan.
The Rev.
Eric C. Markman, a Presbyterian minister, officiated, and the Rev.
Philip Sandrick, a Ukrainian Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
The bride, who is 29 and is keeping her name, is an associate at Robin, Blecker, Daley &amp; Driscoll, a law firm in New York.
She graduated from a joint program of Centre College of Kentucky and Columbia University, with degrees in physics and engineering.
She received a law degree from the New York Law School.


Ramos Calls the Filipino Maid Executed in Singapore a Heroine
As thousands of Filipinos crowded the streets of Manila today to view the coffin bearing the body of the Filipino maid executed in Singapore for murder, President Fidel V. Ramos declared the woman a heroine whose death "will not be in vain."
The remarks by President Ramos were remarkable, given his earlier request that Filipinos put the uproar over the execution of Flor Contemplacion behind them in the interest of regional harmony.


Wasting Money On Losers
Tax inentives are indeed a great way to induce motorists to burn natural gas ("Big Fleets Switching to Natural Gas," Feb. 19).
Exempting the gassers from Connecticut's 31-cents-a-gallon road use tax will hardly be noticed by the gasoline-powered motorists who must make up the difference.
And long term, the impact on air quality will be breathtaking.
When all the vehicles in the state run on natural gas, no tax money will be coming in to fill the potholes or shore up the bridges.
The roads will be impassable, we can all stay home, and the air will at last be clear.


Habitats/455 West 148th Street; Limestone Rowhouse Replete With Harlem History
THE first owner of the elaborate 1898 limestone rowhouse at 455 West 148th Street in Harlem was a financier from "downtown" who built it for his paramour and installed a herringboned wood oval dance floor in the basement, so they could practice the tango together -- alone.
During Prohibition, an Art Deco bar and blue-glass mirror behind it were built, and "rent parties" were held for neighbors too broke to pay their rent; everybody would throw a few dollars in a hat to help, someone would volunteer to play some music, and the neighbor's landlord would be satisfied -- at least until the next month.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
THE LAST OF THE DUCHESS  By Caroline Blackwood. Pantheon, $23.


The Muse in the Machine: Or, The Poetics of Zork
WHAT has poetry to do with computer software?
They share a great human myth or trope, an image that could be called the secret passage: the discovery of large, manifold channels through a small, ordinary-looking or all but invisible aperture.
Pressed to define the special attributes of poetry as an art, I would name speed and memory.
Whipping from image to abstraction, from narrative to reflection, from neat epigram to sensuous trope, poetry can cross terrain and change direction with tremendous swiftness.
Compared to ordinary language, it can be like ice-skating compared to walking. (Discursive prose, to extend the comparison a bit mischievously, often resembles wading straight ahead.) And the effort to enlarge memory -- to recall genealogy or history, for example -- is the most obvious source for the development of verse.


The Top Man in the House Holds A Lower Place Among the People
Speaker Newt Gingrich may be revered by Republicans on Capitol Hill, but polls suggest that his remarkably high profile has carried a price among voters.
At the Kmart here in this solidly Republican suburb outside Philadelphia the other day, even people who said they liked the Speaker were leery of him.


Animal Rescuers Needed Because the System Failed
To the Editor:
The animal rescue community exists largely because New York City lacks a rational animal control policy.
Animal control is organized under the Department of Health, which regards animals essentially as public health problems.
It has therefore been content for decades to collect and dispose of abandoned animals much as it collects and disposes of the city's trash.


Australia And Kiwis Are in A Sea Feud
In America's Cup yacht racing, it doesn't take much to build tension between crews.
Even a gesture as seemingly benign as waving a hand is part of a subtle language, a signal that all is well or willfully wrong, depending on how it's taken.
Such is the state of affairs now between New Zealand's two teams and Australian yachtsmen as the four challengers, including Japan, begin racing today in the Louis Vuitton Cup semifinals.


Old Bones
A TIME TO DANCE By Walter Sullivan. 195 pp.
Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press. $22.95.


The Demise of the Easter Bunny in East New York
AT their family-owned stuffed toy factory in Brooklyn's tough East New York section, where the current inventory of Easter bunnies and teddy bears is smaller than the stock of treasured memories, the Parisi brothers look back fondly on the period they have dubbed the Year of the Snake.
Answering a demand in the spring of 1962 for a carnival and boardwalk prize that was cheap and easy to produce, they started a national fad by creating a 6-foot-long plush serpent.
Before long, young people by the thousands were sporting the snakes around their necks, and companies around the country were copying the item.
"It was unbelievable," said Tony Parisi, one of three brothers still active in the business.
"I sold them to every chain department store in the United States."


Question Now: How Much War in Bosnia?
Having reduced the risk of war in Croatia by persuading it not to expel United Nations peacekeepers, President Clinton's foreign policy team is now seeking to prevent stepped-up fighting in Bosnia, but many officials predict a major outbreak of hostilities with the arrival of spring weather.
With a four-month cease-fire due to expire at the end of next month, Mr.
Clinton's foreign policy advisers acknowledge that there is almost no chance of getting Bosnia's Muslim-dominated Government and the country's rebel Serbs to agree to a peace plan by then.


Animal Rescuers Needed Because the System Failed
To the Editor:
The main reason there is a need for animal rescuers in New York City ("Humans to the Rescue," March 5) is because of the failure of the tax-supported system that is supposed to humanely and intelligently address the cat and dog overpopulation problem -- a system now embodied in the Center for Animal Care and Control.
Accepting the truth about this failed system instead of taking a defensive posture would be a gesture of good faith by the center.
Smoke and mirrors will do nothing to change an essentially rotten core.


Algerian-in-Exile's Pen Wielded for Home Front
To Islamic fundamentalists, there are not enough insults to do justice to Algeria's best-known political cartoonist.
In the lexicon of Islamist political slurs, he has been called some of the worst -- from atheist-Communist to agent of Christian "crusaders."
The cartoonist, Menouard Merabtene, bespectacled and 49, readily acknowledges that he hates the fundamentalists as much as they hate him.


Foreign Affairs; Yesterday's Man
Warren Christopher did yeoman's service last week in cajoling and enticing Syria's president Hafez el-Assad to resume peace talks with Israel.
But frankly I'm really tired of watching secretaries of state trudge off to Damascus to beg Mr.
Assad to resume negotiations that are in his self-interest.
It's time for a new approach.
I propose that the next time Mr.
Christopher sits down with Mr.
Assad, he opens like this:
"Hafez -- you don't mind if I call you Hafez? Hafez, you are yesterday's man. You're still living in the cold war. I know you've only traveled outside the Middle East a few times, so let me tell you a little bit about the new world.
"Hafez, Syria today can barely make a light bulb. That's sad. That's also why your per capita income is only $1,200 a year. Have you ever been to Japan, Hafez? At the Lexus factory in Toyota City, the Japanese produce 300 Lexus sedans each day with 66 human beings and 310 robots. And you can barely make a light bulb. The world is passing you by.
"Now, Hafez, the reason I'm telling you this is because during the cold war, it didn't matter whether Syria made computer chips or potato chips, a Lexus or a light bulb, because you could make a good living just by milking the superpowers for aid and blackmailing your neighbors.
"But, Hafez, the cold war is over. There is a new global architecture. There are no longer two superpowers to play against each other. There is only one and we're broke.
"Instead of superpowers, Hafez, there are super markets. There's the Tokyo bond market and the Frankfurt bond market and the Singapore bond market and the Wall Street bond market. These bond markets are actually more powerful than many governments today. And let me tell you, Hafez, you don't play the Tokyo bond market off against the Frankfurt bond market. No, no, no. They play you off. That's right, they play Syria off against Mexico off against Brazil off against Thailand.
"Whichever country has the most stable government, the most efficient economy, the most Westernized legal system, the most convertible currency and the most educated labor force, gets rewarded with investment capital from the super markets. Those countries that don't get their house in order are left as roadkill on the global investment highway. And, Hafez, you are destined to be roadkill.
"Now, Hafez, every time I come to Syria the phones don't work in the press room. When we go to Jordan and Egypt, we have touch-tone phones, but here, in your Sheraton Hotel, they have these old rotary dials with these very nice Syrian women who spend all day dialing for our reporters, because it can take hours to get through. It's generous of you, but don't you think those women would be more productive making goods for export?
"Tell you what, I'm going to leave you my cellular, satellite phone. It's the latest model from Motorola. You'll reach me in Washington in seconds. Because, Hafez, I don't intend to make any more trips out here. You bore me, and these nine-hour history lessons on the Crusades that you put me through each visit are not an efficient use of my time. Why don't you put them on a compact disk and just hand them out to every visiting secretary of state?
"You see, Hafez, I've got too many other important places to be: Mexico, Russia, China. Who should rule the Golan Heights is a fascinating question, but it's utterly irrelevant to U.S. interests today. But, hey, we'd still love to hear from you. When you're ready to do business, just dial 001-202-647-4910. Ask for Chris. Otherwise, Hafez, stay out of my life."
(Wednesday: Assad's answer.)


Civil Rights Sit-Ins Changed Vanderbilt
To the Editor:
Lamar Alexander, Presidential candidate and former Tennessee Governor, has told us of his role as a student civil rights leader at Vanderbilt University in the 1960's.
His account, while not exactly inaccurate, is somewhat misleading.


You Mean, She Gets the Cutest Boy? Oh, Go On
Bye Bye, Love  Matthew Modine, Randy Quaid, Paul Reiser Directed by Sam Weisman PG-13 107 minutes


Plastic That Pays You Back May Not Be Your Best Payoff
WOULD you sign up for a weight-loss program that promises you can eat as many gallons of chocolate ice cream as you want because all the extra pounds will melt away -- after 20 years?
The Mellon Bank of Pittsburgh is making a variation on that offer with its unusual Cornerstone Mastercard, which promises to let you indulge now and get back all the finance charges you pay over the years.
For people struggling to make their credit card payments, it sounds great.
And 700,000 people have taken the card.


Ripple Effect
To the Editor:
Josh Young's report on the importance of money from the arts and humanities endowments to the production of independent film documentaries  [ "A Slow Fade for Documentaries?," Feb. 26 ]  neglects an important aspect of the problem.


Topics of The Times; Garbo, Fact and Fiction
There was less to Greta Garbo, it seems, than met the eye.
Her telephone conversations were banal beyond belief, and her daily doings a monument to the mundane.
Naps.
Long walks.
"General Hospital" in the afternoon and "Matlock" at night.
Anybody seated next to her at a dinner party (she went to very few) could be sure of a dull evening.
Such are the findings of her latest biographer, Barry Paris, and indeed of everyone who has written about Garbo the person.
Garbo the myth is something else entirely, even now that we know much more about the awful truth.


March 12-18: Ouch, Say Democrats; House Budget Cutters Get Serious, and 'You Ain't Seen Nothing Yet'
Ever since Republicans swamped them at the polls by promising to cut spending, Democrats have taken solace in the fact that their foes would eventually have to deliver on the pledge -- and, presumably, bite the electorate that fed their victory.
Last week, however, the Republican House finally showed a few teeth.
By a 227-to-200 vote, the House struck $17.3 billion from the current year's Federal budget, almost all of it from programs close to Democratic hearts, including President Clinton's nationalservice corps.
The action was probably symbolic; Senate Democrats seem likely to block most of the cuts.


Going Underground Down Under
I FIRST visited Jenolan Caves, 113 miles west of Sydney, five years ago, after an advertisement I saw at my Sydney hotel announced a day tour by bus that combined them with the Blue Mountains.
What I did not realize was that there were nine caves open to the public at Jenolan, and on a day trip from Sydney it is possible to visit only one.
On that visit I chose Lucas Cave from the options offered on the tour, and marveled at its vast chambers adorned with stalactites and stalagmites.
But curiosity about the caves I didn't see made me want to return; I finally managed to do so last August.
As a cave lover who has roamed through caverns in the United States, France and Italy, I was delighted by what I found.
About 300 caves are estimated to exist in the Jenolan region, all thought to be part of a vast interconnected system.
Although Jenolan derives from an aboriginal word meaning "high mountain," the aborigines are not known to have explored the underground labyrinths.
Each of the caves that tourists see has its own name, and the entrances to most are inside an enormous natural bridge called the Grand Arch.
Others are approached through a special manmade entrance near the ticket office.


Small Planes Are Coming Back
FOR the price of a Porsche 911 Turbo you might soon be able to buy yourself a brand new small plane like a Cessna.
After a long hiatus, aircraft manufacturers may soon be turning them out of production lines.
Why?
Last August, Congress passed the General Aviation Revitalization Act, which protects makers of small aircraft from being sued over accidents involving planes more than 18 years old.
And earlier this month House Republicans passed a measure that would put a cap on punitive damages involving defective products and personal injuries. (Its fate in the Senate is uncertain.)


Coastal Disturbances
Route 1, from San Francisco to Monterey, twists and turns high above the Pacific.
It is early spring and I am alone on my way to a conference.
The light is so cheerful it exhilarates, so fragile it leaves me wistful, and I'm reminded of the natives who once roamed these parts, dancing, as they put it, on the brink of the world.
It is sheer perversity that keeps me on this narrow, twisting path.
I have to fight an impulse to turn inland, toward the wide, fast, predictable highway, telling myself that weekends alone in unfamiliar places are the only risk left in an otherwise safe and orderly life.


Montserrat and Jamaica Start Information Lines
Two special telephone lines have been set up for people seeking information on Montserrat and Jamaica.
The Montserrat Tourist Information Office will send guides to the island's transportation, hotels, restaurants and leisure activities, as well as background information on its culture and history, to those who dial (800) 646-2002.
The line is open Monday to Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.


Streetscapes/The Metropolitan Museum of Art; Glimpses of the Covered-Over Victorian Gallery
ALONG with its new exhibit on the history of the museum, the Metropolitan Museum of Art is starting to restore parts of a giant Victorian work that has been painted over and covered up over the years.
The work is the museum's original 1880 building, of which only fragments remain.
The exhibit, "The Architecture of The Metropolitan Museum of Art, 1870-1995," opens on April 4 and closes on Sept. 3.
It begins with the museum's founding in 1870.
The original design by Vaux &amp; Mould proposed an expansive network of slim galleries arranged around a series of 6 (and later, 12) courtyards, a complex covering about the same amount of land that the museum now occupies.


Turkish Muslims in Germany Protest Abuse in Turkey


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday with an article about the Brooklyn Heights Association misidentified a civic program that puts mentally handicapped people to work cleaning Montague Street, and misstated the association's role in the program.
It is Project Sweep, not Project Pride.
It was started and is run by the Midwood Development Corporation; the association raised the money to bring it to Montague Street.


Sports of The Times; City Teen-Agers Hold A Calm Garden Party
FOR almost all of the teen-agers in yesterday's Public Schools Athletic League championships, their sneakers were squeaking on the Madison Square Garden court for the first time.
Maybe for the only time.


MY MOTHER IS SPEAKING FROM THE DESERT
MY MOTHER IS SPEAKING FROM THE DESERT.
Everything she says now is spoken from the desert, a desert she has in part created.
But only in part.
Mostly, I suppose, the desert was created because she is 86 and something has hardened or broken or worn out.
The part she made came about through a dark will and sense of worthlessness.
Believing she deserves nothing, she surrounds herself with empty air.
The sun gleams in her eyes.
Her eyes can sometimes seem colorless, as if they were ruined by looking at the sun.
Sometimes she looks blind.
Her eyes are very beautiful.
The rest of her face is gaunt now and so you must look at her eyes: you can't look at anything else.
When she hasn't combed her hair, when she has lost a tooth she won't have attended to, when she won't cut or file her nails, or change her clothes, she is distressing to look at.
She used to be a very buoyant person, fleshy, with a wonderful skin that always made you think of the inner flesh of fruit: an apple or a peach.
When she wore sleeveless dresses in summer, the cool, thick muscles of her upper arms made you want to rest your hot cheeks against them.
The freshness and crispness of those dresses was a miracle.
Their colors were the colors of nature: sea green, sky blue.
It was as if she were wearing the elements themselves -- the limitless sky, the refreshing sea -- instead of a dress made of material whose shade was only a reminder of sea or sky.


Rise in Hudson Valley Tourism
OVERSEAS, the dollar may be down.
But at home the tourist dollar buys more than ever, especially in the Hudson River Valley region.
That's the message 200 vendors hope to impart to more than 1,000 tour operators and travel planners at Travel Expo '95, a tourism trade show on Wednesday, Thursday and Friday at the Mid-Hudson Civic Center in Poughkeepsie.
To emphasize how important travel is in Westchester County, the Westchester Convention and Visitors Bureau released figures for 1994 that show that tourism -- which includes conventions, meetings and vacation travel -- generated more than $385 million, up 24.5 percent from 1993.
Convention bookings alone were up 347 percent from the previous year.
And the jump in employment in the tourist industry generated an all-time-high industry payroll of $507.6 million.


Ballet Theater Sits for a Documentarian's Portrait
AFTER PROBING contemporary American institutions in a long series of award-winning documentaries, Freder ick Wiseman has for the first time turned his eye to the world of culture, going behind the scenes at American Ballet Theater to record the entire cycle of creativity, from the routine of the classroom to the magic of performance.
Why the arts now? he was asked.
"I wanted to do a film about a cultural institution in the same way I have described other institutions," he said.


Into the Night With a Mask
Un Bal Russe, a masked ball in celebration of Purim,  at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, March 8.


A Gallery all to Yourself
A PASSION FOR ART  Renoir, Cezanne, Matisse and Dr.
Barnes.
CD-ROM.
Windows version available now; Macintosh version to be released this summer.
Bellevue, Wash.: Corbis Publishing.
No suggested retail price given.


BENEFITS
Music From Green Mountains  TODAY -- Alumni from the Adamant (Vt.) Music School will perform at a concert in the Weill Recital Hall of Carnegie Hall.
The program, which starts at 2:30 P.M., will benefit the school's piano scholarship program.
Cocktails and dinner will follow next door at the Russian Tea Room.
Tickets, $200, or $5 for the concert alone, from (212) 532-5076.
Derek Harper at Mantle's  MONDAY -- Derek Harper, a guard for the New York Knicks, will be honored at Mickey Mantle's restaurant, at 42 Central Park South.
The event will benefit the American Suicide Foundation, which is giving Mr.
Harper its Community Youth Service Award.
Cocktails at 6 P.M. will be followed by a buffet dinner.
Tickets, $135, from (212) 410-1111.
Honor for Elizabeth Dole  TUESDAY -- Elizabeth H. Dole, the president of the American Red Cross, will receive the New York chapter's 1995 Humanitarian Award at a black-tie dinner at the Pierre.
Cocktails at 7 will be followed by dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 627-1000.
Joan Rivers and Friends  TUESDAY -- Joan Rivers and several other comedians will perform at Town Hall to raise funds for the Lesbian and Gay Community Services Center in Greenwich Village.
Robert Woolley of Sotheby's will auction a hot-air balloon picnic and other items.
The event begins at 6 P.M. with a cocktail reception at Expo, 124 West 43d Street.
The 8 P.M. show and auction at Town Hall will be followed by a dance party at Expo beginning at 10:30.
Tickets, $25 for show only, $35 for show and reception, from (212) 620-7310.
Dancing for Charity  WEDNESDAY -- Big Brothers/Big Sisters of New York City will hold a benefit dance party from 8 to 10 P.M. at the Irving Plaza, 17 Irving Place at 15th Street.
There will be an open bar.
Tickets, $20, at the door.
Information: (212) 686-2042.
For the Gillen Brewer School  THURSDAY -- The Gillen Brewer School, which helps children with developmental disabilities, will benefit from a party and silent auction at the school, 1190 Park Avenue near 93d Street.
The evening begins with a champagne reception and tour of the school at 6, followed by a wine tasting at 7.
Items to be auctioned include weekend trips, tickets to sports events and restaurant meals.
Tickets, $75, or $45 for entry at 7, from (212) 831-3667.
Music for Carnegie Hall  THURSDAY -- Link Up, Carnegie Hall's musical education program for children in the New York City public schools, will hold a fund-raiser on the 35th floor of the Sony Club, 550 Madison Avenue at 56th Street.
The event starts at 7 P.M. with drinks and a buffet dinner.
Musicians from the Juilliard School will provide cabaret, jazz and classical music; there will be dancing to Alex Donner and His Orchestra.
Black tie.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 903-9682.
Sight Night  THURSDAY -- Prevent Blindness New York will hold a dinner-dance at Tavern on the Green.
The event, starting at 6:30 P.M. with a cocktail-buffet, will benefit the organization's health program for New York City schoolchildren.
The shoe designers Joan and David Helpern of Joan &amp; David Inc. are to be among those honored for contributions.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 980-2020.
A Carnival, Brazilian-Style  THURSDAY -- A Brazilian-style carnival aiding the Talbot Perkins Children's Services, which provides foster care, adoption and other social service programs, will be held at Expo, 124 West 43d Street.
The event, starting at 6 P.M., includes dancing to Afro Andes, a South American band, as well as hors d'oeuvres and a raffle of trips to Rio de Janeiro and Aruba.
Cash bar.
Tickets, $25, from (212) 736-2510.
Dance for Women's Services  THURSDAY -- A dance party will raise money for the women's health, shelter and legal aid referral services of the Women's Resource Center of New York.
The party, from 8 P.M. to midnight at the Madison, a club at 29 East 32d Street, will include cocktails, hors d'oeuvres and a raffle of a cruise to Alaska and other items.
Tickets, $55, from (212) 875-8533, or at the door.
Franciscans and Sonia Braga  THURSDAY -- Sonia Braga, the Brazilian film star, is to be among the hosts of a party that will benefit programs for people with AIDS or H.I.V. that are organized by the Franciscan Sisters of the Poor Foundation.
The party, at Mickey Mantle's, 42 Central Park South, begins with cocktails at 6 P.M., followed by a buffet dinner and an auction of items that will include a boxing lesson from Floyd Patterson.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 838-2660.
Fresh Air, Interactively  THURSDAY -- The junior committee of the Fresh Air Fund, an agency that provides free summer vacations for New York City children, will sponsor a cocktail party from 6 to 9 P.M. at Sony Wonder, Sony's interactive technology exhibition at 550 Madison Avenue at 56th Street.
Tickets, $40, from (212) 221-0900, or $50 at the door.
Honoring Raul Julia  THURSDAY -- The Puerto Rican Family Institute, an agency providing social and mental health programs in the United States and Puerto Rico, will benefit from a black-tie dinner at the Plaza Hotel.
The late Raul Julia will be honored along with the actress Rosie Perez and Joseph Unanue, the president of Goya Foods Inc.
A 6 P.M. cocktail reception will be followed by dinner at 7 and dancing until midnight.
Tickets, $350, from (800) 608-1555, extension 15.
Asian Arts and Antiquities  THURSDAY -- A preview of an exhibition of Asian art and artifacts will raise money for the Asia Society's art galleries and cultural programs.
The preview, from 6 to 9 P.M. at Metropolitan Antiques, 110 West 19th Street, begins with cocktails and a silent auction.
The show opens to the public on Friday and concludes next Sunday.
Preview tickets, $75, from (212) 463-0200.
Sanctuary for Families  SATURDAY -- Sanctuary for Families, which provides shelter to victims of domestic violence, will benefit from an evening of champagne, hors d'oeuvres and dancing at the United Nations.
The event, from 8 P.M. to 1 A.M., is sponsored by the New York Benevolence Council, a volunteer group that supports social and educational services to poor New Yorkers.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, State Senator Roy Goodman and the writer Anna Quindlen are among those to be honored.
Guests enter on First Avenue between 45th and 46th Streets.
Tickets, $90, from (212) 969-0955.
Brooklyn Special Olympics  SATURDAY -- A brunch to raise funds for the programs of the Brooklyn Special Olympics will begin at 11 A.M. at the William Fitts Ryan Center at Floyd Bennett Field in Brooklyn, off Exit 11 South of the Belt Parkway.
Tickets, $35, from (718) 474-8314.
Charity by the Forkful  NEXT SUNDAY -- Diners who reserve tables and eat out in Manhattan this evening will be giving to charity, as more than 130 restaurants donate part of their revenue to God's Love We Deliver, an organization that delivers meals to home-bound people with AIDS.
The restaurants include the Markham, Gotham Bar and Grill, Frontiere, Odeon, Russian Tea Room and TriBeCa Grill.
For information on the restaurants, (212) 865-6500, extension 178.
Eye Charts and Haitian Art  NEXT SUNDAY -- The film director Jonathan Demme will be the host of the 14th Annual Haitian Art Show and Sale at the Convent of the Sacred Heart, 1 East 91st Street.
The show, from noon until 5 P.M., will raise money for Eye Care Inc., which provides free care in eight clinics in Haiti.
A buffet of Haitian food and refreshments will be served.
Tickets, $30, at the door.
Information: (212) 534-0108.
Rossini to Paganini  NEXT SUNDAY -- The Orpheus Chamber Orchestra, featuring the 20-year-old violinist Philip Quint in a program of works by Rossini, Paganini, Mendelssohn and Mozart, will perform at a concert in Avery Fisher Hall.
The 7:30 P.M. concert will benefit the center for women and infants at the Shaare Zedek Medical Center in Jerusalem.
Tickets, $7.50 to $70, from (212) 354-8801 An Academy Awards Party  MARCH 27 -- The Cody Gifford Home for Children with Special Needs, a Manhattan residence for children born into drug addiction or with AIDS or H.I.V., will benefit from an Academy Awards party that starts at 8 P.M. at the Loews Columbus Circle Theater, 61st Street at Broadway.
The Oscar broadcast will be carried on the big screen.
There will be an open bar, hors d'oeuvres and a raffle.
The event is sponsored by Variety, the Children's Charity, which supports programs for children nationwide.
Tickets, $25, from (212) 663-9596, or $30 at the door.
More Oscars  MARCH 27 -- Concerned Professionals for AIDS Research is holding an Academy Awards party at Reminisce, 334 East 73d Street near First Avenue.
Guests will plot their Oscar picks, and prizes will be awarded to the most accurate.
Cash bar.
Tickets, $15, from (212) 682-7440, extension 136.


How Sagamore Hill Should Be Run
As a former seasonal employee of the Theodore Roosevelt House at Sagamore Hill and a lifelong resident of the Oyster Bay Village area, my anger at Park Service management was renewed yet again by "Long Island Journal," "Safety for Sheep's Beard"  [ Feb. 25 ] , in which Sagamore Hill's superintendent blames budget cutbacks for shrinking public access to the T.R.
House.
Superintendent Vidal Martinez is quoted as appealing for volunteer help through Friends of Sagamore Hill, saying: "This is your park. Take pride in it. We can't do it on our own." There is nothing wrong with that concept, but let me offer the current superintendent some advice on how to make it feel like our park and how to stop antagonizing the people he asks for help.
He is not the first superintendent who could benefit from a history lesson of a different kind, at a time when volunteerism is being widely promoted in our society as the solution to a host of problems.


'Getting Out,' Staged by a New Company
THE working word in town is change.
With a new executive director, G. William McLuckey, and a new man in charge of technical operations, Kevin M. Coleman, the old William Carlos Williams Center for the Performing Arts is now the new Meadowlands Center for the Arts.
The center has five theaters -- two for films and three for live events, including the original 642-seat Rivoli, a 1922 vaudeville house.
Plans from renovation to repertory are under way, and they include building yet another theater next door -- a legitimate theater, that is.
The goal is to make the Meadowlands Center an arts happening place.


Asked, Told, Pursued
In the year since the Pentagon initiated its "don't ask, don't tell, don't pursue" policy, the lives of most lesbians and gay men in the military have not improved.
So it is no surprise that lawyers for six gay service members told a Federal court in Brooklyn last week that the rules continue discrimination and accommodate the fears and prejudices of heterosexual troops.
The new policy was intended to stop officials from prying into sexual orientation, to end the Salem-like witch hunts of the late 1980's and early 1990's and to stop physical and verbal harassment of homosexuals.
But commanders continue to ask, pursue and harass those who are or are perceived to be gay, lesbian or bisexual, defying the spirit of the policy and violating constitutional rights.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate
1.
Strikes: Vote to end a filibuster and proceed to a vote on a measure that would overturn a directive by President Clinton on the use of replacement workers in strikes.
Failed, with 58 in favor and 39 opposed (two votes short of the 60 needed), March 15.
1
Connecticut
Dodd (D)
Nay
Lieberman (D)
Nay
New Jersey
Bradley (D)
Nay
Lautenberg (D)
Nay
New York
D'Amato (R)
Yea
Moynihan (D)
Nay
House
1.
Spending Cuts: Vote to approve procedures for debating $17 billion in spending cuts.
The procedures required that any reduction in cuts must be offset by deeper cuts from a program within the same jurisdiction or department.
Approved 242 to 190, March 15.
2.
Spending Cuts: Vote to approve $17.3 billion in cuts to the current budget.
Approved 227 to 200, March 16.
1
2
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D)
Nay
Nay
2. Gejdenson (D)
Nay
Nay
3. DeLauro (D)
Nay
Nay
4. Shays (R)
Yea
Nay
5. Franks (R)
Nay
Nay
6. Johnson (R)
Yea
Yea
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D)
Nay
Nay
2. LoBiondo (R)
Yea
Yea
3. Saxton (R)
Yea
Yea
4. Smith (R)
Yea
Yea
5. Roukema (R)
Yea
Yea
6. Pallone (D)
Nay
Nay
7. Franks (R)
Yea
Yea
8. Martini (R)
Yea
Yea
9. Torricelli (D)
Nay
Nay
10. Payne (D)
Nay
Nay
11. Frelinghuysen (R)
Yea
Yea
12. Zimmer (R)
Yea
Yea
13. Menendez (D)
Nay
Nay
New York
1. Forbes (R)
Yea
Yea
2. Lazio (R)
Yea
Yea
3. King (R)
Yea
Yea
4. Frisa (R)
Yea
Yea
5. Ackerman (D)
Nay
Nay
6. Flake (D)
Nay
Nay
7. Manton (D)
Nay
Nay
8. Nadler (D)
Nay
Nay
9. Schumer (D)
Nay
Nay
10. Towns (D)
Nay
Nay
11. Owens (D)
Nay
Nay
12. Velazquez (D)
Nay
Nay
13. Molinari (R)
Yea
Yea
14. Maloney (D)
Nay
Nay
15. Rangel (D)
Nay
Nay
16. Serrano (D)
Nay
Nay
17. Engel (D)
Nay
Nay
18. Lowey (D)
Nay
Nay
19. Kelly (R)
Yea
Yea
20. Gilman (R)
Yea
Yea
21. McNulty (D)
Nay
Nay
22. Solomon (R)
Yea
Yea
23. Boehlert (R)
Yea
Nay
24. McHugh (R)
Yea
Yea
25. Walsh (R)
Yea
Yea
26. Hinchey (D)
Nay
Nay
27. Paxon (R)
Yea
Yea
28. Slaughter (D)
Nay
Nay
29. LaFalce (D)
Nay
Nay
30. Quinn (R)
Yea
Yea
31. Houghton (R)
Yea
Yea
KEY: (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


If Elected, They'll Do This (Unless They Don't)
"Promises and pie crust are made to be broken." Jonathan Swift
WHEN Gov.
Pete Wilson of California pledged during his re-election campaign last year that he would not run for President in 1996, only to say in recent days that, well, he didn't really mean it, he was practicing a familiar political ritual.


Ms. Curtin, Mr. Karamanoukian
Victoria Marie Curtin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael E. Curtin of Washington, was married there yesterday to Henry Kevork Karamanoukian, a son of George K. Karamanoukian of Englewood Cliffs, N.J., and the late Elisabeth B. Karamanoukian.
The Rev.
Theodore M. Hesburgh, president emeritus of the University of Notre Dame, officiated at Holy Trinity Church.
Archbishop Zaven Chinchinian of the Armenian Orthodox Church took part in the ceremony.
The bride, 30, was until recently a senior account executive at Dunwoodie Communications, a public relations concern in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Colgate University.
Her father is a vice president of Bechtel Enterprises in Washington and was the executive vice president of the Inter-American Development Bank from 1981 to 1988.
Her mother, Anne Curtin, is a former administrative officer for the International Republican Institute in Washington.


Q and A
Giving Christo a Hand
Q.
I would like to spend a week of my vacation this year volunteering to help Christo wrap the Reichstag Building in Berlin.
Who can I contact to arrange this? -- Dallas Chang, New York, N.Y.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Rugged Shopping Malls
WHEN Richard Appell of Malverne told his wife, Donna, that he was looking for a new family vehicle, Mrs.
Appell said, "Whatever you want."
"I give in on things that don't matter," Mrs.
Appell said, "like cars. If it makes him happy, then it makes me happy."


March 12-18; Torrents Turn the Nation's 'Salad Bowl' Into a Swamp
Officials called it the worst natural disaster ever to hit the nation's "salad bowl," the $2 billion farm industry of California's Central Valley and Monterey County.
Torrential rains caused rivers to burst their banks, flooded towns, cut highways and killed at least 12 people.
At the end of the week, as swampy fields sparkled under sunny skies, officials were assessing the long-term damage to the region's crops, which include much of the nation's lettuce, broccoli, celery, artichokes, cauliflower, strawberries and zucchini.
They said the damage could run into the billions of dollars and would certainly mean increases in the prices of some produce.


New Orleans
To the surprise of no one, New Orleans will soon be rushing off to another wild party.
Even as the scent of jasmine fills the air, music will flood the city like a gully washer in springtime.
The Jazz and Heritage Festival is not as big as Mardi Gras, not yet.
But it's a contender for favorite festival in a place that has has spent almost 300 years perfecting the art of celebrating.
The festival will be held this year April 28 to 30 and May 4 to 7 at the Fair Grounds, the city's historic race track, spilling over into evening concerts all around town.
Besides jazz, there'll be blues, rhythm and blues, gospel, Cajun, zydeco, klezmer, Latin, country, folk, blue grass, funk and a brand new style of New Orleans brass band music called bounce, influenced by rap.


Bad Boss? Let Us Know!
Have you had a bad boss?
Send your story -- no longer than 500 words, please -- to On the Job, Money and Business, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York 10036.
Or by E-mail to onthejob@nytimes.com.
Names will be withheld upon request.
All submissions become the property of The Times.
They may be edited, and may be republished in any medium.


Alumni Generosity Has a Catch
LEE BASS'S decision to pull back the $20 million he had given to Yale for a new program in Western civilization was highly unusual.
What was less unusual was that he tried to tell the university how he wanted his funds used in the first place.
Each year, alumni donate billions of dollars to their alma maters.
But where once many alumni willingly allowed colleges to use the money freely, they increasingly want a say in directing where their money will go.


Arendt vs. Abel
To the Editor:
In her review of "Between Friends: The Correspondence of Hannah Arendt and Mary McCarthy, 1949-1975" (Feb. 19), Lore Segal writes of my response to Arendt's "Eichmann in Jerusalem": "Lionel Abel wanted to differentiate between Arendt's 'esthetic' and his own (superior) 'moral' judgment."


Corrections
An article yesterday about the arrest of two Americans at the Iraq-Kuwait border misidentified the country that built a trench there in some editions.
It was Kuwait, not Iraq.


Has Cyberspace Got a Deal for You!
THEY lurk in the electronic alleys of cyber Wall Street, peddlers of worthless stocks, scam chain letters and fictitious mutual funds.
Their game -- separating people from their money -- is old but their playing field is new and the opportunity to pick an investor's pocket has never been better.
The growth of financial pitches delivered over the air and through computer networks has changed the nature of the investment come-on.
The familiar old weapons -- the phone call out of the blue with the can't-miss stock tip, the fast-talking broker with the relentless hard sell -- are fading from the arsenal, replaced by more deceptive tools.


GENDER WATCH: Semiotics of Skating
After rock-and-roll -- figure skating.
The hot new "text," supplanting Madonna's antics as the phenomenon academics love to deconstruct, is the Tonya Harding-Nancy Kerrigan rivalry.
It's the subject of a forthcoming from Routledge Publishers, "Women on Ice: Feminist Responses to the Tonya Harding-Nancy Kerrigan Spectacle," edited by Cynthia Baughman, and of a panel at the recent Society for Cinema Studies conference in Manhattan.
At that event topics included "voyeuristic camera angles" and the "narrative trope of sadistic domination." Figure skating was also derided as "a beauty pageant on ice." No word yet on the semiotic secrets of the triple lutz.


Marbury Leads Lincoln To P.S.A.L. Championship
Stephon Marbury was mobbed by his teammates yesterday after Lincoln's stirring 61-56 victory over Robeson at Madison Square Garden in the Public Schools Athletic League A championship game between the Brooklyn schools.
"I've got everything now," screamed Marbury, who won his first title.
"I've got everything now."


Social Studies and an Economist
WHEN Dr.
Peter F. Bell accepted the year's Distinguished Social Studies Service Award from the New York State Council on the Social Studies recently, he spoke about the issues that were on his mind: his shock at the country's limited knowledge of economics, the subject he has taught at Purchase College since 1972; policies that he suggested would "end welfare and create poverty" and the "political ideologues of a very dangerous kind" who had found power.
To his surprise, spontaneous applause greeted his brief remarks.
This was the most charged moment of an award banquet held during the council's three-day yearly conference at the Rye Town Hilton here.
It was the 57th conference sponsored jointly by the council and the New York State Social Studies Supervisory Association.


MARKET TIMING
Monday Pat Buchanan is scheduled to announce his candidacy for President.
Mr.
Buchanan, who opposed both Nafta and GATT, says he's the only "economic nationalist" among the Republicans.
Tuesday  Earnings reports continue this week.
Among the most watched will be the release today by Oracle Systems, the mammoth of the data base sector and the third-largest software company.
By one survey, analysts expect its third-quarter earnings to increase 44 percent to 23 cents a share from 16 cents a share a year earlier.
Conagra, the big food processor, is also expected to report earnings during the week.
Orange County supervisors will hear a proposal for a new sales tax increase.
While still requiring voter approval, the tax would give debt holders a new source of revenue.
Wednesday  U.S. trade figures for January are due.
Analysts at I.D.E.A. expect the deficit to widen to $8.5 billion from $7.3 billion in December.
Japanese cabinet set to vote on quake reconstruction.
The bill, a shoo-in, is designed to ease some of the bureaucratic regulations blocking a quick reconstruction.
Thursday  Metallgesellschaft shareholders meet in Germany.
The victims of one of the largest corporate derivatives scandals could create fireworks at what is normally a staid German gathering.
Friday  Durable Goods Orders due for February.
With many people looking for signs the economy's landing will be soft, analysts predict a 0.7 percent decline in the index after a 0.6 percent increase in January.


The Actor Within Gets a Chance to Get Out
BRENDAN CANNY was born to be an actor.
The youngest of 11 children, he never took a breath without an appreciative audience, never gurgled without applause, got standing O's just for standing.
As he grew older, life became a cabaret.
There were endless requests at family functions, "A song, Brendan . . . get up on the table and dance, Brendan . . . do 'Church Lady,' Brendan . . ."
Brendan Canny was 24 when he finally decided to come to New York to be one of the thousands of bartenders, waiters and receptionists with just a little too much personality for their jobs.
He is now 26.


Far Above and Beyond the Call of Coaching
Basketball brought them together in 1987, when Michele Sharp, the coach, saw Debbie Lytle, the player, walk through the gymnasium door holding a duffel bag and Brian, Lytle's 3-month-old son.
Lytle was a 5-foot-11-inch all-America point guard in high school who went on to achieve the same status at Maryland.
As a senior, she was on the Lady Terrapins' 1983 Final Four team.
A year later, she was an alternate on the United States Olympic team.


Missing Mud Season
For the first time in 20 years, I won't be on my New Hampshire farm when day and night come into balance at the vernal equinox.
I have defected, for the semester, to teach at the University of Miami and gorge on mangoes and kumquats.
Getting rid of a Calvinist ethic is a bit harder than trading in parka and long underwear for bathing suit and goggles, though.
Guilt ghosts my morning swims in the college pool; my conscience pricks as I stroll the Coral Gables golf course at sunset.
But the Puritan in me has lost her starch.
No kindling to split.
No stocking the wood stoves morning and night.
No bird feeders to fill, no mesh onion bags to pack with suet.


Female Crew Hires A Male Strategist
The one scenario that has run like an undercurrent throughout America  's effort to field an all-female team for the America's Cup finally happened today.
The team has brought a male crew member on board.
In an 11th-hour meeting that went late into Friday night, the women agreed to invite Dave Dellenbaugh to sail with them as strategist for the start of the semifinals today.
He will replace J. J. Isler, America  's tactician, at least temporarily.


Guys' Stuff (for Guys?)
WHEN Bob Cerny hunts for clothes to sell in Steve Cobb's, his store at 110 East Seventh Street, he doesn't waste time looking at each item in the rack.
"I choose it by how it feels," he said, sweeping his arm across an imaginary row of work shirts.
"When I touch something good I pull it out. You can feel polyester and nice cotton."
The store is the latest addition to a block already populated with vintage apparel.
The distinction, Mr.
Cerny said, is that his store, which also sells furniture and a hodgepodge of knickknacks from the 1950's, 60's and 70's, is "strictly for guys."


Defense Against the Black-Legged Tick
THE threat of Lyme disease is real.
It demands that those who work outdoors take practical precautions, without ceasing to enjoy being outdoors.
Recognition of the illness began 20 years ago when the disease was identified by Allen Steere of the Yale University School of Medicine.
Dr.
Steere learned about several juvenile rheumatoid arthritis cases in the area of Old Lyme, many of them preceded by a bull's eye rash.
Further studies showed that the disease was caused by a bite from a particular black-legged tick.
The name of the region where the disease was first identified gave it its name.


IT'S DRUGS, STUPID
We applaud Joseph A. Califano Jr.'s call for increased expenditure on drug treatment programs ("It's Drugs, Stupid," Jan. 29).
However, we are saddened by his obvious attempt to belittle methadone maintenance as "dependence." In addition, Califano excludes methadone maintenance treatment from his list of solutions for the nation's drug problem.
Since its inception over 30 years ago, methadone maintenance has been demonstrated to be the most effective treatment for opiate addicts.
A 1990 General Accounting Office report states that 92 percent of patients stabilized on methadone cease using heroin.
Studies by Drs.
Dole, Nyswander and Kreek indicate that the majority of addicts have an opiate receptor-ligand irregularity in their brain chemistry that is corrected with methadone.


Those Drafty Windows
OVER the next few weeks, homeowners and apartment-dwellers around the region will engage in an odd annual ritual.
Anxious to invite the first spring breezes indoors, they will approach their tightly shut windows, grasp the window frames firmly and pull sharply upward while grunting and gritting their teeth.
And, in more cases than we might care to imagine, the window won't budge an inch.


A Distant State Watches a Killer Waiting to Die
New York State's first execution in 32 years will, in a backhanded way, be carried out in this lonely plains town Sunday at midnight.
Thomas J. Grasso, who strangled an 87-year-old woman in Tulsa with her own Christmas tree lights on Christmas Eve 1990 while stealing a cheap television set and $12, will be strapped to a gurney and wheeled into a small room at the Oklahoma State Penitentiary.
When midnight strikes, executioners will begin the deadly flow of three chemicals into tubes in his arms.


The Renter's Tale
To the Editor: Ira Berkow's hilarious rental car recital ("The Renter's Tale," Feb. 5) reminded me of a similar experience my wife and I had with a Ford Crown Victoria rented at the West Palm Beach airport a year ago.
As we drove out, I found that the front seat must have been previously occupied by an N.B.A. center, it was so far back from the steering wheel.
But I, too, wanted to hit the road.
There was no bar under the front of the seat for adjustment, and hastily pushing an array of five buttons on the side got me nowhere.
So, leaning all the way forward and driving carefully, I got us to Boynton Beach.


Amy Zins, Harold Engelman
Dr.
Amy Jo Zins, a New York psychiatrist, is to be married today to Harold Kent Engelman, a managing director at Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, the New York investment bank.
Rabbi Barry Friedman is to perform the ceremony at the Essex House in New York.
The bride, 35, is also a clinical psychiatry instructor at Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York.
She graduated from Dartmouth College and received her medical degree from New York University.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Jerome Zins of Verona, N.J.
The bride's father, who is retired, was an internist in Millburn, N.J.


The Library's Their Oyster
Annual benefit by Young Friends of New York Public Library, March 9.


THE NATION: The Simpson Defense; One Hateful Word
"NIGGER" is an almost universally known word of contempt.
That point was driven home to me during a tour as a foreign correspondent in Somalia.
By early 1994, feelings there against America's military intervention were running strong.
While I was on patrol with some white American soldiers a group of Somali teen-agers taunted us.
"Go home, Go home," they shouted, and then, one of them focusing on me, shouted, "Nigger, go home."'


If You're Thinking of Living In/Wyckoff; Country Ambiance in Ramapo Foothills
WITH trees that arch over many of its streets, long rolling lawns and a central business district made up mainly of converted old houses, Wyckoff has the ambiance of a country hamlet, even though it is only a 45-minute drive from Manhattan.
The country feel of the 6.7-square-mile township, cradled in the foothills of the Ramapo Mountains in northwest Bergen County, is reinforced by a tradition of volunteerism that is rare in modern communities.


Travel Agents Ready For Airline Dogfight
THE airlines are in a chaotic state, in the view of Allen D. Rich, president of the Hudson Valley Chapter of the American Society of Travel Agents.
"Their marketing departments have taken over the controls," he said.
"But there is no way we are going to allow them to destroy our entire industry without a dogfight."


Saul Shapiro and Elena Nachmanoff
Elena Susan Nachmanoff, the vice president of talent development for NBC News in New York, was married last evening to Saul T. Shapiro, the assistant bureau chief for technology policy in the Federal Communications Commission's Mass Media Bureau in Washington.
Rabbi Aaron M. Petuchowski officiated at the Puck Building in New York.
The bride, 34, is keeping her name.
She is a graduate of Cornell University and a daughter of Gloria and Dr.
Daniel Nachmanoff of Great Neck, L.I.
Her father is a dentist in Kew Gardens, Queens, and an assistant clinical professor at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx.
The bride's mother is the office manager of her husband's dental practice.


Corrections
A brief article last Sunday about activity at the commodity pits at the World Trade Center described the place where the adjacent pictures were taken incorrectly.
All the traders were photographed at the New York Mercantile Exchange.


No. 1, Finch, They're Not Office Gals Anymore
HOW TO REVIVE A GREAT SHOW, HOW to preserve its precision . . .
How to revise dated lines, how to survive each revision . . .
How to develop a new 90's style, how to be true to 1961 too . . .
How to make a new audience smile. . . .
For the creative team bringing Frank Loesser's "How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying" back to Broadway for the first time in nearly 34 years -- it opens on Thursday, starring Matthew Broderick, at the Richard Rodgers Theater -- those are not idle questions.
They focus on the challenge of staging a sendup from the days when Big Blue was truly blue chip, when businessmen were men, and women waded through the steno pool in spike heels on their way to the car pools of suburbia.


Verbal Dexterity May Be the Sum Of Three Parts
IF LIFE IS NASTY, BRUTISH AND short, why shouldn't theater be too?
And in that case, why shouldn't I be content with the three short plays by David Mamet, Elaine May and Woody Allen that make up "Death Defying Acts," since they are cleverly nasty, brutishly smart and reasonably short?
Our cities are filled with the people they put on stage: lawyers and clients, analysts and patients; sex workers (also called prostitutes), husbands, wives, and mistresses en route to being fiancees.
These people are needy and quick-witted; they are anxious and belligerent; they are willing to do just about anything to get love and unable to do much of what's required to give it.
They are all around us, they are inside us, and if we were as sharp-tongued as they, if we served and volleyed our lines as well as the actors do under Michael Blakemore's shrewd direction, we would not have to go to the theater.


Journal; Garth Neuts Newt
Barbra Streisand spoke out for the National Endowment for the Arts at Harvard.
Madonna and R.E.M. have hit the radio with public-service ads extolling the N.E.A.
But it was Garth Brooks, Kenny G and Michael Bolton -- pop stars ranging from middle-of-the-road to Muzak -- who stared down the Republican majority in the 104th Congress last week.
And it was Congress that blinked.
The three musicians lobbied the Hill for the Arts Endowment on Tuesday.
On Thursday the House voted 260 to 168 to defeat an amendment tripling the cut in the 1995 N.E.A. budget -- with 75 Republicans, Newtish freshmen among them, in the majority.


Getting Off the Parking-Go-Round
Ah, the lengths people will go to live in Manhattan and own a car.
For Steve Feldman it means leaving his Upper East Side apartment, commuting 45 minutes by subway and Metro-North to Westchester -- where he garages his car, which he then drives to work, in New Jersey.
All that to avoid $300-plus monthly garage rates and automotive jousting for street parking in his own neighborhood.
"Realistically, it takes anywhere from 15 minutes to a good hour and a half to find a legal spot here," Mr.
Feldman said.


In Trial of 'Morgue Boys,' Former Police Officer Tells of His Tour as Predator in Blue
To hear the former corrupt police officer tell it, protecting the public was the last thing on the minds of the ring of rogue officers in the crime-ridden Brooklyn precinct.
Far more important, at least as indicated by his courtroom tale, was robbing drug dealers while on duty and making illegal arrests to gain overtime pay.


Turning the Players Around
For years, Luis Reyes admits, he ran with gangs, drank, stole, and, on the days he bothered to show up at Grover Cleveland High School in Ridgewood, Queens, fought with other students.
Today, Luis, 18, plays basketball and tells anyone who will listen how the sport has changed his life.
He is the star forward for the Lightning, the three-year-old team at the League School in Crown Heights.
The school, established in 1953, is a nonprofit center for students with mental handicaps and behavioral problems.
Often it is their last stop before the Board of Education moves to have them placed in hospitals or other institutions.
Two-thirds of its 120 students are from Brooklyn, the rest from the four other boroughs.


March 12-18: Charming Voters; Clinton Meets Adams, His Kind of Republican
For Irish-Americans, St.
Patrick's Day is a special time of mirth and politicking.
Last Friday was fraught with more political import than usual because the star was Gerry Adams, the earnest firebrand who heads Sinn Fein, political wing of the Irish Republican Army.
Irish-Americans were delighted that President Clinton invited Mr.
Adams to the White House, a first, and allowed him to do fund-raising in the United States.
But the visit sowed tensions with Britain; Prime Minister John Major had urged Mr.
Clinton not to meet with Mr.
Adams, though the President did follow one suggestion: He called on the I.R.A. to give up its weapons.


Ukraine Moves To Oust Leader Of Separatists
The Ukrainian Parliament has removed the separatist leader of the Crimean region and revoked its constitution, apparently in a move by the Ukrainian Government to assert its control over the area.
The Parliament acted Friday in the ongoing dispute with separatists in the region, who have sought stronger ties with Russia.
After the vote to cancel the constitution and effectively eliminate the presidency, whih was held by Yuri Meshkov, about 200 Ukrainian Interior Ministry troops arrived in Simferopol, the Crimean capital, and disarmed Mr.
Meshkov's security men.


Dr. Robert Wylie, 88, Surgeon Who Consulted in Dr. King Case
Dr.
Robert H. Wylie Jr., a chest surgeon whose skills were called on when Martin Luther King Jr. was stabbed and when Arthur Godfrey had lung cancer, died on Thursday at the Keswick Nursing Home in Baltimore.
He was 88.
Formerly a resident of Sharon, Conn., and Riverdale, the Bronx, Dr.
Wylie had lived in Towson, Md., since 1993.


Believe It, It's Butter


New Secret of Success: Getting Off the Ladder
UNABLE to succeed in business even if you're really trying?
Maybe you're following outdated routes.
In a new book, "The New Rules," Prof.
John P. Kotter of the Harvard Business School tells how to prosper in the new business environment.
Globalization of markets and competition is changing the nature of work and the paths to advancement, said Professor Kotter, who conducted a 20-year study of 115 members of the Harvard B-school's Class of 1974.
Q.  What did you expect to find from this research project, and what did you learn?


Sports of The Times; The Calm by Malone Weathers N.Y. Storm
KARL MALONE of Summerfield, La., population 200, awoke in metropolitan New York, ventured from his hotel room to the lobby gift shop, where he dared to purchase a Friday morning paper.
The back page, to Malone a cross between sports and sitcom, was a fine substitute for caffeine.


THE ART OF HIS CHOOSING
As the parent of a becoming-well-recognized artist, I was delighted to read Klaus Kertess's view of my daughter's studio "looking like an explosion in a thrift shop."


IN SHORT: FICTION
NOW I KNOW EVERYTHING  By Andrew Postman. Crown, $21.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Disloyal Customers
To the Editor:
It's hard to sympathize with the people of Nowata, Okla., who must now take to the highway to shop for their needs because a disloyal Wal-Mart has abandoned their town ("When Wal-Mart Pulls Out, What's Left?", March 5).
It was their own lack of loyalty that forced half of the local shopkeepers out of business as the natives flocked to Wal-Mart.
The citizens of Nowata and Wal-Mart have demonstrated they both place monetary savings above loyalty.


Computer Age Makes Librarians More Efficient but Lonelier
In these days of on-line databases and electronic mail, librarians are getting lonelier.
"Librarians want to be the intermediaries, the ones that open the gates for people to enter the pastures of knowledge," said Laird Klingler, a Princeton University librarian.
"Unfortunately, today, there are no more gates to keep."


A Cross-Examination Ends, and Judging Begins, for Simpson Lawyer
F.
Lee Bailey's cross-examination of Mark Fuhrman this week was probably not just the most widely watched interrogation ever but also the most touted, primarily by Mr.
Bailey himself.
And when it was over, it was surely the most criticized.
For three days, the 61-year-old Mr.
Bailey went at Mr.
Fuhrman, the detective whom O. J. Simpson's lawyers have accused of planting incriminating evidence.
But by the time Mr.
Fuhrman stepped down, the consensus was that Mr.
Bailey had not produced, that for all of his noises beforehand, the last roar of the lion was really more of a meow.


Wrong Building For Union Square
To the Editor:
On Jan. 15, an article headed "What's Up -- and What's Going Up" carried pictures of new buildings planned for New York City.
They were the usual buildings, except for one.
It won't blend in like the others.


You Mean, She Gets the Cutest Boy? Oh, Go On
Muriel's Wedding  Toni Collette, Bill Hunter, Rachel Griffiths Directed by P. J. Hogan R 105 minutes


Spring Artichokes And Asparagus
ON the cusp of spring, seasonal appetites turn from parsnips and butternut squash to artichokes and asparagus.
Although both of these are sold all year, they are at their most tender and most reasonably priced in spring.
Artichokes and asparagus can enhance scores of dishes.
But at the start of the season simplest is best.
Pencil-slim asparagus can be added raw to a salad or used for dipping.
The tiniest baby artichokes can be sliced paper thin and tossed with lemon juice, olive oil and shavings of Parmesan cheese for a classic Tuscan salad.


Laurie Agin and Steven Lederman
Laurie Ann Agin, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Jack Agin of Massapequa Park, L.I., was married yesterday evening to Dr.
Steven Jay Lederman, a son of Harold N. Lederman of Massapequa Park and the late Adele Lederman.
Rabbi Moshe Tutnauer, the bridegroom's uncle, performed the ceremony at the Jericho (L.I.) Jewish Center.
Mrs.
Lederman, 27, is an assistant vice president and a benefits manager at Smith Barney in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University and is studying for an M.B.A. at New York University.
Her father is an internist in Hicksville, L.I.


Louganis's Fault
To the Sports Editor:
George Vecsey in "Tolerance, Not Blame, for Louganis" (The Times, Feb. 24) has most of the facts right.
AIDS is not transmittable through blood in pool water.
Dr.
James Puffer, who rushed to Louganis's aid after the diver hit his head on the platform and stitched him up without gloves, was at risk.
But when Vecsey wrote that the Lakers trainer Gary Vitti "helped demythologize the fear of AIDS" by publicly touching a scratch on Magic Johnson without protective gloves, Vecsey did not have it right.
Vitti could have contracted AIDS if Johnson's cut was wet and if Vitti had a minuscule nick on his hand.
Most of all, Vecsey does not have it right if he supports tolerance for those who lie about the deadliness of the AIDS virus.


Deals and Discounts
ISRAEL AND JORDAN TOGETHER -- A six-night tour that combines Israel and Jordan begins at $999, including air fare from New York.
Offered by General Tours, it consists of three nights in Amman, Jordan, and three nights in Jerusalem.
The price covers flights on El Al and Royal Jordanian, transfers between airport and hotel, accommodations and daily breakfast and services of local hosts.
Optional excursions in both countries cost between $17 and $58.
The tour ranges from $999 to $1,449, with the highest prices in late June and early July.
The last $999 departure is March 29.
Information: (800) 221-2216.


Lisa A. Soloway, John E. Tiffany Jr.
Lisa Anne Soloway, the editorial producer in New York for the ABC news program "Turning Point," is to be married today to John Edwards Tiffany Jr., a lawyer.
Rabbi Joseph Potasnik is to perform the ceremony at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
The bride, 31, graduated from Tulane University.
She is the daughter of Marvin and Arlene Soloway of Fairlawn, N.J.


THE ART OF HIS CHOOSING
Having exhibited at the MOMA, lived the corporate life and written a few obscure historical novels, I venture a view on the visual fine arts, prompted by your feature article about the Whitney Biennial ("The Art of His Choosing," by Paul Goldberger, Feb. 26).
Major art has always been a result of its times and technology: cave paintings, bas-relief, mosaic, wood panel, stained glass, fresco and canvas, all logically static and mute.


RECORD BRIEFS
'Ikos': Music of Gorecki, Part, Tavener  Choir of King's College, Cambridge, led by Stephen Cleobury.
EMI CDC 55096; CD.


Look Also at Who Profits From Sweatshops; A Laborer's Story
To the Editor:
Your March 12 article on Chinese immigrant labor in sewing factories ("Week in Sweatshop Reveals Grim Conspiracy of the Poor") brings back memories.


THE PHIL GRAMM JUGGERNAUT
The early lead that Gramm has apparently established in the race for the Republican nomination for the Presidency is most discouraging to a fourth-generation Republican in upstate New York.
I have already seen enough of Gramm on TV to convince myself that he would never get my vote.
But suppose the Republicans bow before the staggering cash he has collected and offer no one else.
In that event, my hope would be in the Democrats.
JERVIS LANGDON JR.
Elmira, N.Y.


Croatia Bars Extradition of a Fugitive in U.S. Poison-Gas Case
A German who jumped bond in the United States six years ago after pleading guilty in a conspiracy to sell poison-gas chemicals to Iran has escaped extradition from Croatia under a ruling by the country's Supreme Court.
The Court refused to extradite the fugitive, Peter Walaschek, 52, despite intense pressure from the United States, including daily faxes and telephone calls to the tribunal, several court officials said.


Ideas &amp; Trends; If Gingrich Only Knew About Victoria's Secret
It wasn't so long ago that the term "Victorian" was a pejorative one, conjuring up images of Dickensian slums, uptight moralists, pompous prigs, paternalistic moralizers, fussy architecture and overstuffed furniture.
Taking our cue from Lytton Strachey -- whose classic book "Eminent Victorians" (1918) lanced that era's pretentions with malicious wit -- we tended to shrug off the Victorians as sanctimonious imperialists or faintly ridiculous prudes.
All this is changing now, and it's not just the current vogue in Pre-Raphaelite paintings, Laura Ashley furnishings, Gothic revival architecture and neo-Victorian novels.
Victorianism has suddenly become a social model -- for both the left and right.


Change, at a Cost, for an Agency That Resists
By all accounts, Dr.
Bruce Siegel has moved a mountain.
After a year in office, Dr.
Siegel, the 34-year-old president of New York City's Health and Hospitals Corporation, has successfully pushed an organization notorious for its inertia to change.
Facing an unwieldy bureaucracy, he has eliminated nearly 4,000 jobs and cut the staff of the central office in half.
Facing an inefficient system perennially in debt, he has replaced numerous hospital presidents with people he considers better managers, and he plans to eliminate 1,000 beds.
Facing an exodus of patients to private hospitals, he has led the agency in its first attempts at marketing and teaching employees about customer service.


Visiting Washington On a Boat With Wheels
Visitors to Washington this spring can ride a different type of touring machine: a boat on wheels.
A company called D.C.
Ducks operates a land and water tour of Washington using the DUKW, an amphibious Army vehicle from World War II.
These troop-carrying vehicles, built by General Motors, were used in the Allied invasions of Sicily and northern France.
The company has been operating the vehicles in Memphis since 1991.


PICTURING THE WORLD
Founded more than 100 years ago to educate Americans about the rest of the world, National Geographic has evolved from its earnest beginnings into a publication dependent on dramatic photography to hold its large readership.
Two hundred forty-five images, primarily from the last 15 years, have been assembled in NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC: The Photographs (National Geographic Society, $50).
Although technology and personal vision have changed the style of the magazine's photography, the belief in photography as what the book's author, Leah Bendavid-Val, calls "the ultimate eyewitness" seems stronger than ever.
Ms.
Bendavid-Val, a senior editor at National Geographic Books, writes that the use of color portrays "foreign scenes more accurately and graphically than black and white." Undermining this notion of truth in color is the book's striking cover, a portrait of a young Afghan refugee, her face framed by a loose rust-colored scarf, set against a soft green background that accentuates her hazel eyes.
The book jacket claims her eyes "speak volumes about war and fear"; but to the viewer her fearful expression could just as easily have been caused by an intrusive telephoto lens.
Whether or not the photographs succeed in the impossible task of conveying the truth about war or famine or sea turtles, they are the products of extremely enterprising men and women, highly skilled in their craft, rich in resources and driven in their quest for great shots.
ROSEMARY RANCK


Live From New York
SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE The First Twenty Years.
Edited by Michael Cader.
Photographs by Edie Baskin. 264 pp.
Boston: Cader Books/ Houghton Mifflin Company. $25.
With two CD-ROM's, $89.95.
With two videocassettes, $49.95.


'Harriet's Return': Tubman as a Force
WHAT would Harriet Tubman, the formidable 19th-century abolitionist, say to a post-civil rights country in crisis?
Get control of your life.
Don't just survive; thrive.
Teach people how to love.
Stuff like that.


A Writer's Greatest Sin?
To the Editor:
Terry Teachout's review of Jay Pa rini's biography of John Steinbeck (Feb. 26) tells us yet again that a writer's greatest sin can be achieving popularity, at the expense of "superior novelists" whom Mr.
Teachout never identifies.


Virginia Tech Meets A Buzz Saw in UConn
Virginia Tech knew what it wanted to do today against Connecticut.
Pull UConn's big defenders away from the basket.
Get good jumpers from around the foul line.
Keep UConn from getting the fast break and flying downcourt.
Knowing was one thing.
Doing it didn't happen.
Connecticut, the nation's No. 1 team for the last two months, blew out the Metro Conference champions, 91-45, in the second round of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.
The 46-point margin was the largest in the 134-year history of this tournament for a game beyond the first round.


Joelle Buszkiewicz and Peter J. Taub
Joelle Buszkiewicz, a daughter of Mary L. Buszkiewicz and Robert E. Buszkiewicz, both of South Bend, Ind., was married last evening to Dr.
Peter James Taub, a son of Jacqueline and Julian Taub of New York.
Rabbi David Posner performed the ceremony at the Westbury Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Taub, 28, graduated from Brown University, as did the bridegroom.
She received a law degree from Temple University.
She is an associate at Seiden, Stempel &amp; Bennett, a law firm in New York.
Her father is a restaurant consultant in South Bend.
Her mother is a corporate recruiter for CMS Management Services, executive recruiters there.


It's Answer Time for In-and-Out Syracuse
We are about to find out about Syracuse.
We know the start.
A season-opening loss to George Washington and then 14 consecutive victories.
And then losses in seven of its last 10 games.
So very hot and then so very cold.
How good is this bunch?


The Jordan Show Is Returning to the Air Today
In what may be the most anticipated return since MacArthur to the Philippines, or at least the sequel to "Gone With the Wind," Michael Jordan made it official yesterday and announced that he was coming back to the Chicago Bulls and would play in today's game against the Indiana Pacers in Indianapolis.
Jordan said simply, "I'm back" in a statement released by his agent, David Falk, an understated re-entrance for a celebrated figure who has kept the basketball world on edge over 10 days of intense speculation.


Jaspers' Joy Ride Comes to An End
Manhattan College, which struck a blow for midlevel conference teams everywhere with its at-large bid to the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament and its rousing first-round upset of Oklahoma, returned to earth this afternoon courtesy of the Sun Devils.
Arizona State took the Jaspers' best shot and answered with a better one, erasing an 11-point first-half deficit to pull close, then breaking the game open with a 12-2 run midway through the second half on the way to a 64-54 victory.
With the second-round victory in the Southeast Regional, the Sun Devils (24-8) advanced to the Sweet 16, where they will play top-seeded Kentucky.
The Wildcats defeated Tulane, 82-60.


Why Should I Pay for Art I Don't Like and TV I Can't Bear?
To the Editor:
In "Hit the Poor, Reward the Rich" (editorial, March 12), you have joined with other special- and single-interest groups and organizations in protesting their threatened loss of Government funding.
However, the pending budget cuts will be a small step in the direction of returning to productive individuals their right to spend their money on what they value, and protecting such individuals from being compelled by legislation to support groups and organizations they're either not interested in or regard as anathema.


Parents Win A Playground
Brooklyn Heights residents who favor the expansion of the popular Pierrepont Playground won a long battle last week when the City Art Commission approved a plan to add a lawn area for young children.
The commission's action effectively ends a dispute that began more than a year ago.
Supporters of the play area said a compromise was struck, but opponents said they were disappointed that a garden is to be destroyed to make room for the lawn.


U.S. Pressing Iraq to Release Two Americans
Relying mainly on foreign intermediaries to negotiate with Baghdad, American officials continued their efforts today to win the release of two Americans being held in Iraq.
Secretary of Defense William J. Perry, who is in the Middle East on a weeklong diplomatic mission, said the two men were working for the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, which has a contract to maintain Kuwaiti aircraft.


Top Irish Court Asked to Rule on Right to Information on Abortion
President Mary Robinson asked the Supreme Court today to decide on the constitutionality of a measure that would guarantee the right to information on foreign abortion clinics to Irish women who may want to travel abroad for abortions.
The President's decision to pass the measure to the court rather than sign it into law is likely to stir a new round of emotional national debate, centering on the constitutional prohibition of abortion in Ireland except in cases where the mother's life is in danger.


STATES' RITES: Let a Hundred License Plates Bloom
From Connecticut to Florida to Texas, states are getting aggressive in pursuit of millions spent for fancy license plates.
Florida offers 19 different custom plates, South Carolina 225.
And the sales effort is still increasing.
New York has a $2 million advertising budget for its plates, tie-ins with major sports teams and the nation's first license plate gift certificates, as well as some serious market research.
"Our focus group research tells us there are three kinds of motorists," says Jean Rosenthal, the state's director of custom plates.
"Outer-directed" motorists are the "hot dogs" who like to design their own attention-grabbing vanity plates like 2HT2TRT.
"Inner-directed" motorists are the main target, Rosenthal says.
"They'll pay more for a sports team or organization tag if it speaks to them." And the third group?
They don't like to pay extra, says Rosenthal.
"Believe it or not, some people think this is just silly."


Longhorns Come Up Short vs. Terrapins
Maryland looked in the mirror today, saw Texas and decided it is no delight to play your twin.
The Terrapins have made a living with a full-court press, traps and dunks, but the Longhorns have the same resume -- minus one shaven head.
He is Joe Smith, and Texas has not grown anyone like him.
He flicked the lint off himself this evening -- otherwise known as Texas center Rich McIver -- and Maryland's compass consequently points to Oakland for the West Regional's round of 16.


Your Car, the Sitting Duck
EVEN the detectives stalking Guy Gralto admitted a certain admiration for his devotion to work and family.
Each morning, at 6:30 A.M., Mr.
Gralto, a swarthy dark-mustachioed man who favored off-the-rack jogging suits, left his home in East Rockaway, L.I.
Driving east against the traffic, he arrived within half an hour at his small junkyard in Oceanside.
Inside his trailer-office, he phoned home.
"Vera, I'm here," he reassured his common-law wife.
Mr.
Gralto then fed the junkyard's guard dog, a 125-pound German shepherd named Bandit, before his employees arrived promptly at 8 A.M. and the orders came ringing in.
A hard worker and a hard-driving boss, Mr.
Gralto typically ordered in lunch, worked untgil early evening and drove straight home.
At his modest six-room home, a converted one-story bungalow on the waterfront, he and Vera Marino usually shared quiet dinners, though occasionally they dropped in on her daughter and son-in-law's.
In the summer, the couple sometimes went boating, or had the kids over for a cookout.
"He put in long days," said Detective Paul Vitucci of the Nassau County Police.
"He demanded punctuality from his workers. He demanded very high productivity. One time, he had a guy out there who had nothing to do. Gralto had him work in the yard, sweep up the yard, rake it clean."
But the admiration ended there.
The orders coming in, according to an indictment in State Supreme Court in Queens, were from traffickers in stolen auto parts.
Someone would ask for the nose of a 1992 Nissan Maxima.
The fender of a 1991 Plymouth Acclaim.
A couple of phone calls later, the indictment charges, Mr.
Gralto had arranged for one of his trusty "steal men" to cruise parking lots and residential streets, mostly in Queens, occasionally in Nassau County.
He would then "chop up" the cars, fulfill the order with the buyer and stockpile the remaining parts, the indictment says.
To business associates, Mr.
Gralto's favorite comment was: "I'm an honest businessman trying to make an honest day's dollar." But law-enforcement officials say this case, broken last month and based on hundreds of hours of wiretaps of his conversations as well as video surveillance, offers an unusually vivid glimpse into the workings of an auto theft ring, a core group of 13 that extended from a reputed captain in the Bonanno crime family to Mr.
Gralto, down to the "cutters" and the "steal men." The case sheds light on why more than half the cars stolen in New York vanish in Byzantine networks of thieves, chop-shop owners, thieves who specialize in certain parts, illegal parts suppliers and unscrupulous mechanics -- all of whom create an artificial demand for the supply of auto parts.
Organized crime syndicates have been involved in auto theft since at least the 1960's.
But since the 1980's, car theft has grown increasingly organized, as a new breed of expensive and sophisticated cars, equipped with a growing array of gadgets and parts, multiplied the potential profits from theft.
And because a police department overwhelmed with more serious crimes virtually ignored auto theft until the early '90s, the risk of punishment was low.
Beleaguered by perhaps the most skillful auto thieves in the nation, the city's car owners -- already suffering from a scarcity of garages and monthly indoor parking fees of up to $700 -- can take some comfort in statistics, if nothing else.
Partly because of rising police attention, the number of reported thefts has fallen steadily since a record 146,309 in 1990.
Still, 94,525 were reported stolen last year, or almost 260 cars a day.
Of the 30 biggest American cities, only drivers in Detroit and San Francisco were more likely to have their cars stolen in 1993, says the Highway Loss Data Institute, an insurance trade organization.
But because of New York's sophisticated rings, its 1.8 million car owners paid the highest theft premiums: $248, or five times the average for the 30 cities.
"Though the theft claims are not as frequent as in Detroit or San Francisco, the average loss is higher because the chances of recovery are far lower," said Kim Hazelbaker, senior vice president of the Institute.
So pervasive is the problem in some neighborhoods that drivers have adopted an almost fatalistic attitude -- particularly in Queens, home to 38 percent of all cars registered in the city in 1993.
Near the Fresh Meadows shopping mall, one of the hardest-hit areas in the hardest-hit precinct of the city and a favorite target of the ring, so many cars were stolen last year that officers were posted on high-rise rooftops to watch the streets and residents could rattle off the names of victimized neighbors.
Under pressure to combat auto theft, law enforcement officials involved in the yearlong investigation by detectives assigned to the Queens District Attorney and by the Nassau County police were eager to talk about the case, which they describe as a benchmark in their efforts.
"This is the first auto-theft prosecution under the state's Organized Crime Control Act," said Queens District Attorney Richard A. Brown.
"These weren't isolated thefts. You're talking about a highly sophisticated enterprise that stole and dismantled cars and set up a business in stolen parts."
At the arraignment last month, all the defendants pleaded not guilty.
Joseph Mure, a lawyer representing Mr.
Gralto and Ms.
Marino -- as well as her son-in-law Frank Merendino, who is also charged with assisting Mr.
Gralto -- said recently that they maintain their innocence and denied any connection to organized crime.
Lawyers who represent the other suspects and who chose to comment said their clients also declare their innocence.
Vincent Asaro, 60 -- who is charged with being a captain in the Bonanno crime family and with being at the top of this theft ring -- further denies that he controlled Mr.
Gralto.
"He denies any involvement with organized crime, period," said his lawyer, Stephen G. Murphy, who has been involved in many high-profile cases in New York.
THIEF, CUTTER, BROKER: THE CAR-THEFT LADDER
Guy Gralto, 34, grew up in Ozone Park.
Investigators believe he has been involved in the auto-theft business for at least the last 11 years, climbing his way up, from thief to cutter to broker, in the tightly knit car-theft industry in southeastern Queens.
He had been arrested only once, for possession of two stolen vehicles with illegal vehicle identification numbers, in 1988, and that case was later dismissed.
Detectives who shadowed him for a year described him as an excitable man, who spoke in a loud voice even during normal conversations, barking into his telephone.
At work, he kept his phone conversations short and businesslike, though last Sept. 5, unsure of the holiday, he spent minutes trying to persuade every caller that it was actually Memorial Day.
Not all his business associates were privy to Mr.
Gralto's softer side, his love of pets.
Besides Bandit, the German shepherd he had taken in as a sickly stray in Howard Beach, he poured affection on a small dog and three parrots at his East Rockaway home.
Last summer, when a friendly chop shop was raided by the police and its guard dog was shot, Mr.
Gralto's first telephone call, say detectives listening to wiretaps, was to inquire about the pit bull.
"Oh no, jeez, they shot the dog. Poor dog."
According to the indictment, Mr.
Gralto's Oceanside business traced its roots to another auto-theft ring that he and a former partner set up in an inconspicuous warehouse in Maspeth, Queens, in November 1993.
In Queens' auto-theft industry, a tight network where everyone knows everyone else, it was perhaps natural for Mr.
Gralto to join forces with Martin Bosshart, a Woodhaven resident with a criminal record, law enforcement officials said.
It was also natural that in an industry with its own peculiar hierarchies and codes of advancement that Mr.
Bosshart, who was only 25, became the junior partner, with Mr.
Gralto taking the lion's share of the profits.
But Mr.
Bosshart's inexperience was more than compensated for by his extremely violent behavior, officials said, pointing out he had been arrested on charges of attempted murder in 1990, though never convicted.
In 1988, he pleaded guilty to a reduced charge of attempted grand larceny in another case.
The joint operation earned millions of dollars by stealing and chopping up roughly 20 cars a week, Detective Vitucci and other officials said.
But they said there was a conflict larger than both men: Mr.
Bosshart paid tribute to the Gambino organized crime family.
But Mr.
Gralto, who had been loosely allied with Mr.
Asaro for a number of years, was holding back payments from the reputed Bonanno captain.
The indicted individuals -- all "stand-up guys who don't rat on each other," according to Detective Vitucci -- have provided few details of the ensuing fallout.
But investigators believe that on Feb. 25, 1994, with the Bonanno captain's consent, Mr.
Bosshart and two accomplices forced Mr.
Gralto out of the Maspeth business.
Inside the warehouse, the indictment says, Mr.
Bosshart and two associates severely beat Mr.
Gralto, stole thousands of dollars and then dragged him into an office and shot him in the leg.
After the shooting, Mr.
Gralto -- to continue his career in the auto-theft business -- had no choice but to turn to Mr.
Asaro for protection, law enforcement officials said.
Mr.
Gralto moved to Long Island, abandoning a salvage yard, Conduit Auto Parts, he owned in Howard Beach.
In an industrial corner of Oceanside, he rented space in a carpet warehouse where he showed up to work, six days a week, dressed invariably in jogging suits.
Mr.
Asaro shielded Mr.
Gralto against other auto-theft rings looking to expand, steered business his way and sometimes provided him with his own car thieves, said Detective Cary Brenner, of the Queens District Attorney's Office Squad.
A flat weekly fee, typically around $500, was delivered to the Great In Pasta, a restaurant in Hewlett, L.I., where Mr.
Asaro spent his evenings.
A SMALL CIRCLE OF TRUST
In Oceanside, or sometimes at his home, Mr.
Gralto received orders and dispatched his thieves, the indictment says.
Whenever he did not perform those tasks himself, Mr.
Gralto trusted only Ms.
Marino, 49, her son-in-law Mr.
Merendino, 32, or Louis Scarantino, 31, a childhood friend accused of financing a warehouse for stolen parts in East Rockaway.
They were all indicted.
Two others indicted were acquaintances from Mr.
Gralto's years in the auto-theft business -- Anthony LaGreca and Keith Hillman, who worked at auto-supply shops in Jamaica, Queens, and Bay Shore, L.I., respectively -- regularly called him with orders, said Detective Brenner, who eavesdropped on hundreds of conversations.
"Nose off a '91 Max, white, two-door," was a typical order for a Nissan Maxima.
"O.K. I'll buy it," Mr. Gralto said, after haggling over a price.
Mr.
Gralto then paged one of his steal men, who were paid between $400 and $600 to find the car and drop it off at a pre-arranged location, Detective Vitucci said.
One of Mr.
Gralto's employees would pick up the car and drive it to a friendly chop shop where it would be dismantled, generally for $1,800, the detective said.
"I bought it," Mr.
Gralto would say, calling back the orderer of the part.
"I'll have it to you in a day or two." The parts were delivered to Mr.
LaGreca, 30, who had previously been convicted of insurance violations, burglary, attempted possession of stolen property and attempted forgery.
Other valuables were warehoused, and, after everyone was paid, Mr.
Gralto could clear several thousand dollars.
The indictment says that two of Mr.
Gralto's regular thieves were Victor Norwood, 35, and Thomas Parker, 42, two tall, thin men from Jamaica who over the years had acquired reputations as dependable steal men, Detective Brenner said.
Although the operators of an auto-theft ring are often shielded from scrutiny, the steal men are the organization's foot soldiers, often desperate people who are willing to expose themselves to great risks for a few hundred dollars and, unlike their bosses, are unable to afford top-notch lawyers.
Mr.
Parker's criminal record, dating to 1970, includes multiple convictions for grand larceny, possessing an illegal vehicle identification number and making a false report of a stolen vehicle; Mr.
Norwood, with convictions for harassment and the unauthorized use of a vehicle, also spent five years in prison for first-degree manslaughter.
THE M.O.: DAYLIGHT, PARKING LOTS, TRAIN STATIONS
Dressed in dungarees, driving junk-cars with stolen out-of-state license plates, the steal men favored spots in northeast Queens -- parking lots at the Fresh Meadows shopping mall, St.
John's University and at Long Island Rail Road stations, say the detectives.
They stole not at night, but during working hours.
From their surveillance investigators inferred that the two suspects worked like other professional car thieves.
They usually broke in by smashing a small window.
If an alarm blared, they popped open the hood, went around to the front and smashed the alarm, housed usually next to the engine.
If a Club was used, they simply cut through the steering wheel.
Finally, they started the car by breaking the steering column.
"It took them usually less than 20 seconds to start a car," Detective Brenner said.
"What made them good? Experience. Most car thieves are young, and not as reliable."
Admired for his efficiency, Mr.
Gralto, investigators pointed out, possessed another quality that led to his downfall: foolhardiness.
A simple, unostentatious man, Mr.
Gralto eschewed the grand ambitions that drive many of his peers, Detective Vitucci said.
Unlike a John Gotti who used car theft as a stepping stone into one of New York's five traditional crime families, Mr.
Gralto apparently had no aspirations of joining the Bonanno family, of ever becoming a "made man."
Instead, Mr.
Gralto revealed a more pedestrian goal in phone calls: "I want to make a million a year." That goal, investigators said, pushed him to grow reckless.
When an industry associate alerted him that his Oceanside yard was under surveillance, Mr.
Gralto ignored the tip.
When detectives, waiting in ambush a stone's throw from Mr.
Gralto's home, phoned him on Feb. 15 at 6 A.M., to warn him that they were coming to arrest him, Mr.
Gralto simply said, "Knock it off," and hung up.
When the police called back immediately, he still believed it was a joke.
Spitting out an expletive, he slammed down the receiver.
It was only when the police began breaking down his front door that the truth hit him, Detective Vitucci said.
Mr. Gralto tried to save the door by opening it. But it was too late.
By the time all 13 suspects were arrested last month, the ring had operated 10 months, from May 1994 to February 1995, the indictment charges.
During a period of intense surveillance, from May 9 to Aug. 11, 1994, the ring chopped up and sold parts from 21 cars -- worth $244,000 on the used car market but almost $1 million in parts, the District Attorney's office charged.
In a related indictment, Mr.
Bosshart, the alleged Gambino loyalist, and his two associates from Maspeth were also charged last month with possessing and dismantling stolen vehicles, and with assaulting Mr.
Gralto.
Murray Richman, Mr.
Bosshart's lawyer, said his client denies all the charges against him.
THE TOP CARS AT HOME AND ON THIRD WORLD ROADS
Because of the immense profits from cannibalizing cars, the police estimate that more than half of all cars stolen in the city are taken for their parts, said Lieut.
Robert Martin of the Auto Crime Squad.
Not surprisingly, the cars most frequently stolen are made by General Motors -- because of the greater demand for used G.M. parts.
By contrast, Lieutenant Martin attributed the theft of three cars in the top 10 list of most stolen cars -- 1994 Toyotas, Hondas and Nissans -- to the growing number of stolen cars exported to Third World nations, where there are few or no dealerships that sell new cars and where vehicle registration is often nonexistent.
The Japanese makers' reputation for durability make them popular in underdeveloped nations with unreliable roads, Lieutenant Martin said.
This market is controlled by recently established rings, based among the new immigrant groups, specialize in illegal exports.
They steal new cars and resell them, for double or triple their original worth.
In the end, organized crime rings account for almost nine out of 10 car thefts in the City, Lieutenant Martin said.
Faced with the disquieting statistic that more than nine cars a day were reported stolen in the 107th Precinct last year, Linda Leuzzi thinks her Jeep Cherokee could be next.
She and her husband, Vincent, live in Jamaica Estates, on a block where brazen thieves have been known to career down the street, searching for cars in broad daylight -- even on Mother's Day.
Three times in the last three years, inside their second-floor bedroom, which faces the driveway, the couple were awakened in the predawn hours by breaking glass.
Each time, they chased away the thieves in time.
"Now, if we hear a noise outside, we jump out of bed and go to the window," she said.
"We have the window open, even in the middle of winter. We want fresh air, but it's also because we want to know what's happening out there." The Indicted: A Flow Chart"
Though it is on the decline, auto theft remains a scourge in many neighborhoods.
As cars have become more sophisticated, so has car theft.
Law enforcement officials in Queens and Nassau County say a recent indictment is a key step in efforts to combat the crime and illustrates the power of market forces for blackmarket auto parts.
Their case: Vincent Asaro, a reputed captain in the Bonanno crime family, was at the top, receiving $500 per week in tribute from the man they say operated the ring, Guy Gralto.
They say Mr.
Gralto connected with buyers and helped hire car cutters and thieves.
All those charged have pleaded not guilty.
You and the 'Steal Men': Get Protection and Say a Prayer
IN a densely populated city where few residents own private garages, and where monthly indoor parking fees can cost as much as a studio's rent, New Yorkers must leave their cars to the gods of the streets.
Experts say that in New York -- especially in New York -- nothing will stop a thief.
But there are devices that will make stealing your car more difficult, and maybe persuade the thief to move on to your neighbor's car.
Here's a look at the most popular.
IGNITION CUT-OFF SYSTEM
HOW IT WORKS: If the proper encoded ignition key is not used, or if an attempt is made to start the car without a key, electronic sensors built into the ignition lock automatically cut off the electric power.
Usually, the system also activates an alarm.
Some sought-after cars, like the Corvette and Lexus LS400, come already equipped with the system.
But it can be installed in any car for a few hundred dollars.
THE BOTTOM LINE: The best, experts say.
"We've seen this to be effective even in very high-profile vehicles, like the Camaro or Corvette," says Kim Hazelbaker, senior vice president of the Highway Loss Data Institute.
"Compared to previous models that did not have this system, the thefts have come down, and have stayed down. Now the theft of Corvettes is only twice above average, whereas in the past it used to be 10 times the average."
HOW THIEVES GET AROUND IT: Tow the car away. ALARM
HOW IT WORKS: Sirens, flashing lights, or robotic voice warns thieves to "stand back."
THE BOTTOM LINE: "They don't do much good," Mr.
Hazelbaker says.
"It's a harsh statement. But we simply don't find the difference in the theft records of cars that have these alarms and those that don't." Especially in New York, people tune them out.
HOW THIEVES GET AROUND IT: One thief breaks into the car and immediately releases the lever of the hood.
An accomplice pops open the hood and smashes the alarm, which is usually installed near the engine.
Frank Vasquez, an officer with the city police's crime prevention division, recommends adding a lock to the hood latch.
LOJACK
HOW IT WORKS: A radio transceiver is hidden somewhere in the car.
When the car is stolen, the police enter the vehicle identification code into a computer system, and a broadcast system emits radio signals to turn on the transceiver in the car.
Each precinct has at least one patrol car equipped with a tracking computer, says Officer Jim Muller of the crime prevention division.
THE BOTTOM LINE: The recovery rate in several states for stolen cars with Lojack is 95 percent, according to the manufacturers.
But the unit, which costs $595 or less, is unproven in New York City, where here it has just been introduced and where there are special problems.
HOW THIEVES GET AROUND IT: The owner must report the theft to the police immediately.
If the owner dallies, especially in New York, the car could be in a chop-shop by the time the owner makes the call.
STEERING-WHEEL IMMOBILIZERS
HOW IT WORKS: The most famous is the Club, a device that is locked to the steering wheel and limits turning.
THE BOTTOM LINE: Many auto-security experts regard these devices, used by themselves, as minor deterrents.
HOW THIEVES GET AROUND IT By spraying Freon, a refrigerant, on the immobilizer's lock, thieves can easily smash it.
Most don't even bother doing that.
They simply cut through the steering wheel, which (to prevent injuries during accidents) is usually made of an aluminum wire covered with foam and vinyl.
COMBAT AUTO THEFT
HOW IT WORKS: Under a police program, car owners stick a notice on their windshields, allowing the police to stop their cars between 1 A.M. and 5 A.M.
THE BOTTOM LINE: It deters car thieves who don't want to needlessly increase their chances of being stopped.
For no cost, drivers who register cars at the local precinct can get between 5 and 15 percent discounts on insurance premiums, Officer Vasquez said.
HOW THE THIEVES GET AROUND IT: Once the car is stolen, the chances of recovery are no different from cars not registered in this program.
Since the program's inception in the mid-1980s, 126,000 cars were registered, said Barbara Keimes, an officer in Crime Prevention.
Of that total, 1,000 cars were stolen.
But only 45 cars were recovered, and 20 thieves were arrested.


African Democracies Worry Western Aid Will Evaporate
For the three decades that constituted the infancy of African independence, Washington and its allies preached the virtues of democracy while supporting many of Africa's most corrupt one-party regimes, invoking the strategic considerations of the cold war.
Now, with the Soviet Union no longer the opponent that justified this policy, democratic systems have taken root for the first time in a score of countries.
But as these sub-Saharan nations face grave crises of debt, population growth, poverty and religious militancy, leaders in Washington and in the capitals of Western Europe are increasingly telling African governments that they will have to rely on their own meager resources to solve the continent's problems.


Lobo's Choices
To the Sports Editor:
If Rebecca Lobo had been born a boy, she might now possibly be looking at a lucrative career in the National Basketball Association ("Lobo's Impact Resonates Far Beyond the Court," The Times, March 6).
Instead she will have to be content with a professional career in Europe and the Olympics Games in 2000.
She can also feel thrilled about a career in broadcasting.
Personally, I think the N.B.A. would be infinitely more exciting for her.


Where Danger Is
To the Sports Editor:
Another boxer, Gerald McClellan, has suffered a traumatic brain injury and the international cry for banishing the sport goes up.
Well and due perhaps, but consider that on almost the same day the receiver Sterling Sharpe faced permanent paralysis or death without an unusual operation to correct an injury he suffered while playing football for the Green Bay Packers.


The World; Do Fickle Markets Now Make Policy?
THE domino theory is alive and worried about in Washington.
A generation ago, the fear was over Vietnam and whether its fall to Communism would inevitably take Thailand or Malaysia or Indonesia with it.
The Vietnam of the economic age is Mexico, and the insurgents are brandishing not AK-47's and ideology but "hot money." That is what Wall Street calls the billions of dollars that investors move in and out of countries in minutes.
And suddenly the task of trying to direct or at least contain that flow before it topples the next domino is remaking the conduct of American foreign policy.


Cuba: Time to Change Direction
The sight of Fidel Castro in a business suit being escorted about Paris this week as an honored guest deserves some consideration in Washington.
With the Soviet Union gone and the cold war over, the only threat that the Cuban Communist poses to the United States lies in the imagination of ideological warriors like Senator Jesse Helms.
While the time has not yet come to welcome Mr.
Castro to Washington, a re-examination of Cuba policy is long overdue.
The embargo of Cuba, begun when John Kennedy occupied the White House and Nikita Khrushchev was Soviet leader, has outlived its usefulness.
Conservatives still cling to the notion that isolating Cuba and creating misery for its people will eventually cause an uprising and sweep Mr.
Castro from power.
Now that he is without Soviet support and his economy is in tatters, they reason, sanctions should be tightened.


The War in Bosnia as Told to Students by a U.N. Observer
FOLLOWING a three-month stay near the Bosnia-Serbia border, Doug Coffman, a 29-year-old public affairs specialist with the United States Mission to the United Nations, returned to his home here, and within weeks accepted an invitation to speak to the students and faculty of the Soundview Preparatory School at the Union Church here on his experiences overseeing the United Nations-sanctioned embargo on the Bosnian Serbs.
"I like explaining the role our country and individuals in our country can play in foreign affairs," Mr.
Coffman said.
Having volunteered twice in two years to assist with peace work around the world, Mr.
Coffman can amply expound on the subject.


Penelope Green and David Dawes
Penelope Green, the daughter of Patricia Corbin of New York and the late Fitzhugh Green, was married on Tuesday to David Meldrum Dawes, the son of Edward and Olwen Dawes of Brisbane, Australia.
Steve Gold, a municipal clerk, performed the ceremony at New York's City Hall.
The bride, 33, is an editor at The New York Times.
Her father, a career officer in the United States Information Agency, had retired from the Environmental Protection Agency in Washington, where he was the assistant administrator for international activities.


L. E. Woodberry, M. T. Robinson
Lesley Ellen Woodberry, an associate of the New York law firm of Donovan Leisure Newton &amp; Irvine, was married yesterday to Mark Timothy Robinson, a vice president of Citibank in New York.
The Rev.
Thomas A. Nielson performed the Roman Catholic ceremony in the Lady Chapel of St.
Patrick's Cathedral.
Mrs.
Robinson graduated from Middlebury College and received her law degree from Boston College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Woodberry of Lompoc, Calif.


Can't Anybody Around Here Count in English?
THE excuses are rampant.
They don't want to confuse you with extraneous details.
They want to keep letters short to save on printing costs.
They don't have the necessary computers.
Whatever the reason, mutual fund companies are reluctant to reveal a simple fact in their customer statements: whether you made money.
Many fund companies are spending heavily to redesign their statements, which are essentially report cards for investors.
Dreyfus, Fidelity, Kemper and Putnam have introduced new quarterly versions, while Twentieth Century, Janus and AIM funds are talking about changes.


'A Diving Rock On the Hudson'
To the Editor:
I had just finished reading Henry Roth's new novel, "A Diving Rock on the Hudson," when Mary Gordon's review appeared (Feb. 26).
I was puzzled by the review, which I think somehow missed the point of the book.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LASSOS ATWIRL
They come in all colors, singing up a storm, twirling lassos and decked out in checked shirts and 10-gallon hats, and they have taken their show on the road to Australia, Canada, China, Russia, Europe, Mexico and Japan.
They are called the Tucson Arizona Boys Chorus, founded 55 years ago, and they will be at the Rich Forum in Stamford this afternoon at 3.


Better Late


THE WORLD: Get Ready for Mao's Heirs; Hong Kong's Press Starts to Pull Its Punches
THE arrival of Communist rule is still three summers away, but Hong Kong's rambunctious, free-swinging press is already beginning to pull its punches lest it offend its future rulers, many journalists here say.
In the absence of official censorship, there is a growing perception of self-censorship among many editors and journalists.
"Subtle change would be the best term to describe it," said Daisy Li Yuet-wah, an editor at the independent paper Ming Pao and a leader of the Hong Kong Journalists' Association.
"You see a gradual toning down of certain kinds of stories, playing down stories. Day after day this happens. Self-censorship is the greatest threat to Hong Kong journalism right now."


Rebecca T. Ecton, Brian O'Reilly Jr.
Rebecca Tappan Ecton, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Martin Ecton of Cabin John, Md., was married yesterday to Brian Joseph O'Reilly Jr., the son of Mr.
O'Reilly of Dallas and Priscilla Lawrence of New Orleans.
The Rev.
Susan Gaumer performed the ceremony at St.
George's Episcopal Church in New Orleans.
Mrs.
O'Reilly, 25, graduated from Vanderbilt University, as did the bridegroom.
She is the benefits manager at the Delta Queen Steamboat Company, a riverboat company in New Orleans.
Her father is the director of Japanese affairs at the State Department in Washington.
Her mother is the senior staff analyst to the president of American University in Washington.


Gay Issue Roils Church of England
For years the Church of England has been racked by an internal debate over homosexuality: Is it morally reprehensible and a cause for repentance?
Or is it acceptable and, when accompanied by love and fidelity, as positive a form of human expression as heterosexuality?
This week the debate exploded into the public arena as the Bishop of London, the church's third-most-senior cleric, disclosed that he had been pressed by a militant gay rights group to proclaim himself a homosexual "voluntarily."


You Mean, She Gets the Cutest Boy? Oh, Go On
Outbreak  Dustin Hoffman, Rene Russo, Morgan Freeman, Donald Sutherland Directed by Wolfgang Petersen R 125 minutes


SIX DIE AND HUNDREDS ARE HURT
A terrorist attack on three Tokyo subway lines during this morning's rush hour permeated trains with what the police said appeared to be a form of nerve gas, killing at least six people and injured more than 1,200.
No group immediately claimed responsibility, but the police said they believed that "a simultaneous guerrilla attack" from several different points was responsible.


After 81 Years, a New Look at d'Albert's 'Tiefland'
It has been 81 years, the Washington Opera says, since Eugene d'Albert's "Tiefland" received a major production in this country, an obscurity that might seem well deserved.
After all, what could a Glasgow-born, French-named, German-educated virtuoso pianist turned composer possibly make of a Spanish story about life in Catalonia?
This unlikely tale begins when a bumpkinish shepherd, Pedro, tosses a stone down a mountain to magically predict where he might someday find a wife.
It nearly hits a party of notables who are approaching with Marta, the woman of his dreams.
He does indeed marry her at the urging of the rich landowner Sebastiano; what he doesn't know is that Marta is being forced to remain Sebastiano's mistress as well.
That's the way they do things down in the village, below the pastoral peaks of the Pyrenees, in "Tiefland" ("The Lowlands").


No Comeback, No to ESPN, Yes for a Simms-NBC Deal
On the day Michael Jordan returned to basketball, Phil Simms decided not to return to football -- in order to become a football analyst for NBC Sports.
The 39-year-old former Giant quarterback's decision jolted ESPN, for whom Simms worked adeptly last season on "N.F.L. Gameday," the Sunday studio show.
Simms had a two-year agreement with ESPN, but never signed the contract.


Stand Aside, Babushkas. Cosmo Is a Smash in Russia
The editor in chief of Cosmopolitan, Helen Gurley Brown, once wrote a famous defense of sexual tension in the office, trying to draw a wavy line between sexual harassment and her own fond memories of men chasing female secretaries through the halls of a radio station to remove their underwear in "a dandy game called 'Scuttle.' "
She would feel right at home in Russia, where male chauvinism still rules and Cosmopolitan is making extraordinary inroads and profits.
Started as a bimonthly last May with a print run of 60,000 copies, the Russian-language Cosmopolitan, now a monthly, carries about 110 pages of advertising and will sell 225,000 copies this month.


Trial Becomes Analysts' Super Bowl
The television commentators have compared it to football, boxing, wrestling, mud-wrestling, bullfighting, a circus -- even to the inside of a sausage factory, because, "you don't want to see exactly how this gets done."
They are talking about the American judicial system.
Specifically, they are talking about People v.
Orenthal James Simpson.


In Rural West, U.S. Funds for Art Help Buy a Sense of Community
An audience of 1,400 people took their seats at the Civic Center here the other night for a performance, financed in part by the National Endowment for the Arts, featuring men dancing in skirts, women dancing with women, fetishism, strong language and open mockery of Little Rock, Ark.
It was "South Pacific," and the people loved it.
They swayed to the strains of "Some Enchanted Evening" and beamed at the chorus boys.
And at intermission, many praised the notion of Washington's kicking back a little of their tax money so that they could enjoy the show.


Buying Excellence: How N.Y.U. Rebuilt Itself -- A special report.; A Decade and $1 Billion Put N.Y.U. With the Elite
Ten years ago, New York University was what college-bound students from New York regarded as a safety school, fourth or fifth on their application lists.
If you didn't get into Cornell or Brandeis or Brown University, you could always commute to N.Y.U.
But the administration, doing some long-range planning, decided that being the safety school was not good enough.
So in 1984, it began a brash campaign aimed at moving the school into the nation's top tier of universities.
And according to academics around the country who have looked on with envy, the strategy worked.


Knicks' Task Gets Harder From Here
The Knicks will see Michael Jordan on March 28 in New York.
More important, the Knicks may see Jordan and the Chicago Bulls again in the first round of the playoffs.
So what was a challenging season for the Knicks has become more grueling.
To win a championship, the Knicks will have to overcome the return of Jordan, the fallout from Anthony Mason's suspension and a possible playoff bracket that could force them to face the Bulls, the Indiana Pacers and the Orlando Magic just to reach the finals.


Sheryl Crow, With Conviction
"I was a waitress not too long ago, and then I won a Grammy," Sheryl Crow said midway in her sold-out concert at the Beacon Theater on Friday evening.
But in fact, the seemingly instant pop stardom that Ms.
Crow has achieved with her album "Tuesday Night Music Club" (A&amp;M) did not come instantly.
Friday's concert was the payoff after years of apprenticeship as a background vocalist and touring to promote her album, which won three Grammys.
The performance reinforced the recorded impression of Ms.
Crow as a vocal chameleon with a core of gritty emotional honesty.
In some numbers, Ms.
Crow's voice recalled the fluid, jazzy wail of Rickie Lee Jones.
In others, she echoed the more grounded folk-blues of Bonnie Raitt.
For big soul-flavored ballads, she unleashed a grainy rock cry reminiscent of Janis Joplin.


Ex-Communist, 35, Good at Poker, and Bulgaria's New Hope
Facing serious economic and political turmoil, Bulgaria has placed its hopes on a 35-year-old Prime Minister who was running a regional branch of the Communist youth organization only a few years ago.
Prime Minister Zhan Videnov took office in December after his Bulgarian Socialist Party, formerly the Communist Party, won a clear majority in national elections.
Despite his age and his even more youthful appearance, many Bulgarians say they believe that he may be tough and competent enough to master the country's problems.


Phone Bill Brings Out Big-Name Lobbyists
Howard H. Baker Jr. has been many things over the years, from Senate Republican leader and Presidential candidate to a trusted adviser to President Ronald Reagan.
But now the former Tennessee lawmaker is a hired gun -- and this is the week he must prove his worth.
His client: a coalition of long-distance telephone carriers, dominated by AT&amp;T, MCI and Sprint.
His mandate: to persuade his former Republican colleagues in Congress to keep the so-called Baby Bell companies out of the long-distance market for at least a few more years.


A Top B.C.C.I. Investigator To Join New York Fed Staff
John W. Moscow, one of the Manhattan District Attorney's top sleuths, will join the Federal Reserve Bank of New York as deputy general counsel in June.
Mr.
Moscow, 46, will take charge of litigation and enforcement in the New York Fed's legal department.
For seven years, Mr.
Moscow has been deputy chief of the investigations division in the district attorney's office, managing complex cases including the investigation of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.


Burned by Loss of Conoco Deal, Iran Says U.S. Betrays Free Trade
Iran accused the United States today of betraying its free-trade policy in canceling a $1 billion contract between the Iranian Oil Ministry and Conoco Inc. for the development of the Sirri oilfield.
Iranian officials made the accusation even as analysts here said that the Government was close to awarding the contract to the French oil giant Total.
According to oil analysts, Total, which has been involved in what were termed advanced negotiations with Iran, would most likely be awarded the contract exclusively or in a joint agreement with Elf Aquitaine, another French oil company.


Kluge's Group Plans Offer For Triton in a Merger Deal
Seeking to make a complicated four-way, $1 billion corporate merger easier to achieve, the billionaire John W. Kluge and his associates said yesterday that they would make an offer for the Triton Group Ltd., which owns 25.55 percent of one of the four corporations they are hoping to combine.
But while John C. Stiska, the chairman and chief executive of Triton, said he was "very happy people are interested in Triton, because we're in business to get value for shareholders," he insisted that his company had "more value than" the tender offer reflected.


Congress's New G.O.P. Majority Makes Lobbyists' Life Difficult
For years, Republicans said they did not get their deserved share of attention from lobbyists and political action committees, simply because the Democrats ruled on Capitol Hill.
But now that Republicans control both houses of Congress, they are seeking to make up for lost time by plying what many lobbyists and business executives describe as strong-arm tactics that are blunt even by Washington standards.


Richer's Second Goal Beats Boston in Overtime
This was one of those rare nights when the Devils looked every bit like the Devils of last season, from goaltending to the last forward on attack.
A blistering shot by Stephane Richer 1 minute 36 seconds into overtime gave the Devils their first victory in seven overtime games this season, a 4-3 decision over the Boston Bruins at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


A Chance to Take Home Some Special Children


First Lady Emphasizes Human Issues
In her first live televised interview since the November elections, Hillary Rodham Clinton pledged today to work on "the human issues" at home and abroad, said Republican spending cuts would finance tax breaks for "very rich people," and played down her role in her husband's decision to propose tax relief for the middle class.
At the beginning of a week that will take her halfway around the world on an official visit to South Asia, Mrs.
Clinton took call-in questions from viewers half a world away in an hourlong session on CNN's "Late Edition." She touched on topics ranging from affirmative action to welfare reform to the 1996 elections and her own role as a pioneering First Lady.


CHRONICLE
The rap star EAZY-E , who remained hospitalized in Los Angeles yesterday in critical condition with AIDS, is getting about 2,500 telephone calls a day from distraught fans.
"We've been just about overwhelmed," said Paula Correia, a spokeswoman for Cedars-Sinai Medical Center.
"There's been an incredible outpouring of sympathy and we're not equipped to handle it."


THEATER
A Curious Case Of Rape as Good Medicine  'Brimstone and Treacle' Houseman Studio Too
Dennis Potter was arguably the greatest television writer the medium has so far produced.
His teleplays "The Singing Detective" and "Pennies From Heaven" pushed the dramatic frontier for the small screen into uncharted territory.
Surreal on the surface, the plays' depth of focus was the point where the conscious and subconscious merge, offering a candid portrait of the human psyche.


A Youth Program That Worked
A random group of adolescents from welfare families can benefit greatly from an academic program that includes disciplined training, a stipend, money toward college and caring adult supervisors.
That is the lesson of a Ford Foundation-financed program described in The Times recently by Celia Dugger.
The 100 teen-agers who participated from 1989 to 1993 graduated from high school, went on to college, avoided child-bearing and escaped involvement with the criminal justice system at a greater rate than did a comparable control group.
The program's success offers hopeful lessons for budget-cutting politicians and pessimists who think no intervention can change the downward trajectory of poor youths.


Xerox to Announce Technology To Make Remote Printing Easier
The Xerox Corporation, continuing its strategy of seeking growth through the computer industry, is set to announce technology today that will make it easier for customers to use their corporate computer networks to send electronic documents to printers and copiers in remote offices.
Xerox, the Hewlett-Packard Company and Novell Inc. have been developing the project for two years, and they say the technology is based on software that Novell intends to begin shipping early next year.
At that time, Xerox and Hewlett-Packard expect to be ready with printers and copiers capable of working with the remote-access software.


Landmarks in Queens Need Stronger Laws
To the Editor:
Your March 13 news article on the fire that gutted the Arthur Hammerstein house in Whitestone, Queens, reports that officials believe the fire was deliberately set.
This tragedy was predictable.
The benign neglect by two successive developer-owners of the house left it vulnerable to destruction, manmade or natural.
It is a showcase example of developers' uncaring disregard for heritage, history and public benefit.


Pena to Speak on Gas Blasts
A year ago, a natural-gas pipeline exploded at the Durham Woods apartment complex in a thunderous roar, turning the night sky orange with flame.
One death was linked to the March 23, 1994, blast, and it was widely believed that the toll could have been worse.


Eugenio Perente-Ramos Is Dead; Farm Labor Organizer Was 59
Eugenio Perente-Ramos, an organizer of migrant and seasonal laborers who founded the Eastern Farm Workers Association on Long Island and was a close associate of Cesar Chavez in the United Farm Workers Organizing Committee, died at his home in Brooklyn on Saturday.
He was 59.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said Dan Fiske, a friend and fellow organizer.


THEATER
The Funny Side of Death, With an Explosive Finale  'Thanatos' Alice's Fourth Floor
What to wear to Ron Simonian's play "Thanatos"?
Earplugs, for the last 10 minutes at least.
For after an hour and a half of often very funny variations on an unlikely comic theme -- the modern fascination with death -- Mr.
Simonian winds up with a roar of fireworks.


Mr. Kasich's Numbers
The House Budget Committee has released a five-year plan to cut discretionary spending by $100 billion.
Or, depending on who does the counting, $177 billion or perhaps $315 billion.
The blizzard of numbers confuses debate.
But no matter how the G.O.P. decides to count, its budget looks punishing and arbitrary.
The only reasonable sign to emerge from Congress last week was a mild outbreak of party disunity.
Faced with the prospect of stiff, sometimes cruel, budget cuts, some moderate Republicans in the House and Senate are beginning to inch away from their commitment to large tax cuts.
Senators Pete Domenici, John Chafee and Judd Gregg may not have seemed like paragons of moderation in the past.
But they are positioning themselves between the House and fiscal folly.


Up Next for Connecticut: Huffing and Puffing 'Bama
The top-ranked and undefeated University of Connecticut women's basketball team can count on one thing from Alabama, its next opponent in the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament: The Crimson Tide is likely to still be tired from Saturday night.
At least Alabama will have some time to recover from its record-setting and dramatic 121-120 victory -- in four overtimes -- over Duke in an East Regional second-round game at Tuscaloosa, Ala.
The longest game ever in the N.C.A.A. women's tournament enabled Alabama (22-8) to advance to a Sweet 16 meeting with UConn on Thursday at Storrs, Conn.


Republican Says Senators Put Deficit Over Tax Cut
The head of the Senate Finance Committee, which oversees tax legislation, said again today that his panel would have little appetite for reducing taxes until Congress had brought the Federal deficit under control.
The remarks by Senator Bob Packwood underscore the widespread presumption that any tax cut even approaching the five-year $189 billion package now in the House is a dead letter in the Senate.


Spring Cleaning for a Mr. and Mrs. Bluebird?


Review/Fashion; Hermes Seeks a New Image
Classic fashion houses like Hermes have watched with interest as Chanel and, more recently, Gucci shook up their moribund images and resuscitated their flagging names.
Now Hermes has decided that it, too, would like to lay claim to a hipper image and the extra customers that come with it.
But at the same time, the company does not want to lose the loyal Hermes woman who has relied on its classic good taste for decades.
The collection Hermes presented on Sunday was evidence of the tightrope it is walking as it tries to fulfill both its desires.


Huskies Taking Time To Enjoy Their Ride
There was just not enough time.
Last Friday, the day before a second-round matchup against Cincinnati that could have ended their season prematurely, the Connecticut Huskies came to the type of realization that many teams discover in the national collegiate tournament.
Time was slipping away, and they had to do something about it.
But at that moment, they were not on a basketball floor.
They were at an outlet mall, strangers far from home, a short bus ride from here in Park City, closer to the snow-capped mountains.
Jim Calhoun, their coach, made an announcement: They had 45 minutes to shop.
Immediately, Nantambu Willingham, the reserve center who has been in charge of inspiring his team's laugh track for four seasons, had a request.


Review/Fashion; What Time Is It? A Second French Revolution
There is a revolution going on at the Paris runway shows, but it has nothing to do with the clothes.
Twice so far this season, French editors have made good on their threat to walk out of shows that start more than 30 minutes late.
Both times the designers were not French but British: Rifat Ozbek and Vivienne Westwood.


Hometown Hero Jones Takes Fast Track
It was not a time to be humble, but Roy Jones Jr., who had spent the morning tending to his chickens, didn't gloat after his sensational one-round defense of his International Boxing Federation supermiddleweight title.
He knows that hubris has dethroned other kings, especially Mike Tyson.


No Dare Untaken, With an Enigmatic Instigator
Not much distinguishes Otto (Martin Dahl Garfalk), the opaque main character of "Cross My Heart and Hope to Die," beyond the fact that he seems unusually glum for a 13-year-old and is too easily led into mischief.
In the opening scene of the movie, the first feature directed by Marius Holst, a young Norwegian film maker, Otto takes a friend's dare and urinates on a doorstep, rings the bell and flees.
Otto courts far more serious trouble during a school soccer game.
While in the grandstand, he is beckoned by a sinister-looking older boy who hands him a stone and dares him to hurl it at the referee.
Otto obeys and hits his target squarely on the forehead, causing him to collapse.


It's a Buyer's Marketplace
Just when most of us have reached the point where we don't want to pick up the newspaper or turn on the TV for fear of running across that tired phrase "information superhighway," the Harvard Business Review has given us a lean, spunky new buzzword: "marketspace."
Mutated from "cyberspace" -- the term coined by the science fiction writer William Gibson for the emerging electronic frontier -- "marketspace" is pleasantly compact.
There's also a cold-bloodedness about the word that finally encourages us to talk frankly about issues "the information superhighway" kept hidden behind the bushes on its shoulder.
Namely, the issue of money -- who is going to make it and how.


INSIDE
Pakistan and Terrorism
A Pakistan university reputed to be a haven for Muslim militants is under investigation as a possible training ground for terrorists.
Page A8.
Tough Stand From Britain
Britain's leader, speaking to President Clinton, took a tough stand on Northern Ireland talks.
Page A7.
Zoning Home Ventures
More communities are trying to draft zoning rules that accommodate home businesses.
Page B1.
A Stake in Dreamworks
A co-founder of Microsoft is investing $500 million in the studio created by Steven Spielberg, David Geffen and Jeffrey Katzenberg.
Page D1.


Politics and Dismissals: Taking On the Governor
DEBORAH I. VOLBERG is just about the last person you'd expect to make trouble.
Reserved and quiet, she speaks with such slow, deliberate care that a reporter can easily take verbatim notes.
Longhand.
Former bosses describe her as "sound" and "level-headed" and "nice." A rabble-rouser she is not.
Yet this 14-year veteran of New York state government is indeed making trouble.
She is suing Gov.
George E. Pataki and members of his administration for dismissing her as a lawyer in the Department of Environmental Conservation.
Though not immune under Civil Service rules, she is charging that her dismissal was an act of partisan retribution.


Shining Path Rebels Step Up Terror Campaign in Peru
A series of deadly attacks by the Shining Path guerrilla movement in the last month have demonstrated that it is still a potent threat to security more than two years after its top leaders were captured.
The violence has occurred not only in villages but also in the capital as the Government prepares for elections next month.


New School Would Serve Immigrants
In an effort to accommodate New York City's burgeoning immigrant population, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines is proposing to establish a special high school in Queens for the children of immigrants.
Like other city schools, this one would provide instruction in both English and the students' native languages.
But the range of languages the 1,000-student school would offer would be broader, and it would also provide more services for students and their families, like counseling on health care, jobs and naturalization.


When Artifacts Are Returned Voluntarily
To the Editor:
May I make what I consider an important postscript to "Are Finders Keepers?" (Week in Review, March 12), your article on museums and the spoils of war?


Tobacco Sees Way to Block A Big Lawsuit By Consumers
Lawyers for the seven American tobacco companies facing the largest class action suit in history said yesterday that their defense had been significantly strengthened by a Federal appellate court's ruling late last week on a case that pits hemophilia patients against drug companies.
The lawyers said that the ruling by the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit in Chicago, provides a precedent to invalidate the legal assault brought by a group of current and former smokers that could cost the tobacco companies billions of dollars in damages.


Helping Health Insurers Say No
A health plan asks a new mother to leave the hospital one day after her baby is born, instead of the usual two or three.
Or it refuses to cover cataract removal in more than one eye unless the patient is fairly young and needs both eyes for work.
Or it presses a generalist, not a neurologist, to treat epileptic seizures.
Who comes up with such rulings?
The answer is often Milliman &amp; Robertson Inc., a Seattle-based consulting firm that unknown to most doctors and their patients has quietly become the supreme court of medical insurance.


Major, Taking CLinton's Call, Maintains Tough Stand on I.R.A.
After not accepting a telephone call from President Clinton for more than a week, Prime Minister John Major relented today and, in a 25-minute conversation, promptly struck a tough stance on talks with Sinn Fein, the political wing of the Irish Republican Army.
Mr.
Major insisted that Sinn Fein had not yet made a firm enough commitment to "decommission" the weapons of the Irish Republican Army to enter into high-level talks with the British Government, according to an account of the conversation provided by the Prime Minister's office.


A Relationship Tested by Differences on China
HARRY AND TEDDY The Turbulent Friendship of Press Lord Henry R. Luce and His Favorite Reporter, Theodore H. White  By Thomas Griffith  340 pages.
Random House. $24.
Henry R. Luce and Theodore H. White first met in Chongqing, China, early in 1941, shortly after White had been assigned to rove Southeast Asia as a full-time correspondent for Luce's Time magazine.


Encouraging Home Businesses; Suburbs Revise Zoning Rules for Residential Entrepreneurs
Evelyn Simon was stunned the day a city inspector came to her door to investigate a violation of a law she had never heard of: her neighbors had filed a complaint against her for working out of her home.
"I couldn't believe it," said Ms.
Simon, who was running a consulting business from home using a fax machine, a copier, personal computers and two secretaries.
"It was totally absurd. I always assumed I had a right to work at home."


Nagano Journal; U.S. Companies Slip on Way to Winter Olympics
With snow-capped peaks in the background, a magnificent skating rink is being built here as the centerpiece of the 1998 Winter Olympic Games and a tribute to international cooperation and harmony.
Or maybe as a monument to provincialism and protectionism.


Dead Couple Discovered In Apartment
A husband and wife were found dead in their apartment in the Midwood section of Brooklyn yesterday in what investigators speculated was a murder-suicide, the police said.
Neighbors of the couple, identified as Gregory Baron, 60, and his wife, Fania, 57, criticized the handling of the case by the police last night, saying that officers had been called to the scene twice yesterday, once about 9:30 A.M. and again about 2:30 P.M., after sounds of a struggle were heard in the apartment.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:  MONDAY  Continental Homes Hldg Standard Prods Co TUESDAY  Capitol Amern Finl Corp WEDNESDAY  Commercial Intertech Franklin Res Inc Raytheon Co Sierra Pac Res THURSDAY  Boston Edison Co Super Food Svcs Transatlantic Hldgs FRIDAY  Aquarion Co Superior Inds Intl


U.C.L.A. Dash Knocks Wind Out of Missouri
U.C.L.A.'s Tyus Edney ran a 94-foot dash in 4.7 seconds today.
That he also managed to toss in a swooping layup left Missouri with its hands over its face.
The No. 1-seeded Bruins trailed the No. 8-seeded Tigers by 1 point with 4.8 seconds remaining when Edney, a turbo point guard, started his cross-country journey.
He took the inbounds pass under his own basket, was neck-and-neck with defender Jason Sutherland at midcourt, freed himself with a behind-the-back dribble, made a hairpin turn to the lane and banked in a shot over 6-foot-9-inch Derek Grimm at the buzzer.


Black Flags in Boston Protest Gay Group
Black flags, rather than green, led the annual St.
Patrick's parade today, recasting the city's traditional celebration of its considerable Irish heritage as a protest against court rulings supporting the inclusion of a gay group.
By portraying the parade as a protest march, organizers circumvented the judicial rulings against the exclusion of gay men and lesbians marching as a group.
But this tactic also had the effect of diluting the event, if not in spirit for those who attended then in their numbers.


Terror Network Traced to Pakistan
Glimpsed from a taxi, there is nothing obviously sinister about the University of Dawat and Jihad.
Like much of the sprawling Afghan refugee camp that surrounds it, the campus crouches unobtrusively behind high walls of sun-baked clay.
Beyond a guardhouse, clusters of young men in Afghan tribal garb move about languidly.
The scene could be anywhere in this tense and often lawless region along the frontier with Afghanistan.
There is no police presence for miles around, and no sign of any other Government authority.
In the bazaars that line the road running past the university, the name of which translates roughly as "University of the Community of the Holy War," just about everybody has a hidden Kalashnikov assault rifle, and a sharp eye for anything deemed intrusive, especially Westerners.


Linking Language and Identity In Friel Territory Long Ago
Brian Friel's "Translations" is a big, meditative, far more interesting play than you're likely to realize from the flat, mostly uninspired production that opened last night at the Plymouth Theater.
Though not neatly made, "Translations" is a period play of ideas, about language in particular, that have haunting resonance in our own era, when the manipulation of linguistics shapes virtually every aspect of our lives.
The cast is an able one.
The impulse to produce the play is worthy, but the text deserves better.


Essay; Clinton Ups Welfare
With veterans' hospitals emptying and the vet population declining;
With V.A. nursing homes costing the taxpayer twice as much as comparable community facilities;


NBC Hopes Comeback Pumps Air Into Ratings
NBC was more than willing to adapt itself to Michael Jordan's comeback.
Why not?
NBC signed a four-year, $750 million deal with the National Basketball Association in May 1993, and never got a scintilla of Jordan for its money.


A Niece Rummages in a Rich and Enigmatic Uncle's Closet
What do we really know about anybody else?
An entire Hollywood genre, the film noir, has devoted itself to the notion that the real truth about anyone is usually sordid, that wealth is synonymous with corruption, that the fancier the closet the nastier its secrets.
In "The Devil Never Sleeps," Lourdes Portillo, a Chicana film maker, takes the role of cinematic gumshoe as she investigates the mysterious death of her beloved multimillionaire Uncle Oscar.
Although the concept is promising, the movie's conclusions are too vague and scattered for her spadework to dig up a compelling drama.
Using vintage snapshots, old home movies and interviews, the film builds a biographical portrait of Oscar Ruiz Almeida, a Mexican rancher who amassed a fortune exporting vegetables to the United States and went on to become a powerful politician and businessman.
A go-getter and a charmer, Uncle Oscar married twice.
With his first wife, who died of cancer, he adopted two children.
After she died, he married a much younger woman who produced two more children from artificial insemination.
Unfortunately for the film, the second wife refused to appear on camera, although excerpts from several telephone conversations are heard.


Robertson Rejects Anti-Semitism
To the Editor:
Re "The Jew World Order" (column, March 9): Frank Rich again distorts reality when he attempts to link anti-Semitism and Louis Farrakhan of the Nation of Islam to the religious broadcaster Pat Robertson.


Reid Makes the Shot and the Highlight Film for Hoyas
Don Reid sat in his hotel room on Saturday night and watched a television program that highlighted dramatic moments in National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament history.
This afternoon at the Tallahassee Leon County Civic Center, he created a dramatic tournament moment of his own.


Review/Fashion; Courreges, Once Again
This season, looks inspired by Andre Courreges, whose avant-garde architectural styles shook up the fashion world in the 1960's, were all over Milan's runways, including those of an unapologetic Gianni Versace and of Dolce &amp; Gabbana.
They even cropped up in the collection of the London-based Red or Dead.
On Sunday, Mr.
Courreges and his wife, Coqueline, who has worked by his side for 43 years, showed how the originators do it, when they staged their usual fashion show during show week here.
"It's very good, in a way, that people copy," said Mrs.
Courreges, who now heads the Courreges design studio, which she and her husband founded in the early 1960's.
"It's not always good copies, but it's good for Mr. Courreges because he's a visionary and it shows that his style has kept up for 40 years."


Refused a Haircut, an Official In Stamford Closes a Salon
When Andrew McBride walked into Sweeney Todd Hair Design in Stamford, Conn., and asked for a trim, he was told no one there knew how to cut his hair.
So Dr.
McBride, who is black, as well as the city health director in Stamford, closed the shop.
"They told me nobody was available to cut my kind of curly hair," Dr.
McBride said yesterday.
"I went outside and hung around, and I saw a white couple go in. They got immediate service."


Review/Fashion; Photogenic, but Out of Focus
Claude Montana's fall collection on Saturday afternoon made more news off the runway than on it.
When the photographers arrived at the Theatre National de Chaillot a half-hour before the scheduled show time, they were denied entrance by the private security force hired by the house of Montana.
No one from the Montana staff was there to clear the way, and an argument erupted that resulted in a cameraman's being manhandled.


Runner Competes by Feel, By Vibration and by Heart
The public-address announcer asked for quiet before today's 400-meter race at the Pan American Games.
Wendell Gaskin of Kansas City, Kan., is deaf.
Unable to hear the starter's pistol, he relies on his hands, feeling the pistol's report through a vibration in the track.
The gun sounded, and Gaskin started in sync with the rest of the field.
He is the world-record holder for deaf 400-meter runners, and he had hoped for a medal here.
But his race essentially ended before it began.


METRO DIGEST
N.Y.U.'S MOVE INTO THE FIRST RANK
Ten years ago, New York University was what college-bound students from New York regarded as a safety school, fourth or fifth on their application lists.
If you did not get into Cornell or Brandeis or Brown University, you could always commute to N.Y.U.
But the administration, doing some long-range planning, decided that being the safety school was not good enough.
So in 1984, it began a brash campaign aimed at moving the school into the nation's top tier of universities.
And according to academics around the country who have looked on with envy, the strategy worked.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  A VIGIL FOR A SLAIN SON
Ethel Stavropoulos has been going to a Queens courtroom each day for the last three weeks, always dressed in black and bearing a photograph of her slain son.
"People should be held accountable," she said.
"If you do wrong, you should be accountable." Mrs.
Stavropoulos, 81, lost her son a year ago when Lisa Bongiorno, in an alleged hallucinogenic haze, struck the car in which the Rev.
Germanos Stavropoulos, 51, and the Rev.
Dimitrios Frangos, 81, were waiting at a red light.
B3.
TRIPLE MURDER IN THE BRONX
A man who was apparently angry that his ex-girlfriend was seeing someone else, killed the woman and two other people by spraying the inside of her Bronx apartment with gunfire, the police said.
A fourth person was also wounded in the attack.
The police said they were looking for the former boyfriend, Roger Logan, in the attack at 1535 Undercliff Avenue in Morris Heights.
B3.
A HAVEN FOR CHILDREN IN BROOKLYN
In a harsh corner of Brooklyn -- where a boy speaks of not being able to erase mental pictures of his mother, face down on the pavement, the barrel of a gun at the back of her head; where schoolchildren must walk past the hollow-stare windows of crumbling buildings -- Gershwin Junior High in East New York is a haven.
And Greg (Jocko) Jackson is the gatekeeper.
B3.
REGION  SCALING BACK MEDICAID PLANS
The Pataki administration has scaled back its ambitious plans to revamp health care for the poor, saying it will move more slowly in requiring Medicaid recipients to enroll in managed-care plans, state officials said.
The administration had originally planned to enroll an additional 1.2 million poor Medicaid patients in managed care by next spring -- a plan Mr.
Pataki made a cornerstone of his efforts to cut the cost of state government and particularly the increasingly expensive Medicaid program.
B5.
TAKING ON THE GOVERNOR OVER A DISMISSAL
Deborah I. Volberg is just about the last person you would expect to make trouble.
Reserved and quiet, she speaks with such slow, deliberate care that a reporter can easily take verbatim notes.
Longhand.
Former bosses describe her as "sound" and "level-headed" and "nice." A rabble-rouser she is not.
Yet this 14-year veteran of New York state government is indeed making trouble.
She is suing Governor Pataki and members of his administration for dismissing her as a lawyer in the Department of Environmental Conservation.
Metro Matters by Joyce Purnick, B5.
CHARGE OF RACISM IN REFUSAL TO CUT HAIR
When Andrew McBride walked into Sweeney Todd Hair Design in Stamford, Conn., and asked for a trim, he was told that no one there knew how to cut his hair.
So Dr.
McBride, who is the city health director in Stamford, closed the shop.
"They told me nobody was available to cut my kind of curly hair," Dr.
McBride, who is black, said.
"I went outside and hung around, and I saw a white couple go in. They got immediate service." B5.
GRASSO SEES A BEGINNING IN THE END
In an enigmatic final statement, scribbled on a piece of paper and handed to prison officials in McAlester, Okla., at 3:15 yesterday afternoon, Thomas J. Grasso said: "What we call the beginning is often the end, and to make an end is to make a beginning. The end is where we start from." For Mr.
Grasso, the twice-convicted killer who found himself playing a central role in New York's long-simmering death penalty debate and in George E. Pataki's successful campaign for governor, the end was near.
B5.
Chronicle B4


THEATER
Singing and Swinging Through a War  'Swingtime Canteen' The Blue Angel
Postcard from New York:
Dear Mom,


At Home Abroad; 'Through That Gate'
In the center of Jerusalem a great development underway, the Mamilla project, will link the old city to the new.
The construction workers are Romanians who live in trailers next to the site.
Supervisors communicate with them through a Jerusalem Palestinian who was educated in Romania.
What a bitter irony for Palestinians.
They used to do most of the construction work in Israel, but fear of terrorism has led the Israeli Government virtually to close its borders with the West Bank and Gaza.
Two years ago 120,000 Palestinians came in from the occupied territories daily to work.
Today quotas allow fewer than 25,000.


Knobbed Whelk on the Table
What do a horse, a brook trout, a honeybee and a duck-billed dinosaur have in common?
One is the state animal, one the state fish, the third is the state bug and the last (Hadrosaurus foulkii) the state dinosaur, whose fossilized remains were found in Haddonfield in 1858.


Patents; A Consultant Singles Out for Scorn 2 Patents Recently Granted To Big Computer Companies
THE Patent Office appears to have gone to great lengths to shore up the quality of its software patents since it rescinded a highly criticized patent granted to Compton's New Media.
But some patent experts despair that the agency's research resources are still woefully inadequate and are no match for the rising tide of software patent applications.
Chief among the critics is Gregory Aharonian, a software patent consultant in Belmont, Mass., who owns what is perhaps the largest private collection of software-related documents, most of which are housed in his basement.


Coverage of Murder Encourages Gay-Bashers
To the Editor:
The murder of a man who dared voice his attraction to another man on national television raises many more hard questions about homophobia in this country than about talk television (front page, March 14).


Let Gingrich Also See Victorian Failures
To the Editor:
The historian-Speaker Newt Gingrich is right: there is much to admire in Victorian society (news article, March 14).
He spoke admiringly of the moral leadership of that time and bemoans our lack of it.
I suppose the question is where to locate that leadership in Victorian England.


CHRONICLE
BETTY COMDEN will celebrate the first working words she has ever put on paper without her friend and lifelong collaborator, ADOLPH GREEN, at a cocktail reception tonight at Le Cirque.
The new work is actually her autobiography, "Offstage" (Simon &amp; Schuster), which details her upbringing, marriage to the late Steve Kyle and life outside her 55-year career with Mr.
Green writing lyrics for the American theater.


BUSINESS DIGEST
A Senate Barrier To Tax Cuts
The Senate Finance Committee has little appetite for reducing taxes until Congress gets the Federal budget deficit under control, the panel's chairman, Senator Bob Packwood of Oregon, reiterated.
Both Republicans and Democrats on the committee say "the best thing we can do for the taxpayers of this country is just try to move toward deficit reduction," Mr.
Packwood said.
A11.
Washington Lobbyists Complain Of Republican Muscle-Flexing
Republicans who feel they did not get their share of attention from lobbyists when the Democrats were in power on Capitol Hill are seeking to make up for lost time, using what many lobbyists and business executives say are strong-arm tactics blunt even by Washington standards.
A1.
Tender Offer for Triton Group
The billionaire John W. Kluge and his associates said they would make an offer of $1.80 a share, or $36 million, for Triton Group, which owns 25.55 percent of one of the four corporations the Kluge group hopes to combine.
Triton's chairman said his company was "clearly worth more than $2 a share" -- that is, more than $40 million.
D3.
Lumber Companies Cry Foul
The skating rink being built in Nagano, Japan, for the 1998 Winter Olympics has spawned a trade dispute.
American lumber companies spent tens of thousands of dollars preparing bids before Japan announced that the wood to be used will be Shinshuu larch, which grows only in Japan.
A4.
Iranians Seek Conoco Replacement
Oil analysts in Teheran said the French oil giant Total was likely to receive a contract to develop the Sirri oilfield, perhaps in a joint venture with Elf Aquitaine, another French oil company.
The contract had originally been negotiated with Conoco, a deal that was blocked by the Clinton Administration.
D2.
Oilmen Flocking To Colombia
A decade ago Colombia was an oil importer, but now foreign oilmen are drilling in the foothills of the Andes, confident that a sea of low-sulfur crude oil will help supply the United States market.
D2.
Concerns Over Bandwidth
Internet users and many companies that transmit computer data over telephone lines are worried that an F.C.C. ruling might raise the cost of using an integrated services digital network, or I.S.D.N., by as much as 50 percent before the end of the year.
Denise Caruso: Digital Commerce.
D6.
New Approach to Electronic Ink
Aha Software is offering a program that does not attempt to recognize handwriting, but instead allows users to write and send notes in electronic "ink." D6.
TV Advertisers' Strong Stomachs
Advertisers known to be queasy about sponsoring violent television action shows are, to the amazement of many in the television industry, seemingly comfortable with buying time on the most criticized programs on the tube, the daytime talk shows.
Bill Carter: Television.
D7.
Magazines Explore Abroad
Hearst, with 64 foreign-language editions of eight magazines, is leading the way as magazine publishers aggressively seek overseas readers.
D7.
Suburbs Debate Home Offices  Across suburbia, planning officials are re-viewing zoning rules that affect home offices, wondering if current rules meet the demands of a working world laden with fax machines and desktop computers.
B1.
Markets Await French Election
Investors in France and abroad are wondering what the impact will be on the financial markets from the wide-open race for the presidency.
The vote on April 23 pits two conservatives against a Socialist, Lionel Jospin.
Market Place.
D4.
An Investigator Joins New York Fed
John W. Moscow, one of the Manhattan District Attorney's top sleuths, will join the Federal Reserve Bank of New York as deputy general counsel in June, taking charge of litigation and enforcement there.
D4.


Editorial Notebook; South African Themes
Nothing I had read quite prepared me for the overlay of good humor that greets the visitor to the South Africa of Nelson Mandela.
Tourist kitsch shops jokily display salt-and-pepper shakers featuring the likenesses of President Mandela and Deputy President F. W. de Klerk.
The catch phrase "the new South Africa" is ubiquitous.
It is flung with equal zeal by hotel greeters and newspaper columnists.
But newcomers should be cautious analysts, especially in nations that have been through a passionate transition.
The cautious ear picks up another buzzword currently in fashion among Government officials and political journalists.
That word is "deliver," and often it is couched in questions.
Can the Government deliver decent housing to the shanty towns that constantly remind that third- and first-world conditions are literally a stone's throw apart?
Can it deliver employment to the three million blacks and 600,000 whites that the Government conservatively estimates to be without jobs?
Can it deliver reassurance to a white minority that, as if reading today's American papers and ignoring four centuries of their own history, has suddenly discovered "reverse discrimination" as a serious problem?


Equity Issues Set for This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Baby Superstore Inc., Greenville, S.C., 2.08 million shares. CS First Boston.


Animal Shelters Shouldn't Get Blame for Strays
To the Editor:
I have been a volunteer with the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals for almost nine years, and I am weary of the continual criticism leveled at the society, and now at the Center for Animal Care and Control, for their attempts to alleviate a problem they did not create.
Although I commend Judith Binus's friend (letter, March 11) for saving Mugger, it is fairly easy to rescue and place one cat -- especially one young cat -- with a friend.
I wonder how successful Ms.
Binus's friend would have been if Mugger had been old, sick, injured or pregnant.
And what if her friend had found one cat every day for, say, 10 days?
Would she have been able to place all 10 cats?
What if Mugger had been a dog?


Singapore Puts Off Prime Minister's Trip to Manila
In life, Flor Contemplacion had a story that was not much different from the ones told by so many other Filipinos -- and not much sadder.
Like them, Mrs.
Contemplacion was forced by the wrenching poverty of the Philippines to leave her family behind and seek menial work in a foreign land.
But in death, the 42-year-old Filipino maid has achieved a type of martyrdom.
Mrs.
Contemplacion's execution last week in Singapore horrified millions of Filipinos and stirred up a sense of outraged nationalism not evident in this country in years.


Romanian Kerouac Is Back
"Road Scholar" just keeps rolling along.
Filmed in 1992, it documents a cross-country trip in the manner of Walt Whitman and Jack Kerouac that was taken by Andrei Codrescu, poet, humorist and National Public Radio commentator.
The resulting 90-minute film won several festival awards and was released in theaters in 1993.
His book of the same name came out that year.
Now public television is circulating a one-hour version of the film.
On Channel 13 at 8 tonight, it adroitly salvages the essence of the original.
Mr.
Codrescu, a Jew in Romania, left the country when Israel was paying Romania to let Jews out.
He arrived in the United States in the mid-1960's.
For his planned car trip, he had to learn how to drive, "adjusting my notions of left and right." Hopping into a red 1968 Cadillac convertible, he bravely sets off, his instincts for the outlandish at full throttle.


When Fluidity Replaces Maturity
In Washington, in academia, in the writing of biographies and fiction, several R-words have gained a new ascendancy.
The words are "reinvent," "revise," "redefine," "reposition." "rehabilitate" and "redeem."
Shortly after his election, President Clinton put Vice President Al Gore in charge of "reinventing government"; then, after the Republican victory last year he refocused on reinventing himself.
He summoned three self-help gurus (Stephen R. Covey, Marianne Williamson and Anthony Robbins) to Camp David last December, while his wife, Hillary Rodham Clinton, embarked on yet another image make-over with the help of Ann Landers and Cindy Adams.


Rangers Searching For a Lost Power Play
A three-game losing streak, tied for longest this season, forced Coach Colin Campbell to change his plans for the Rangers yesterday.
"It should have been an off-day," Campbell said, "but we had to have a practice and we did. It cleanses the soul, somewhat. You do some soul-searching. It was a brisk practice -- basic power play."


What to Expect This Week
SENATE -- On Monday, the Finance Committee will hold a hearing on welfare, and the Select Committee on Indian Affairs will hold a hearing on proposed cuts in the current budget and block grants.


Roberts and Bay Hill Links Seem Made for Each Other
A few years ago, Arnold Palmer came close to selling his Bay Hill Club.
The deal fell through.
After what happened today, he might want to just deed it over to Loren Roberts because, in a manner of speaking, Roberts already owns the place.
For the second straight year, Roberts won the Nestle Invitational at Bay Hill, displaying a game as solid as Palmer's granite jaw.
He beat back challenges from Brad Faxon, who shot 71 and finished second, and from Peter Jacobsen, who shot 69 and finished third.
Roberts's closing round of 71 gave him a total of 272, 16 under par and 2 strokes clear of Faxon.


New Star-Ledger Editor Tries Something Novel: Change
One of the first things Jim Willse did when he took over as editor of The Star-Ledger, New Jersey's most influential and most old-fashioned newspaper, was to order television sets installed in the newsroom.
Editors at most other American newspapers have been paying attention to television news since sometime during the Eisenhower Administration, so Mr.
Willse's move two months ago was symbolic: The Newspaper That Time Forgot was being dragged into the modern world.
By the rabbit ears.


DANCE
Cunningham's Version Of a Work for Bostonians  Merce Cunningham Dance Company City Center
What fun it would be to see a performance by the Merce Cunningham Dance Company in which, with the assistance of guest artists from Boston, "Breakers" was followed by "Breakers."


Journalists Uneasy About Microsoft News Service
Executives at the Microsoft Corporation have rejected assertions that the company plans to begin competing directly with news organizations this summer when it begins its Microsoft Network on-line service.
But ambitious electronic news-publishing services being prepared by software makers like Microsoft and the Oracle Corporation, by telephone companies like AT&amp;T and by other technology companies have renewed concerns that as news gathering moves into the information era, editorial decisions may increasingly be made by business executives who are not journalists.


Good Skates They Were Not
Late Saturday night, a handful of rowdies were being shooed out of a roller-skating rink for fighting, the police said.
The rowdies were in hot temper, as were some people outside, who wanted to skate but had arrived when the rink's managers wanted to close for the night.


JAZZ
A Band of Improvisers Quoting Other Improvisers  Highlights in Jazz Pace University
The Highlights in Jazz concert on Thursday night, featuring the clarinetist Buddy DeFranco, started badly, dusted itself off and finished well.
Mr.
DeFranco can be an imposing soloist, and when he and his band settled down and cooled off the tempos a bit, the music flourished.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Quick Sampras Work  Pete Sampras, eager to watch the telecast of Michael Jordan's return to the Chicago Bulls, hurried past Derrick Rostagno, 6-3, 6-2, in the second round yesterday at the Lipton Championships in Key Biscayne, Fla.
Andre Agassi also won, beating Shuzo Matsuoka, 6-2, 6-4.
Sixth-seeded Richard Krajicek was eliminated, 6-3, 3-6, 6-2, by Paul Kilderry, an qualifier ranked No. 194.
Stefan Edberg, seeded 11th, lost to Karsten Braasch, 6-3, 7-6 (7-1).
On the women's side, second-seeded Steffi Graf, fourth-seeded Lindsay Davenport and fifth-seeded Gabriela Sabatini advanced to the fourth round. (AP) ALPINE SKIING


Widower to Speak on Death Bill
Robert Shollar, whose wife, Gail, was abducted and killed in 1992, is expected to appear today before the Senate Law and Public Safety Committee when it holds a public hearing on a bill to allow relatives of victims to testify before a murderer is sentenced.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Food &amp; Wine magazine turns a hungry eye to the adventuresome and affluent.
A magazine devoted to eating, drinking and making merry is seeking to attract attention in a competitive category by emulating the flamboyant Auntie Mame, who always insisted that "life is a banquet, and most poor suckers are starving to death."
Food &amp; Wine, the epicurean monthly from the American Express Publishing Corporation, is introducing a print campaign carrying the theme "Life should be devoured." It's not to be confused with a similarly Mame-like new campaign for Gatorade sports drink by Bayer Bess Vanderwarker in Chicago, which carries the theme "Life is a sport. Drink it up."


Market Place; As French elections approach, investors ponder 'what if.'
FIVE weeks from the first round of France's two-ballot presidential election on April 23, the race still looks open, and investors in France and abroad are sifting through the likely impact of the vote on the financial markets.
In the polls, Mayor Jacques Chirac of Paris has overtaken Prime Minister Edouard Balladur, his fellow conservative rival, to become front runner.
But this spurt was so sudden that it may be reversible or even repeatable by the Socialist candidate, Lionel Jospin.
Forty percent of the voters say they are undecided.


Making a Scandal Where None Exists
To the Editor:
William Safire has written at least 22 columns on the so-called "Iraqgate" scandal, replete with factual errors and unfounded accusations.
Other journalists have long since dropped the claim that the Bush Administration was involved in a covert effort to arm Iraq.
However, in his column of Feb. 20, Mr.
Safire again spins out his conspiracy theories and hurls unsubstantiated charges against innocent parties.


Simpson Trial as Sport
Television is treating the O. J. Simpson trial like a sporting event, complete with expert commentators.
But the scorekeeping and instant analysis that works in sports -- play by play, blow by blow -- seems ill suited to assessing the tedious, complex twists of a long trial.
Article, page A13.


People
*
Mary Doan, executive vice president and general manager at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, San Francisco, was promoted to chief executive and worldwide account director on the Hewlett-Packard Company account, succeeding Michael J. Jeary, who left last year to join Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, New York, as chairman and chief executive.
Since then, Ms.
Doan had managed the office with Rob Ingalls, vice chairman and executive creative director, who returns to focusing on his creative role. *
Robert Kantor was named president and chief operating officer at Publicis/Bloom, New York, succeeding Penny Hawkey, who was promoted to the new position of vice chairwoman.
He was previously a partner and group account director at Chiat/ Day, New York.


More Fallout From Mars Agency Shifts
Almost a month after Mars Inc. extensively revamped its agency roster, the changes continue to reverberate.
D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, which remained on the roster and was awarded additional assignments, said on Friday that it would consolidate all work on the Mars candy and snack brands it handles at its St.
Louis office, which had previously shared responsibilities with the agency's New York office.


Correction
An article in Business Day on Saturday about trading in the bond markets misstated the date of the Federal Reserve meeting at which one analyst expects interest rates to be raised.
Eugene J. Sherman, director of research for M. A. Schapiro &amp; Company, said he expected the higher rates to come at the Fed meeting of May 23, not at the one on March 28.


In West, Wildflowers Have Jump on Spring And the Tourists Glow
If you figure spring by the earth's dance around the sun, it'll show up on March 20 at 9:14 P.M., Eastern time.
But out in the desert, it first stirs in January, when the Minnesotans start calling the Arizona Sonoran Desert Museum and asking, "When will the wildflowers bloom?"
"They want to know which weekend it will peak here -- the exact place and date," said Dr.
Mark Dimmitt, the museum's curator of plants, as he drove west across the desert that surrounds Tucson.
"They're very insistent."


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge an article or return it unless it is accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


New U.N. Force in Croatia To Be Given Limited Power
The new peacekeeping force being created to police the borders of Croatia will have only limited authority to deter the movement of arms and troops and no enhanced military powers, according to diplomats involved in Security Council discussions on draft plans.
It will be at least a week or so before the Council formally debates resolutions reconstituting all peacekeeping operations in Croatia, Macedonia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, and an official said that many of the issues still undecided were "messy." But diplomats agree that there is no support for giving the force in Croatia military powers beyond self-defense or the protection of relief supplies.
They would not, for example, have the power to forcibly seal the borders.


No Headline
"Artists see things differently from the rest of us. They make us see things we would never see on our own. And if the Government doesn't help fund it, only the rich can enjoy art." -- PAUL STAHL, a deputy county attorney in Helena, Mont.  [ B7:1. ]


Man on Women's Boat Doesn't Thrill Sponsor
Sponsoring an America's Cup yacht-racing team usually brings with it a measure of glitz -- surely some hobnobbing with the sport's top athletes, and most assuredly, a boat ride in sunny San Diego to watch the races.
Lifetime Television, the cable company based in New York, came here over the weekend with 100 corporate personnel and clients to watch America
race in the first match of the defense semifinals.
But it had no way of knowing that Bill Koch, founder of the all-women's team, was about to rock the boat.


Nikita Talin; Dance Coach, 75
Nikita Talin, a dance coach, teacher and director of the Harkness Ballet school, died on Wednesday at his home in McKinney, Tex.
He was 75.
The cause was heart failure, said Norma Rogers, a friend.


More of Baryshnikov
Mikhail Baryshnikov is to give two additional performances of Eliot Feld's "Tongue and Groove" on March 23 and 24 at 8 P.M. at the Joyce Theater.
The solo, which was created for Mr.
Baryshnikov and which he will also perform on tour with his White Oak Project, received its world premiere early this month in a gala for the Feld company's New Ballet School.
Mr.
Baryshnikov will also perform with the company in a free special matinee for 450 New York public school children on March 22 at the Joyce.
Tickets for the March 23 and 24 performances are $30.
Information: (212) 242-0800.


Children Crusade Against Proposed Republican Budget Cuts
The message on buttons and banners and booming over loudspeakers was, "Pick On Someone Your Own Size." But the intended audience at the Capitol, the Republican Congressional leadership, was on this day of rest absent from the building they have dominated since January.
The rally on the west steps of the Capitol today was aimed at proposed Republican legislation that would cut money for school lunch programs.
The messengers were hundreds of children from the District of Columbia and four nearby states, together with leading Democratic legislators and a coalition of 81 children's advocacy groups.
The crowd numbered about 1,500.


At the Scene, Riders Numb With Horror
The more than 50,000 people who work at the Tsukiji wholesale fish market start the day early, in time for the predawn ceremony in which huge tunas and other fish are dumped onto the piers and auctioned off to the sushi shops of Tokyo.
Today, that early start might have saved thousands of people from death or illness.
Shortly before 8:30 a.m., a subway car reaching the Tsukiji station was one of the first of several trains to be stricken by poison gas.


Untimely Error Foils Orange Bid
It was all there for Syracuse today -- the Arkansas Razorbacks, the game, the crowd, the Sweet 16, the steal, the ball, the shot.
The upset.


Playboy Makes Pitch for 'Girls of the Net'
Playing on the increasing popularity of the Internet, Playboy has taken to the information highway in search of women who would like to appear in a photo display.
For its pictorial feature, "Girls of the Net," Playboy is asking women 18 or older to E-mail their height, weight, measurements and of course their favorite Internet sites -- and to scan into the system pictures of themselves in a bikini or less.


Magazines Find Green Pastures Abroad
Forget about the weak dollar, said George J. Green, who shrugs it off as a minor irritant: These are great times for starting magazines overseas.
Mr.
Green, who has been president of Hearst Magazines International since the group was founded in 1989, is looking 5 to 10 years down the road with the goal of developing a large international media operation within Hearst.
This year alone he plans to add 8 to 10 new foreign-language magazines, a high number of start-ups for any company.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  GAS ATTACK IN TOKYO SUBWAY
Poisonous gases killed at least six people and injured more than 900 on the Tokyo subway, and the police called the incident a "simultaneous guerrilla attack." A1  TENDING TO THE VICTIMS
Hundreds of sick commuters flooded Toyko's hospitals in the aftermath of the poison gas attack, overwhelming health workers throughout the capital.
A1  CROATIAN FORCE LIMITED
The new peacekeeping force being created to police Croatia's borders will have only limited authority to deter the movement of arms and troops, diplomats have said.
A2  United Nations troops in Sarajevo fired at Serbian gunners.
A2  BRITISH LEADER HOLDS GROUND
Britain's Prime Minister John Major struck a tough stance on talks with Sinn Fein in a phone conversation with President Clinton.
A7  PAKISTAN'S WILD NORTH-WEST
Pakistan's North-West Frontier Province, on the frontier with Afghanistan, has emerged as a training ground for a new breed of international terrorist.
A8  In death, an executed Filipino maid has achieved martyrdom.
A3  Bulgaria has placed its hopes in a new Prime Minister.
A5  Elections in France are unlikely to alter its foreign policy.
A6  A West Bank town with high hopes for Israeli withdrawal.
A8  Shining Path rebels step up terror campaign in Peru.
A9  Nagano Journal: U.S. companies slip on way to Olympics.
A4  National A10-15, B7-8  LOOK WHO'S IN CHARGE NOW
The Republicans, who won control of both houses of Congress in November, are using strong-arm tactics that are blunt even by Washington standards to reorient lobbyists and political action committees to the new power structure.
A1  SO WHAT IF BASEBALL'S ON STRIKE
Television, in treating the O. J. Simpson trial like a sporting event, has brought in a raft of expert commentators who elaborate on the developments play by play.
A1  A MAIN STREET DEBATE ON THE ARTS
The argument over Federal support for the arts has found its way to audiences in many places like Helena, Mont., that are far away from Broadway or Hollywood.
A1  ST.
PATRICK'S DAY PARADE SUBTEXT
As the Irish marched peacefully through South Boston, they were not only celebrating St.
Patrick's Day but also protesting a state court ruling that prohibited the exclusion of homosexuals in the parade.
A10  FIRST LADY REVAMPS HER ROLE
In her first live television interview since the elections in November, Hillary Rodham Clinton stressed issues at home and abroad that affect women and children.
A13  A SHORTAGE OF LEGAL PEYOTE
The hallucinogenic peyote cactus, legally used as a sacrament by the Native American Church of North America, is in critical short supply because of a change in farming practices in Texas.
A10  WHERE THE WILDFLOWERS BLOOM
In the desert, spring is the season for caravans of tourists hoping to catch the peak color of wildflowers.
And the mild, wet winter raised expectations for an especially abundant crop this year.
B7  The head of the Senate Finance panel questions tax cuts now.
A11  Children's advocates organized a protest against budget cuts.
A13  Metro Digest B1  A UNIVERSITY'S UPGRADE
Ten years ago, New York University began a brash campaign to move the school into the nation's top tier of universities.
And according to academics around the country who have looked on with envy, the strategy worked.
A1  GRASSO EXECUTED IN OKLAHOMA
Thomas J. Grasso, the twice-convicted killer whose case and sentence became a key factor in the election of Gov.
George E. Pataki, was executed by lethal injection at an Oklahoma prison.
A1  Sports C1-10  JORDAN IS BACK
Michael Jordan returned to the Chicago Bulls, scoring 19 points against the Indianapolis Pacers.
The hoopla made him feel "like I was a god, or something." A1  Basketball: Jordan returns but Bulls lose.
C1  Knicks' job gets harder.
C4  Baseball: Orioles comfortable as loners.
C2 Columns: Rhoden on Arkansas.
C7  On basketball.
C6  Hockey: Devils stop Bruins.
C3  N.C.A.A.: Arkansas beats Syracuse in overtime.
C1  Georgetown survives.
C6  U.C.L.A. nips Missouri.
C7  UMass gains Sweet 16.
C7  Racing: Afternoon Deelites wins.
C8  Television: Simms signs deal with NBC.
C8  Track: Deaf runner races by feel.
C2  Business Digest D1  Obituaries D10  Eugenio Perente-Ramos, farm labor organizer.
Fashion Page B10  Review: Four designers who have no use for trends.
Arts/Entertainment C11-16  Theater: "Translations." C11  Film: "Cross My Heart and Hope to Die." C12  "The Devil Never Sleeps." C12  Music: "Tiefland" at the Washington Opera.
C11  Sheryl Crow at the Beacon.
C12  Black Crowes.
C16  Books: Critic's Notebook.
C11  "Harry and Teddy." C15  Television: "Road Scholar." C16  Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17  Editorials  Mr.
Kasich's numbers.
A youth program that worked.
Howell Raines: South Africa.
Letters  William Safire: Clinton ups welfare.
Anthony Lewis: "Through that gate."  Stevan Alburty: It's a buyer's marketspace.
Bridge C16  Chronicle B4  Crossword C15


Interpublic Merging 2 New York Shops
The Interpublic Group of Companies is merging one of its oldest New York-based agencies, LCF&amp; L, with one of its newest, the Gotham Group, to create a shop named Gotham Inc. that will join the ranks of the country's 50 largest agencies by billings.
LCF&amp; L, founded in 1952 as Daniel &amp; Charles, brings in 202 employees and billings estimated at $205 million from clients like Abbott Laboratories, Bristol-Myers Squibb and the Dial Corporation.
The Gotham Group, founded in 1994 as a spinoff of Lintas Worldwide, brings in 38 employees and billings estimated at $70 million from clients like Maybelline, Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing and Time Warner.


Agency Changes For 3 Companies
Three advertisers said on Friday that they would make changes in their agency rosters.
Tyson Foods Inc. in Springdale, Ark., which markets poultry products under brands including Tyson and Weaver, has named DDB Needham Chicago to handle its retail advertising account, which had been at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York for the last seven years until that agency was unexpectedly dismissed early last month.
The billing were estimated at $25 million to $30 million.
DDB Needham Chicago was awarded the account after a review that was narrowed to that agency and two other finalists, McCann-Erickson New York and D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in St.
Louis.


Registration Closes Today
New Jersey residents who are not registered to vote in their municipalities must do so by today to participate in the annual school board elections on April 18.
The elections are expected to focus on cuts in Federal and state aid, efforts to control increases in property taxes and ways of consolidating school systems to reduce costs.


Treasury Sets Bill Auction
The Treasury's schedule of financing this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
Traders said that at the close of the New York cash market on Friday the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 5.72 percent and the rate on the six-month issue was 5.86 percent.


Murder Suspect's Words at Issue
Shortly after he was arrested on charges that he cut his girlfriend's throat in January 1993, John Chew said some things to his police interrogators that the prosecution would like to use when the murder trial begins in May.
A hearing will begin today on whether what Mr.
Chew said should be admissible.
Mr.
Chew, 44, is accused of killing Teresa Bowman, 31, with whom he had lived in Mystic Island.
Her body was found in his car, which had been left in a parking lot.


POP
Polished Honky-Tonk And Chronically Lovesick  David Ball Bottom Line
With a cowboy hat on his head and a hit, "Thinkin' Problem," on the radio, David Ball joins country's throng of polished honky-tonk singers.
On Tuesday night, his music was steeped in Hank Williams and Lefty Frizzell, George Jones and Willie Nelson.
His wiry tenor can slide casually or swell toward a telling phrase, and of course he can yodel.
His six-man band, complete with fiddle and pedal-steel guitar, easily dispenses casual Western swing and chugging Bakersfield country-rock.


Bridge
Total concentration at the bridge table results in a total lack of movement.
This was proved in a remarkable way in Bermuda in January, during international playoffs.
Intermittently the room would go black, causing considerable irritation, and light would return as soon as someone stood up to summon help.
It happened that the lights were motion-sensitive, and turned themselves off when lack of movement seemed to indicate that the room was empty.
The playoffs were between teams representing Bermuda, Canada and Mexico, vying for the right to compete in world championship play in Beijing next October.
Canada had a double victory, in both the open and women's series.
Their open team consisted of Eric Kokish, Joe Silver, George Mittelman, Fred Gitelman, Boris Baran and Mark Molson.
The winning Canadian women were Gloria Silverman, Roisin O'Hara, Joan Eaton, Barb Clinton, Katie Thorpe and Mary Paul.


Jeweler Faces More Questions
The husband of a woman killed in a botched jewelry heist faces more questioning today.
If Jeffrey Wolf does not cooperate, he may be charged with giving false information to the police, the Somerset County Prosecutor, Nicholas L. Bissell Jr., said over the weekend.
Mr.
Wolf said that three men burst into his jewelry store on Tuesday and that one of them shot and killed his wife, Brenda, 32.
Mr.
Wolf then shot one suspected robber, Marqis Kennon, with his .357-caliber Magnum.
Ballistics test showed that Mrs.
Wolf was shot with her husband's gun.


Sports of The Times; Trying to Ignite the Flame Within
AT 7 o'clock Sunday night, members of the Arkansas basketball players were still sitting in front of their lockers, eating boxed lunches and thinking about how they had sweated out yet another unbelievable victory.
A half an hour earlier the defending national champions had defeated Syracuse, 96-94, in overtime in a game they had no right to win except by divine intervention.
This one was truly a miracle.


Orioles Stand Firmly on Outside Looking at Harmony Within
With 14 days until their scheduled opener at Camden Yards, the Baltimore Orioles remain in a league of their own making.
None of the other 27 major league clubs will play exhibition games against the Orioles.
And the Orioles won't play the other 27, either.
The irreparable parting of the ways was caused when the Orioles' owner, Peter Angelos, ordered his team not to play with or against nonunion workers hired to replace striking major league players.


Politics Didn't Enter Yale's Return of Gift
To the Editor:
Your March 15 front-page article on a donor's request that Yale University return a $20 million gift inaccurately describes the problems surrounding the proposed program in Western civilization.
This has never been a story about a debate between traditionalists and multiculturalists.
No one ever argued that the money should be spent on courses "with a multicultural perspective."


Minutemen Finally Escape 2d Round
Lou Roe called it the end of a jinx and perhaps the beginning of something very special.
After having their last two National Collegiate Athletic Association tournaments end in second-round defeats despite being seeded No. 3 in 1993 and a No. 2 in 1994, the Massachusetts Minutemen have reached the Sweet 16 with maybe only one major speed bump between them and a trip to Seattle.
In thoroughly dominating 10th-seeded Stanford today at Knickerbocker Arena, second-seeded UMass had the look of a team making a statement.
Its 75-53 victory was every bit as one-sided as it sounds as the Minutemen used an aggressive defense and a balanced offense to build a 20-point lead at halftime.
Unlike Friday, when UMass played tentatively and struggled with St.
Peter's for 30 minutes before pulling away, the Minutemen pounced on Stanford from the start, forcing turnovers, blocking shots and turning offensive rebounds into baskets.


Timetable on Managed Care for the Poor Is Pushed Back
The Pataki administration has scaled back its ambitious plan to overhaul health care for the poor, saying it will move more slowly in requiring Medicaid recipients to enroll in managed care plans, state officials said yesterday.
The administration had originally planned to enroll an additional 1.2 million Medicaid patients in managed care by next spring, a plan Mr.
Pataki had made a cornerstone of his efforts to cut the cost of state government and particularly the increasingly expensive Medicaid program.


THEATER
Four West Indian Tales, Using Dance and Music  'Another Story' Ubu Repertory Theater
Julius Amedee Laou's "Another Story" is such a loosely stitched-together group of four tales that a director and cast can turn it into almost any kind of play they care to imagine.
In the Ubu Repertory Theater version, presented as part of a Martinican theater festival, the director Francoise Kourilsky turns it into a dark and moving commemoration of West Indian history by using dance and music to give a kind of epic quality to the tales, each presented by a different actor in a high declamatory style that is almost a chant.


Sports of The Times; Jordan Back And Seeks High Goals
It is a very powerful thing, being Michael Jordan.
He makes stocks rise with his comeback.
He makes television networks quiver with joy or gloom.
He draws hundreds of journalists paying peak fares on short notice.
He makes fans go out and buy his jersey, just by hinting at his comeback.
He is probably the most famous athlete on the face of the earth, and he seemed legitimately boggled by the commotion today, after he played his first basketball game in 21 months.


Digital Commerce
IF you believe everything you read, you must think everyone spends every waking hour in cyberspace.
They're having cybersex, using cybercash to buy cyberzines, engaging in cyberactivism, committing cybercrimes and in general embarking on a mass exodus from the deadly ennui of physical existence.
Unfortunately, this is easier written than done.
What's required to enjoy the cyberlife is a sufficiency of bandwidth -- that is, the number of digital graphics and the amount of video and sound that can move over a network in a given time.
And a commodity it is not.


In Queens Court, a Dead Priest's Mother Keeps a Faithful Vigil
Ethel Stavropoulos has been going to a Queens courtroom each day for the last three weeks, always dressed in black and bearing a photograph of her slain son.
"People should be held accountable," she said.
"If you do wrong, you should be accountable. That's what God said."


Review/Fashion; Four Who Have No Use for Trends
There is one question the omnipresent television camera crews want answered as they hover with their headlamps, like miners in the dark cavernous show spaces: what are the trends?
Looking for trends at the runway shows of Jean-Paul Gaultier, Vivienne Westwood, John Galliano and Karl Lagerfeld is a bit like going to the Museum of Modern Art and doggedly seeking paintings with flowers or trees.


State Universities
Decreasing state and Federal aid to the region's public universities has left the schools with little choice but to continue raising tuition to make ends meet.
The cost of a year's schooling at the State University of New York, the University of Connecticut and Rutgers has almost doubled in the last six years.
Tuition at SUNY has remained the same for the last three years, but last week, the school's trustees said they would raise tuition $1,600 a year and close or merge eight campuses or hospitals if Gov.
George E. Pataki's budget cuts were approved.
The proposed $290 million reduction in state money would be the largest cut in SUNY history.


The World Watches Jordan Hold Court
It was the kind of hullabaloo reserved for coronations, or when Elvis or a spacecraft is sighted.
Michael Jordan, His Airness, the World's Greatest Hoopster, was returning to basketball and the Chicago Bulls, and much of the nation seemed transfixed.
And it was here in this relatively tranquil Midwestern city today that Jordan, after 18 months of baseball and some 10 days of rumors, began his comeback against the Indiana Pacers.
Hordes of reporters converged on Market Square Arena.
National television was on hand.
Scalpers reportedly were seeking as much as $680 for $42 tickets.


Inmate Is Executed in Oklahoma, Ending N.Y. Death Penalty Fight
Thomas J. Grasso, the twice-convicted killer whose case became a key factor in the election of Gov.
George E. Pataki, went to his death at 12:22 this morning at the Oklahoma State Prison here.
In an enigmatic statement scribbled on a piece of paper and handed to prison officials here at 3:15 yesterday afternoon, Mr.
Grasso said:


For Indian Church, a Critical Shortage
When the Native American Church of North America recently held its midyear conference in South Texas, the top priority facing church leaders was not a question of law, doctrine or liturgy but a critical shortage of their sacrament, the hallucinogenic peyote cactus.
Twenty-five years after Texas legalized the religious use of peyote by Indians, changing agricultural practices in a part of the state once known among Indians as "peyote gardens" have left the church's members with only a fraction of the wild peyote cactus needed for their ceremonies.


Rethinking Approaches To Digital Handwriting
Listening to the makers of personal digital assistants talk about their products sometimes brings to mind Thomas the Tank Engine, the little blue locomotive whose simple ambition is to be "a really useful engine." PDA's, so the industry likes to insist, will be really useful devices, really, one of these days.
Devices like Newton from Apple Computer and Magic Link from Sony are already useful, in a limited way, right out of the box.
They come with software including spreadsheets, contact managers, personal organizers and other handy programs, and the learning curve is not steep.
But one problem with all of them has been getting information into and out of the devices.
Attempts to develop systems for reading the user's handwriting have provoked a great deal of ridicule.


Honoring Walter Sorell, 90
The Dance Collection at the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts will celebrate the 90th birthday of Walter Sorell, the dance historian, on April 5 with a performance and party at 6 P.M. in the Bruno Walter Auditorium, 111 Amsterdam Avenue, at 65th Street.
Both events are free and open to the public.
The program will include "Looking Back With Wonder," a speech by Mr.
Sorell, known particularly for his writings on Mary Wigman and Hanya Holm.
Information: (212) 799-7865.


Investor to Put $500 Million In New Studio
Paul G. Allen, a co-founder of the Microsoft Corporation, has agreed to invest about $500 million to acquire 18.3 percent of Dreamworks SKG, the entertainment company that is controlled by David Geffen, Jeffrey Katzenberg and Steven Spielberg.
Mr.
Allen's investment puts a value on the fledgling company of $2.7 billion.
"It is very impressive because it is a great deal of money for a modest stake," said David Londoner, who follows entertainment for Wertheim Schroder &amp; Company.


CHRONICLE
PRINCESS ELENA said "I do" inside a cathedral packed with royalty, and a roaring cry of "Long live the bride and groom!" rose from the thousands waiting outside as Spain celebrated its first royal wedding in 89 years on Saturday.
The 31-year-old daughter of KING JUAN CARLOS and QUEEN SOFIA exchanged vows with JAIME DE MARICHALAR Y SAENZ DE TEJADA , a banker eight months her junior.
The 90-minute Roman Catholic ceremony was orchestrated to show off the proud position the restored Bourbon monarchy has carved out for itself in modern Spain.


Television
WHEN ABC first brought forth its racy police drama "N.Y.P.D. Blue" in September 1993, mainstream advertisers, fearing for their corporate images, headed for cover.
But to the amazement of many in the television industry, companies known for that sort of careful image protection are now regularly sponsoring the most critically reviled programming there is: the daytime talk show.


Borrowing Without Blending: Black Crowes at the Beacon
Rock as the Black Crowes know it ended in 1976.
Their music is a period piece, mixing Southern rock and soul with British blues-rock: part Allman Brothers, part Faces.
Chris Robinson's vocal style comes from Rod Stewart, and at the Beacon Theater on Friday night, so did his stage moves: he'd be lost without a microphone stand.
As the band avoids musical updates, Mr.
Robinson's lyrics add the 1990's touches: self-pity and self-righteousness.
"I've never stolen nothing, not a thing," he insisted, ludicrously, in "A Conspiracy." The Black Crowes also flaunt their affection for drugs, in lyrics and in their staging; for the finale, "Remedy," a dancer appeared dressed as a crow in an Uncle Sam costume, with a marijuana leaf on the hat.


Catching the Breeze at Sandy Hook


West Bank Town Is Impatient for Israelis to Leave
In this dusty market town, proposed by Israel as a starting point for expanding Palestinian self-rule beyond the Gaza Strip and Jericho, any sign of change these days raises hopes of an Israeli withdrawal.
When trucks carrying scores of prisoners began rolling out of a jail at Israeli military headquarters here last week, many residents took it as a sign that the Israelis were getting ready to leave.


Accounts
*
Southern California Mitsubishi Dealers to Zimmerman &amp; Partners, Fort Lauderdale, Fla., to handle the dealer association's account, previously at Robert Elen &amp; Associates, Los Angeles.
Zimmerman now handles Mitsubishi dealer association accounts in the nation's 10 largest markets.
The billings were estimated at $7.5 million. *
Coors Brewing Co., Golden, Colo., to Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, Chicago, to introduce Killian's Irish Brown Ale.
Foote, Cone already handles other Coors products including Killian's Irish Red Ale.
The billings were not disclosed.


Colombia Becoming an Oil Power in Spite of Itself
Once defined by creeks and cow paths, the arid landscape of the Andean foothills here is now marked by helicopters, drilling rigs and the cowboy boots of American oilmen.
Foreign oil companies are drilling three miles down, tapping into a sea of low-sulfur crude oil capable of making Colombia a major oil supplier to the United States.


On Hustings, Paris vs. Anglo-Saxons
No matter which candidate wins this spring's French presidential elections, French foreign policy is likely to remain what it has been for three decades: proudly European and prepared to keep Anglo-Saxon influences at arm's length.
All of the three leading contenders, two conservatives claiming direct political lineage from the famously difficult de Gaulle and a Socialist hoping to inherit the mantle of President Francois Mitterrand, have been saying more or less the same things.


Major, Taking CLinton's Call, Maintains Tough Stand on I.R.A.; Dublin Praises Clinton
Prime Minister Bruton said today that efforts toward peace in Northern Ireland would be accelerated by President Clinton's decision to allow Mr.
Adams, the Sinn Fein leader, to visit the United States, despite the consternation it caused among British officials.
Mr.
Bruton, speaking from Washington in an interview on Irish national radio, praised the President's decision to allow Mr.
Adams to raise money for Sinn Fein, and to invite Mr.
Adams to St.
Patrick's Day ceremonies at the White House.
He said those actions would speed progress on the most difficult issue in the peace effort, the decommissioning of the I.R.A. arsenal.


In East New York, a Haven on the Court
Night after night, they play hard ball on the basketball courts of George Gershwin Junior High School in East New York: a bumping, banging, reach-in kind of game played by street kids snared in the ferocity of eternal tryout.
But they do not fight.


Trans World Entertainment Corp.(TWMC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Saving Old Barns (Till the Cows Come Home)
TO New Yorkers, this is still Sunday-drive country.
City people in caravans find their way here every week, slowing down traffic on the narrow roads to ooh and aah at old stone houses or hawks hovering above the trees.
But the suburbs are pushing their way into this town of "u-pick" apple orchards, black-dirt onion fields and green, sloping hills.
Teen-agers hang out at the Burger King that opened on Main Street.
Farmland has been tarred for a park-and-ride lot.
A strip mall with a Dunkin' Donuts is going up in front of the old feed and grain by Warwick Creek, right behind some of the oldest houses in the village.


Thanks, Mom. Here's $7 Million.
When Matthew L. Snell, 21, of Totowa saw that the New Jersey Lottery's Pick-6 Lotto had topped $15 million, he wanted to buy a few tickets, but he didn't have the money.
His mother, Kathleen Snell, gave him a few dollars and told him to split the winnings with her if he won.
He did, and he will.
Mr.
Snell's winning numbers -- 12, 21, 28, 35, 36, and 39 -- are worth $7.5 million to him and $7.5 million to his mother.


Providence Bounced Out By Balanced Virginia Tech
Virginia Tech 91, Providence 78


In Subways Elsewhere, A Heightened State of Alert
After a poison-gas attack in the Tokyo subway, authorities in major cities around the world are taking precautions against similar attacks.
While playing down the possibility of such an attack in their own cities, they said they had tightened security and issued statements seeking to allay commuters' fears.


Despite Reductions in Exposure, Lead Remains Danger to Children
THANKS to bans on lead in gasoline, indoor house paint and cans that hold food, enormous progress has been made in recent decades in ridding the environment of lead and preventing symptomatic lead poisoning in children.
Even in the worst of the nation's slums, it is rare to see children who are obviously suffering from the toxic effects of lead.
Even the incidence of so-called silent lead poisoning -- the low levels that have hidden effects on the developing brain -- has dropped precipitously.
Since 1969, more refined studies of lead's effects on children's neurological development have prompted changes in the definition of lead poisoning, from 60 micrograms per deciliter of blood to 10 micrograms in 1991.
The percentage of preschool children with that lower level has plummeted from 88 percent to 9 percent.


Raiders Sign Colts' Cash
Tight end KERRY CASH yesterday became the first unrestricted free agent from another team to sign a contract with the Los Angeles Raiders this year.
No terms were announced.
Cash, a fifth-round draft choice by Indianapolis in 1991, played in 52 games for the Colts, 48 of them starts.
He has 103 career receptions for 1,131 yards and 7 touchdowns. (AP)


Hugh Kelsey, 69, Famed Bridge Writer And Expert Player
Hugh W. Kelsey, one of the world's leading bridge writers, died on Saturday in Edinburgh, where he lived.
He was 69 and had suffered from repeated cardiac problems, his son George said.
Mr.
Kelsey's first bridge book, "Killing Defense," published by Hart in 1967, was an immediate success.
It set a standard for clear lay-out of a problem, challenging the reader to solve it before viewing the explanation.


Vivian Gordon, 60, Professor and Writer
Vivian Verdell Gordon, who wrote about feminism, black families and affirmative action and who was a professor of black studies at the State University at Albany, died on Wednesday at St.
Peter's Hospital in Albany.
She was 60 and lived in Albany.
The cause was amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Lou Gehrig's disease, said a friend, Lois Smith Owens.


New Wrinkles at the On-Line Big 3
PERSONAL computer users who have hesitated to go onto the Internet will soon have the Internet coming to them.
Each of the major consumer on-line information services, including America Online, Prodigy and Compuserve, is racing to meld its system with the global Internet.
The Big Three services will soon be joined by the Microsoft Network and AT&amp;T's Interchange, two new and powerful rivals with Internet aspirations.
At the same time, some of the leading Internet access companies, including Netcom Inc. and Performance Systems International, are creating consumer versions of their business-oriented Internet services.


Theft of Dog Cash Is Charged
This borough has only about 100 full-time employees, and in the words of the saddened police chief, David DiMarco, "We're like family here." Now one of the family, Borough Treasurer Gertrude Cooper, is accused of stealing $6,958 from the dog license trust fund.


CHRONICLE
A new symbol may be visible at the Academy Awards ceremonies on Monday night.
CATHERINE WYLER, a film producer, greeted guests at her Washington town house on Saturday night with two laminated 32-cent flag postage stamps pinned to her chiffon dress.
Most of the guests -- writers, artists, lawyers, film makers and lobbyists -- got the message.
Sixty-four cents a year is the cost to individual Americans of the $167 million budget of the National Endowment for the Arts, now threatened by drastic cuts in Congress.


On My Mind; American Class Struggle
When the Republicans took over Congress in the November election, I didn't take it hard.
I voted for candidates from both parties, so I told my Democratic friends not to go into mourning.
After all, shifting control of Congress once every few decades was not exactly destroying democracy.
But I began to get nervous when I heard Representative Newton Gingrich boast that he was a revolutionary, the only one around.


Gas Threat Delays Plane
An Olympic Airways airliner was held at a remote section of Kennedy International Airport yesterday evening after the airline received a threat of sabotage with some form of poison gas, officials said.
But Joan Brown, a spokeswoman for the Federal Aviation Administration, told The Associated Press that the threat "appears to be a hoax."


Corrections
A report in the Night column of the Styles pages on Sunday about a "Top 100 Irish Americans" party given last Wednesday at Tavern on the Green by Irish America magazine referred incorrectly to Maureen O'Hara.
She is not Mia Farrow's mother; Ms.
Farrow's mother is Maureen O'Sullivan.


Princeton Economist Is Named John Bates Clark Medal Winner
The highest prize in economics short of the Nobel -- the John Bates Clark medal -- will be awarded to a Princeton University labor economist, David Card, who has helped make empirical research on hot topics fashionable again among younger economists.
The prize, granted by the American Economics Association every two years, is for the best economist under 40 and is seen by many as an indicator of Nobel material.


German Economy Took This Path in the 20's
To the Editor:
As an economic historian who has analyzed American policy since 1932, I commend "Hit the Poor. Reward the Rich" (editorial, March 12), a cogent indictment of the Republican plan for reducing poverty programs while cutting taxes for upper-income families and turning over block grants to the states.


Pataki Irritated by Budget 'Horror Stories'
Concerned that protests against his budget are beginning to sway legislators, Gov.
George E. Pataki today accused his opponents of "fearmongering" and spreading "horror stories," particularly about the potential for hospital and university closings.
In a 45-minute interview, the Governor expressed confidence that the vast majority of New Yorkers still support his plans for cutting spending and taxes.
But he raised the volume of his response to his critics, and acknowledged that he was concerned about their influence on members of the Legislature.


No Headline
"We all talk about how America is a risky society, but in the New York subways, at least you can see who is firing the guns. But in this case, nobody could see who did it. This is really terrifying." -- WAKO ONODERA, who rode the Tokyo subways shortly after the attack.  [ A13:1. ]


Nucor Cuts Some Steel Prices, Hurting Stocks
The stocks of steel-producing companies were hammered yesterday after the Nucor Corporation, the nation's largest mini-mill operator, announced that it was cutting the price of some of its lower-grade products by $20 a ton, or about 5 percent.
The action came at a time other steel companies are trying to raise prices for a second time this year.
Consequently, some analysts concluded that the industry was close to the price peak for some grades of steel in this economic cycle.
Eased demand and new mills' entering the market will lead to lower prices in the future, they say.


Visa Will Put A Microchip In New Card
Visa International said yesterday that it planned to introduce a new type of plastic card, embedded with a microchip, that is intended to replace bills and coins for small purchases.
Unlike debit cards, which transfer money electronically from customers' bank accounts, the new "electronic purse" cards will have an amount of money stored on them.
They are similar to the cards issued for some telephone and mass transit systems, but are designed to be used interchangeably in pay phones, vending machines, taxi cabs and for other small purchases.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $350 million of notes due in 1997 through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
The notes are callable in six months, carry an interest rate of 7.1 percent and are priced at par.


Times Co. to Issue Debt
The New York Times Company is planning to raise $250 million by issuing notes and debentures to pay off debt.
According to the offering notice, which was issued on Friday, the notes and debentures will be used to repay $162.3 million in debt related to newspaper acquisitions in 1985 and $50 million to pay off debt issued by Affiliated Publications Inc., the parent company of The Boston Globe.
The Affiliated debt was guaranteed by the Times Company in connection with its 1993 purchase of The Boston Globe.
The remainder of the $250 million will be used for general corporate purposes.
Of the total, $125 million is being offered in notes due 2005 and $125 million in debentures due 2025.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  JAPAN TIGHTENS SECURITY
Japan tightened security and appealed for public cooperation to prevent a repeat of the deadly nerve gas attack by terrorists on the Tokyo subway system.
A1


Ties Than Bind: His Directors, Her Charity
On paper, the board of the Morrison Knudsen Corporation in Boise, Idaho, seemed perfectly in tune with the new age of corporate accountability: independent, free of nepotism and filled with high-caliber outsiders like Peter S. Lynch and Peter V. Ueberroth, people familiar with what shareholders expect of a public company.
How, then, could such a distinguished board fail to recognize and address serious problems that developed at the giant construction and engineering company during the six-year tenure of William J. Agee, the chairman and chief executive?


Lewis No Stranger to Cocaine, Says Friend and Ex-Teammate
A close friend and former teammate of Reggie Lewis's says he used cocaine several times with the late Celtics captain, including five days before Lewis collapsed at a playoff game two years ago, The Wall Street Journal reported yesterday.
DERRICK LEWIS, who is not related to Reggie Lewis, said his friend was "an experimental user of cocaine like a lot of people, from executives to college students, who try it once in a while. Reggie was addicted to basketball, not drugs."


Knicks Are Still Searching For Fun
It was just an aside, really, a throwaway line at the end of an interview after a long practice.
But coming from Pat Riley -- and after all that has happened with the Knicks this season -- the remark was telling.
On his 50th birthday, the Knicks' coach was reminiscing about the glory days in Los Angeles, about having a running team that would also post-up instead of one that plays the halfcourt, set-style of offense that has become the Riley trademark here in New York.


Corrections
An obituary on Thursday about Edward V. Roberts, an advocate for the disabled, misspelled his mother's name.
She is Zona Roberts, not Vona.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Whoa horse! The Marlboro Man adds cranked-up electric guitar to 'Home on the Range.'
MARLBORO is looking to lasso smokers without lassos -- or, for that matter, without boots, chaps, branding irons, spurs or any of the other trappings that have epitomized the "Marlboro country" theme since 1964.
In an intriguing twist to what has become the world's most successful cigarette campaign, a series of assertive print advertisements by Leo Burnett U.S.A. in Chicago, the longtime Marlboro agency, will eschew the brand's traditional cowboy images in favor of trying to disseminate more contemporary cowboy imagery.
Instead of the familiar Western photography, the all-text ads paint portraits of modern-day cowboys who ride "a chopper with bright chrome" instead of a horse.


Keith Jennison, 83, Leader in Publishing Large-Type Books
Keith Warren Jennison, a writer, editor and publisher who became an early leader in the publishing of large-type commercial books, died on Thursday in his home in Castleton, Vt.
He was 83.
The cause was cancer, said his brother, Peter S. Jennison.


DANCE
Who Would Think That Paper Could Play Its Part in a Dance?
Gina Bonati and Marcela Ortiz de Zarate Dia Center for the Arts
Gina Bonati, who shared a program with Marcela Ortiz de Zarate on Friday night, has an exquisite yet authoritative presence.
It would have been more than enough simply to see how she chose to occupy empty stage space.
But in "Hunger and Visits," performed to a score by Ed Greer and Bill Delp, Ms.
Bonati moved through a sea of paper artfully positioned and decorated by Elizabeth Castagna, a painter.
Ms.
Castagna's more solid, darker presence was as compelling as Ms.
Bonati's, and the set she created was handsome and appropriate.
Ms.
Bonati's poetry, spoken softly on tape, had its moments.
There was too much, however, of everything.


A New Home (but for How Long?)


Sudbury Inc.(SUDS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


When a Midwest Newsman Makes It to the Big Time
NBC's "News Radio" is off to an enticing start.
And with good reason.
The sitcom's credentials are definitely A-list, at least in television's universe.
The producers are Brad Grey and Bernie Brillstein, whose credits include HBO's "Larry Sanders Show." The creator is Paul Simms, formerly a writer for Garry Shandling and David Letterman.
And the stars are dripping in contemporary hip.
Dave Foley of the comedy troupe Kids in the Hall plays Dave, the baby-faced man from Wisconsin who hits Manhattan to be news director of all-news radio station WNYX.
Phil Hartman, formerly of "Saturday Night Live," is bringing his delicious sultan-of-smarm manner to the character of Bill, the oily news announcer.
And Andy Dick, who has worked prominently with Ben Stiller and Mr.
Letterman (he plays Donnie, the fawning page), is Matthew, the hypersensitive apprentice who's sure he is going to be fired for things like his unfortunate on-air mispronunciation of Buttafuoco.


SOCCER REPORT
United States
The Americans went from gold medalists to total embarrassment in the Pan American Games.
They suffered humiliating defeats in the three games they played.


Argentina: The Unspoken Past
Adolfo Francisco Scilingo is haunted by a memory.
Eighteen years ago, as an Argentine naval officer, he pushed living people out of airplanes into the Atlantic Ocean.
He feels no remorse toward his victims, though he has no idea who they were or what they might have done to deserve their fate.
The Government and military commanders at the time claimed to be conducting a necessary, if dirty, war against domestic subversion, and for Mr.
Scilingo that was good enough.
But today, neither the Government nor the military authorities want to hear about the dirty war.
Instead of coping with his memories on his own, Mr.
Scilingo has decided to tell his uncomfortable story to the public.
It would be a welcome result if this spurs more open discussion of what happened during those terrible years.


20 Injured In Blaze On L.I.R.R.
A fire apparently caused by an overheated brake shoe sent smoke through a Long Island Rail Road train as it entered the tunnel leading to Pennsylvania Station yesterday afternoon, injuring 20 passengers.
More than 600 people on board the train, the 11:39 A.M. from Babylon, were evacuated via Track 20 in the station about 1 P.M.
Of the 20 people treated for smoke inhalation, 13 were taken to hospital emergency rooms for further evaluation, though none of the four hospitals that treated the passengers reported admitting them as patients.


A Post-Season Upset: Hoyas' Thompson Sheds an Image
Jerome Williams sat at the table and teased his coach, in public.
Irvin Church called him "a big teddy bear." The coach, John Thompson, simply laughed.
Georgetown is having fun in this year's N.C.A.A. tournament, and it starts with the coach, the oft-glowering Thompson.
On Sunday at the Tallahassee Leon County Civic Center, the Hoyas advanced to the Sweet 16 with a buzzer-beating basket by Don Reid.
On Thursday night they will face North Carolina in Birmingham, Ala., in the Southeast Regional semifinals.


Stocks Continue to Rise; Dow Climbs 10.03, to a Record 4,083.68
The stock market rose again to record levels yesterday after posting records on Friday.
But the rally was not very broad, and analysts warned that traders might pull back as the Dow Jones industrial average approached 4,100 points.
Tobacco, pharmaceutical and retailing stocks rose sharply, but those of steel, bank and automobile companies fell.


A New Quest By Buchanan For President
Patrick J. Buchanan, the conservative commentator who wounded President George Bush badly in this state's Republican primary in 1992, returned here today to declare that he is again running for his party's Presidential nomination.
This time, he said, he is not merely a protest candidate.
Known for his provocative language and combative style, Mr.
Buchanan repeated the hard-line conservative themes he invoked in his first campaign, and which even some of his fellow Republicans blamed in part for the party's difficulties then.
He again called for abolishing racial quotas, cracking down on immigration and striving for economic nationalism, including virtually eliminating foreign aid.
And he vowed to lead a "cultural war," saying that the nation's movies, television and music are "polluted with lewdness and violence."


What Vance Accomplished in Croatia
To the Editor:
"Balkan Brinkmanship" (editorial, March 10) contains two inaccurate references to the United Nations peacekeeping operation in Croatia negotiated by former Secretary of State Cyrus Vance.


All Too Human Comedy On a Midwest Campus
MOO  By Jane Smiley  414 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $24.
Some writers -- the hedgehogs of the literary world, as it were -- spend their entire careers amplifying a single vision and working improvisations upon a single voice.
Others are more foxlike in their approach, pushing their talents in as many directions as possible, continually reinventing their styles and continually looking for new subjects.
Among contemporary novelists, Philip Roth has been a willful fox, while John Cheever was more of a hedgehog.
As for John Updike and Norman Mailer, they have occasionally tried -- with varying success -- to shed their hedgehog natures and embrace a more foxlike demeanor.


Discount Auto Parts Inc.(DAP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Syms Corp.(SYM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lessons Far Beyond the Classroom
"Art," "teachers" and "children" are all loaded words, and Jennifer Montgomery's coolly ruminative film about adolescent sexuality explores their meaning.
"Art for Teachers of Children" is Ms.
Montgomery's autobiographical, sexually frank account of a high school student who has an affair with a married teacher.
The film examines the dynamics of seduction, exploitation and power as it brings this relationship to light.
Jennifer (Caitlin Grace McDonnell), who recalls these events in voice-over, was a schoolgirl.
John (Duncan Hannah) was a photographer who specialized in lofty attitudes and artistic nude shots of young women.
John was all objectivity the first time Jennifer posed for such a picture, and it was Jennifer who suggested that she take off some of her clothing.
"You were really good," he said afterward, full of professional detachment.
"You didn't move at all." In the darkroom, where they would soon have sex for the first time, Jennifer watched John develop his photographs and said: "Look! It's just like the green peppers."


KEY SENATE PANEL AGREES TO PURSUE BIG SPENDING CUTS
The chairman of the Senate Finance Committee said today that both Republicans and Democrats on the panel were prepared to make spending cuts "of an immense magnitude" -- up to $700 billion by 2002 -- to erase the Federal deficit if both parties will give their political blessing.
The chairman, Senator Bob Packwood of Oregon, said the committee's members reached a consensus in support of huge budget cuts during a weekend retreat on the Chesapeake Bay.
The retreat was attended by Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin, who said they had also agreed that tax reductions should be postponed either until the deficit has been tamed or until responsible experts can prove that specific tax cuts will not raise the Federal debt.


Sports of The Times; What They Aren't Saying About Jordan
EVER since Michael Jordan moved onto the runway for takeoff, just about everybody in the National Basketball Association except the ballboys have been asked for their thoughts on the return of His Higher and Higherness.
But none dared to finish the sentence with what they were really thinking.
Pat Riley said, "It obviously puts a big impact on, and changes the thinking of, who can and cannot win." But the Knicks' coach, aware of a possible opening-round playoff pairing with the Bulls, didn't dare say, "I know we can't win now."


Sentencing Days
In a three-hour monologue full of complaints large and small, Colin Ferguson urged a judge to dismiss his murder and attempted murder convictions in the Long Island Rail Road shootings.
The judge denied the motion to set aside the verdict, a common request at the end of a trial.
He said the next phase of Mr.
Ferguson's sentencing -- statements from shooting victims and family members -- would begin today.
Article, page B5.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League


Olympic Stadium Tower Falls, Killing Worker
A recently erected steel lighting tower at the city's $207 million Olympic stadium bent and collapsed today onto a concrete grandstand, killing one construction worker and injuring two others.
The accident temporarily halted work on the stadium, scheduled to house the opening and closing ceremonies and the major track and field events of the 1996 Summer Olympics.
Construction officials said that there was "a significant amount of cushion" in the building schedule and that the stadium was likely to be completed in time for the opening ceremonies on July 19, 1996.


Senator Tried To Dismiss Air Inspector
Despite the insistence of Senator Tom Daschle that he has never interfered with Federal aviation inspectors, new evidence shows that the Democratic Senate leader once demanded that the Federal Aviation Administration dismiss a safety inspector.
His demand came after the inspector angered a friend of Mr.
Daschle and other people.
The F.A.A. inspector, Grant Pearsoll, said Mr.
Daschle, a South Dakotan, sought to have him dismissed because he failed a friend of the Senator on a piloting skills test, an assertion the Senator denies.


Norand Corp.(NRND,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 4


On the Count of Three, PULL!


Market Place; To some analysts, prospects at Sprint have gotten loud and clear.
THE Sprint Corporation likes to promote itself as the telephone company with lines so clear you can hear a pin drop.
On Wall Street, though, the long-distance company has recently generated nothing but static.
Since last fall, shareholder qualms about Sprint's long-distance business and costly expansion into wireless communications have driven down the company's share price by 25.5 percent, to $29.25 yesterday from $39.25 on Sept. 26.


A Dentist Served As Tulsa's Sixth Man
The simplest of things can mean the difference between winning and losing in the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.
A missed rebound, a missed free throw, an illegal timeout.
How about a pulled tooth?
It's not farfetched to say that a major reason why the Tulsa Golden Hurricane has reached the Sweet 16 for the second straight year is because of an abscessed tooth pulled from the sophomore guard Shea Seals on March 10.


Observer; Hymns to Joy
If you are fed up with the Puritan tyranny over modern America, boy, have I got a book for you!
"Endangered Pleasures" is the title.
It is by Barbara Holland, and its underlying philosophical question is, "If the carefully lived life is so good for you, how come the people living it spend so much time thinking about death?"


Nobel Insurance Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Eviction of Abortion Clinic Is Postponed Until a Hearing
A Long Island abortion clinic that faces eviction because of its landlord's fears of anti-abortion violence can remain in place, at least until a trial next month, a judge ruled today.
Justice John DiNoto of State Supreme Court here ruled that the clinic -- Long Island Gynecological Services, at 1103 Stewart Avenue, Garden City -- could continue to operate while the court determined whether new rules that prohibit abortions in the building were "reasonably prescribed."


Marcus Corp.(MCS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 2


No Fair, These Noms de Guerre!
Trying to win elections by appealing to ethnic groups may be as American as pizza pie, but Mayor Anthony Russo doesn't like it, as least when the candidates are his political foes.
The candidates, for the Board of Education, want to run as Phyllis Spinelli and Ines Garcia Keim.
No, Mr.
Russo argues.
They should run as Phyllis Spinelli-Evans and Ines Maria Keim, as their names appear on the voter registration rolls.
The board secretary, Anthony Curko, says the State Education Department's Division of Controversies and Disputes sides with the Mayor.


Hundreds in Japan Hunt Gas Attackers After 8 Die
A 300-member task force interrogated witnesses today and searched for clues as the Government appealed for public cooperation to prevent a repeat of the nerve gas attack by terrorists on the Tokyo subway system.
Eight people died and more than 4,700 others were treated in hospitals for that attack, which came at the peak of the Monday morning rush hour in one of the busiest commuter systems in the world.


A Celebration, Boom, Of Ability, Boom Boom
The drumming of Burundi has exerted a small, persistent influence in pop music since Joni Mitchell used a recording of the drums on her album "The Hissing of Summer Lawns" in 1975.
Since then, the deep pulse of the drumming has occasionally shown up on other recordings.
On Saturday night, the Drummers of Burundi appeared at Town Hall, attracting a fairly large audience, not all of whom were ethnomusicologists.
The group recently released an album, "Live at Real World" (Real World), and they clearly know how to perform for an audience.
They would do well in Atlantic City.
The drummers, dressed in green and white costumes, trouped out on stage carrying their large drums on their heads, playing them all the while.
The drums, made of roughly carved wood, conveyed a feeling of solidity.
The drummers positioned themselves in the shape of a half-moon, with one standing in the middle of the crescent, and then they were off.


Premier Industrial Corp.(PRE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Failed Firm's Stocks Endure A 'Buy-In'
The prices of some stocks underwritten by the defunct penny stock brokerage firm of Hanover Sterling &amp; Company soared in price yesterday.
They also fell sharply.
It all depended on where you were looking.
The trustee for the Securities Industry Protection Corporation, which wound up holding the bag when Hanover Sterling went broke, executed a "buy-in," forcing short- sellers to pay very high prices for the securities.
It appeared that more than $20 million in such buy-ins were executed.


INSIDE
Buchanan Runs Again
After challenging George Bush in 1992, Patrick J. Buchanan is again seeking the Republican Presidential nomination.
Page A16.
The Brain's Inner Workings
More scientists say that precise timing underlies the brain's intricate dynamics.
Science Times, page C1.
Grasso's Last Statement
Thomas J. Grasso paid a tribute of sorts to Mario Cuomo, writing, "Life without parole is much worse than the death penalty." Page B6.


Texas Industries(TXI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


In Desktop Publishing, A Happy Medium
DESKTOP publishing was one of the innovations that put personal computers in the center of our business lives.
Before we were able to turn out professional-looking reports and newsletters at our desks, they had to be done, or at least finished, by professionals, whether employees in the building or outside contractors.
Now we do it all ourselves, even when we do not really want to.
High-end programs like Aldus Pagemaker, Quark Xpress and Corel Ventura are wonderfully versatile, rather difficult and quite expensive.
Lower-end programs like Microsoft Publisher are easy to use and affordable but may not offer enough features.
Serif Pageplus, now in version 3.0, is in the middle range in usability, often verges into the high end in features and, at less than $99, is definitely in the low end in price.


A Bribe or a Contribution?
The defense began calling witnesses yesterday in its attempt to show that Councilman Gary S. Harris and former Councilman Ralph T. Grant never accepted bribes for helping a company trying to get a city towing contract.
Several witnesses testified that the $3,000 in cash that a businessman turned informer gave to Mr.
Harris was not a bribe, as Federal prosecutors maintain, but a contribution for a school board candidate.


Sindney Kingsley, Playwrite, Is Dead at 88; Creator of 'Dead End' and 'Men in White'
Sidney Kingsley, who brought the gritty drama of mean city streets into the theater in plays including "Dead End" and "Detective Story" and who won a Pulitzer Prize in 1933 for his first Broadway play, "Men in White," died yesterday at his home in Oakland, N.J.
He was 88.
The cause was a stroke, said his secretary, Maureen Lake.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BALL CORP., Muncie, Ind., completed the sale of part of its communications division, Efratom, Irvine, Calif., to Datum Inc., Anaheim, Calif., for $28.7 million in cash and stock.
The sale gives Ball about a third of Datum's stock, or 1.28 million shares.
CARAUSTAR INDUSTRIES, Atlanta, reached a definitive agreement to acquire Gibraltar Packaging Group Inc., Charlotte, N.C., for $7 a share, or $35.3 million.
PAYCHEX INC., Rochester, which provides computerized accounting services, will acquire Pay-Fone Systems Inc., Van Nuys, Calif., a payroll and tax preparation service company, for $10.5 million in stock.
Paychex will offer $6.51 for each share of Pay-Fone, subject to certain adjustments.


M/I Schottenstein Homes Inc.(MHO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Nerve Gas That Felled Tokyo Subway Riders Said to Be One of Most Lethal Known
Sarin, the nerve gas that Japanese officials say killed eight people and injured thousands of others in a terrorist attack on the Tokyo subway system today, is one of the most potent poisons known.
Amounts smaller than a milligram can disrupt communications between nerves, leading to suffocation from paralysis of the diaphragm and other muscles used in breathing, according to toxicologists and textbooks.


Islanders' Sutter Closer to Playing
Although Ron Sutter has skated for almost two weeks and participated in today's rigorous off-day practice session at the Islanders' training facility, the 32-year-old center still was not sure whether he would be on the ice against the Rangers at the Nassau Coliseum on Thursday night.
"I'm not at 100 percent," said Sutter, who has not played since straining his right ankle against Tampa Bay on Feb. 7.
"And when I get close to it, that's when I'll ask Lorne to put me back in the lineup. I'm not setting any date. It's unfair to me and to the guys to say when I'll be back, when I don't know myself."


With a Woman Sought, the U.S. Offers Choices as Unicef Chief
Under pressure from Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali to nominate women for the job of executive director of Unicef, the United States submitted new candidates today for the position in order to meet a European challenge to American leadership of the organization.
Until today, the Clinton Administration had stood by its original nominee, Dr.
William H. Foege, a former director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta.
Clinton Administration officials have described him as uniquely qualified to head Unicef, the United Nations children's fund, an organization heavily involved in issues of child health.


It's Time to Bring New York Car Registration Out of Dark Ages
To the Editor:
With five years to the next millennium, New York car owners are still in the dark ages about registering their vehicles.
Car registration in New York is still measured by how much a vehicle weighs.
Big deal, you say, that your Ford is registered the same way your parents registered their Studebaker -- by the pound?


How the Brain Might Work: A New Theory of Consciousness
FOR scientists who study the human brain, even its simplest act of perception is an event of astonishing intricacy.
Consider this: It is a beautiful spring day and you are walking down a country lane, absorbed in thought.
Birds are chirping, roses are in bloom and the sun feels warm on your face.
Suddenly, you hear a dog bark and you switch your attention to seeing if the animal means to bite.


A Hanging in Singapore
Singapore's implacable justice system has once again imposed ruthless punishment on an individual who may have been innocent.
Flor Contemplacion, a Filipino woman working in Singapore as a maid, was hanged on murder charges last week despite new evidence that seems to cast reasonable doubt on her guilt.
Her case was reminiscent of Singapore's notorious flogging last year of the American teen-ager Michael Fay on disputed charges of vandalism.
The big difference is that Mrs.
Contemplacion, charged with a more serious crime, lost her life.


Surviving and Disturbing in Moscow
Homeless people sleep in railway stations, Russian Air Force jets blitz the rebel republic of Chechnya, rich gangsters and corrupt politicians poison the free market, inflation has turned old people into paupers, and the country's most popular television personality was recently gunned down by unknown assassins in his apartment stairwell in what many Russians suspect was a government-led conspiracy.
But Russia's best known and most successful movie director, Nikita S. Mikhalkov, chose to illustrate a different kind of terror in his latest film, "Burnt by the Sun." His is a lush, lyrical and ultimately horrifying portrait of how one happy, upper-class family living in the country in the summer of 1936 is destroyed by Stalinism.


Yesterday in Washington
BUDGET: Senator Bob Packwood, the Oregon Republican who heads the Senate Finance Committee, said that Republicans and Democrats on the panel were prepared to make spending cuts "of an immense magnitude" to erase the Federal deficit -- up to $700 billion by 2002 -- if both parties would put aside partisan bickering.
Mr.
Packwood said the committee's members reached a consensus supporting huge budget cuts during a weekend retreat on the Chesapeake Bay that also was attended by Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin.
Most at the meeting also opposed further cuts in taxes until the deficit was under control.
That position puts the panel, most of whose members are middle-of-the-road politically, at odds with more conservative Republicans in the Senate and especially the House, where Speaker Newt Gingrich has endorsed a five-year package of business and personal tax cuts totaling $189 billion.
LINE-ITEM VETO: In an effort to unify members of their party, Senate Republicans unveiled a proposal to reduce the Federal budget deficit by allowing the President to veto any of the thousands of separate items in Federal spending bills.
The proposal would also allow the President to veto parts of a tax bill that grant favorable treatment to a particular taxpayer or to a "limited group of taxpayers." Senate Democrats called the proposal a gimmick and a dodge, forcing the President to propose what Congress cannot bring itself to do: cut pork-barrel projects out of spending bills.
But President Clinton encouraged the Republican effort, saying Congress should give him "the strongest possible line-item veto," so he could kill wasteful programs.
The House passed a different version of the line-item veto in February.


Grasso's Farewell: 'Life Without Parole' Worse Than Death
In the end, the execution of Thomas J. Grasso, inmate No. 209207, this morning was almost anticlimactic.
The twice-convicted killer, whose death sentence became a factor in Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's defeat by George E. Pataki in New York, died quietly at 12:22 A.M., his eyes closing gently and his chest barely fluttering, just five minutes after the fatal mixture of chemicals entered the tubes flowing into his arms.


Federal Cuts Set Off Debate on Homeless With AIDS
It is 9 A.M. on a rain-slogged Tuesday and the seven men and eight women crowded into the waiting room have AIDS and no real homes.
There is a frightened-looking mother whose restless daughter smears a child-size lipstick across her lips.
There is a grandfather who worked as a chef and is now wedded to a kidney dialysis machine.
There is a former businessman in his 30's who lost his livelihood and now sleeps on his mother's floor.


Seaboard Corp.(SEB,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tovah Feldshuh Is the Star of an Odets Revival
There is a moment toward the end of the Jewish Repertory Theater's revival of Clifford Odets's "Awake and Sing!" of the sort that devoted theatergoers are always waiting for, one in which performance and text come together in a startling click of revelation.
In it, Bessie Berger, the Depression-era matriarch played by Tovah Feldshuh, angrily compares herself to a wind-up clock, and you find yourself nodding in appreciative recognition.
For there has indeed been something mechanical about Ms.
Feldshuh's Bessie, and suddenly it all makes sense.


Nets Having a Harder Time Finding a Healthy Lineup
The Nets have made a mosaic of their center position, cutting and pasting to fill the void left by the absence of Benoit Benjamin.
For the last six games, Dwayne Schintzius started, either Jayson Williams or Armon Gilliam relieved, and away they went, improvising their way to the eighth and final playoff slot in the Eastern Conference.


Washington Loses Jets' Job In Shake-Up of Secondary
In a continuing effort to reshape their roster, the Jets yesterday terminated the contract of Brian Washington, a starting strong safety for five seasons.
Washington had one year left on his contract, which would have paid him $1 million for the 1995 season.
Thus far, through free agency or waivers, safety Ronnie Lott, wide receiver Art Monk, defensive end Jeff Lageman and three members of the offensive line -- center Jim Sweeney, guard Dwayne White and tackle Jeff Criswell -- have left the team.


L.I.R.R. Fire Injures 20 Passengers


DANCE
2 Maryland Groups With a Serious Outlook  Kinetics Dance Theater and The Moving Company Merce Cunningham Studio
Two groups from Maryland -- Kinetics Dance Theater and the Moving Company -- shared a program on Friday night at the Merce Cunningham Studio.
The works were serious and the dancing was earnest, but the choreographic ideas were not always convincingly developed.


Knight's Tirade Under Review
BOB KNIGHT's famous temper got the best of him again, and the National Collegiate Athletic Association wants a closer look.
The Indiana coach, miffed that an N.C.A.A. news media liaison erroneously said he would not attend a post-game news conference, lashed out at the liaison after the Hoosiers' 65-60 first-round N.C.A.A. tournament loss Friday at Boise, Idaho.
BERNARD MUIR, assistant director of the N.C.A.A.'s basketball championship, said the committee will study videotapes of the incident and talk to the parties involved. (AP)


Treasuries Mark Time Again on Light Day
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed for a third consecutive session yesterday in thin trading.
Without any new economic data or comments from Federal Reserve officials, market participants shifted their attention to the dollar, which moved from stronger in early trading to weaker and back to stronger as the day progressed.


Anger at Government Rises as Israelis Bury Ambush Victims
A few thousand Jewish settlers and supporters held an emotional funeral procession through Hebron today, burying two men who were killed Sunday night in the ambush of an Israeli bus.
In angry eulogies, speakers denounced the Government for planning troop withdrawals and an expansion of Palestinian self-rule in the West Bank, calling the policy an invitation to further bloodshed.


Jury Takes Close Look at Simpson's Hand
O.
J.
Simpson, who had previously lifted his pants leg and showed off his injured knee, hobbled over to the jury box again today, this time to hold out the middle knuckle of the third finger of his left hand, the one that was swollen and oozing fluid hours after Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman were killed.
Police have speculated that Mr.
Simpson injured the knuckle while Mr.
Goldman fought him for his life on the night of June 12.
But making his most conspicuous and spirited appearance in weeks, Mr.
Simpson's defender for the day, Robert L. Shapiro, sought to show the jurors that his client's finger has always been swollen and remains so now.


Fortunes Rise and Fall at the Buzzer
Where once there was Lorenzo Charles dunking Dereck Whittenburg's air ball to win a championship for North Carolina State, now there is Georgetown's Don Reid with a far more challenging last-second move, under and up and off the glass, to convert Allen Iverson's miss and extend the Hoya season.
Where once there was Danny Ainge darting coast-to-coast to single-handedly beat both the buzzer and Notre Dame for Brigham Young, now there is Tyus Edney rescuing U.C.L.A. with an unforgettable dash that belongs in the same time capsule with the finest Bruin tournament moments.


Myra P. Sadker Is Dead at 52; Wrote on Sexual Bias in Schools
Myra Pollack Sadker, a Washington educator and writer who charted sexual bias in the nation's classrooms, died on Saturday at Georgetown Medical Center.
She was 52 and lived in Bethesda, Md.
The cause was complications from a bone marrow transplant for breast cancer, said a spokesman for American University, where she was a professor and former dean of the school of education.


Clinton to Meet Yeltsin in May On Russia Visit
After more than two months of shifting signals, the White House announced today that President Clinton would travel to Moscow in May to meet with President Boris N. Yeltsin and to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Allied victory in Europe.
The meeting, which was proposed by Mr.
Yeltsin in January, has become the subject of the kind of debate in Washington that used to be reserved for the summit-planning decisions of the cold war.


Bosnian Army On the Attack, Breaking Truce
Bosnian Government forces began an offensive today, shattering a cease-fire six weeks before it was scheduled to expire, United Nations officials reported.
The officials said the Bosnian attack was most intense near Tuzla, the second-largest Government-held town in Bosnia after Sarajevo.
Michael Williams, a spokesman for the United Nations peacekeeping force in Bosnia, was quoted by The Associated Press in Zagreb, Croatia, as saying 500 detonations had been reported in the Mount Majevica area northeast of Tuzla as more than 1,000 Bosnian Government troops tried to take a Serbian communication tower.


Trademarks and Patents
To the Editor:
Since no discussion of domestic or international trade escapes without reference to intellectual property rights, I was concerned to read your March 13 Patents column on trademark infringement.


Parkland Route of Pan-American Highway Sets Off Storm
A NEW effort by Colombia to complete the Pan-American Highway as part of an economic development program has reopened a longstanding conflict with local residents and environmentalists.
The 16,000-mile highway was conceived at the International Conference of American States in 1923 to provide an uninterrupted roadway from Argentina to Alaska.
It is complete except for a 70-mile stretch that crosses two national parks, one on either side of the Colombia-Panama border.


L.I.R.R. Murderer Argues for Reversal
In a three-hour monologue in which he complained about everything from the way evidence against him was handled to problems he had in making collect phone calls from jail, Colin Ferguson urged a judge today to dismiss his murder and attempted murder convictions in the Long Island Rail Road shootings.
Mr.
Ferguson, acting as his own lawyer as he did at the trial that concluded last month, told Judge Donald E. Belfi of Nassau County Court that he had not been given enough time to prepare for his trial.
He suggested that prosecutors raised unfair objections, the judge made prejudicial rulings and some of the shooting victims had lied about the nature of their injuries.


Eckerd Corp.(ECK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


BUSINESS DIGEST
Dow Hits Another Record; Dollar Up, Bonds Decline The Dow rose 10.03 points to a record 4,083.68 in mixed trading, but analysts warned that it may pull back as the industrials near 4,100.
Tobacco, pharmaceutical and retailing stocks rose sharply, but steel, bank and automobile stocks fell.
D8.


Argentine Atrocities Have U.S. Connection
To the Editor:
Re "Argentine Tells of Dumping 'Dirty War' Captives Into Sea" (front page, March 13): Dictator-Generals Roberto Eduardo Viola and Leopoldo Galtieri ruled consecutively during Argentina's "Dirty Little War." At least 30,000 civilians died at the hands of their Government forces.
General Galtieri also led the Falkland Islands invasion.


POP
Connecting Celtic Roots In Spain, France and the U.S.  The Chieftains Avery Fisher Hall
The Chieftains are building an Irish empire.
It's defined by the rhythms and modes of Celtic music, and its goal is to recharge connections.
On Friday night the Chieftains and guests played Celtic music from Galicia in Spain and from Brittany in France.
They reunited American country songs with Irish relatives; they played new soundtrack themes with old roots.
They clowned around a bit, too.


Yielding, U.S. Bows to Europe On Trade Chief
In an embarrassing setback, the Clinton Administration has abandoned a lengthy effort to install its candidate as head of the new World Trade Organization and will announce on Tuesday that it is endorsing Europe's choice, Renato Ruggiero of Italy.
The move ends a divisive deadlock involving countries on three continents and assures that Mr.
Ruggiero, a longtime diplomat who was once Italy's trade minister, will take up the post this spring.


Don't Blame All White Men; No Room at the Top?
To the Editor:
Given the Federal Glass Ceiling Commission findings (news articles, March 16) that while women comprise 40 percent of corporate middle management, white males still hold 95 percent of all senior management positions, the air must be getting very thin for qualified women as greater numbers of them pile up against that glass ceiling.


Trying Out the Fourth: Would Mahler Approve?
New Yorkers have long been able to take for granted a vibrant Mahler tradition at the Philharmonic, if not since Mahler's own frustrating tenure as music director, at least since Bruno Walter, Leonard Bernstein and other visionary advocates took up his cause at midcentury.
It will be interesting to see how the accumulated legacy stands up as memories of Bernstein fade.
Kurt Masur, the current music director, is not a Mahler specialist, and for that matter, with the retirement of Klaus Tennstedt, few commanding Mahler interpreters are to be found anywhere today.


Reliance Steel &amp; Aluminum Co.(RS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Harper Group Inc.(HARG,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Correction: Obituary Omitted Key Facts On Labor Organizer
An obituary of Eugenio Perente-Ramos yesterday gave an incomplete and partly inaccurate account of his activities and life.
The article, based largely on information provided by two associates, noted that he was an organizer of migrant and seasonal labor, but omitted the fact that he was also the leader of a group that has been characterized as a cult.
The article noted that Mr.
Perente-Ramos, who died at age 59 on Saturday at his home in Brooklyn, founded the Eastern Farm Workers Association on Long Island in the early 1970's, led migrant workers in a strike against potato processers in Suffolk County in 1972 and helped organize workers and boycotts for the United Farm Workers.


Bennett Considers Badgers' Job
DICK BENNETT will consider the University of Wisconsin coaching job after all.
The Wisconsin-Green Bay coach met with PAT RICHTER, the Wisconsin athletic director, yesterday in Green Bay and apparently had a change of heart after insisting that he was no longer interested in coaching the Badgers.


Wind-Whipped Courts, Well-Whipped Seedings
Whether you're riding high as No. 1 in the world, or whether you simply used to be No. 1, tennis still comes down to a confidence game: neither top-ranked Arantxa Sanchez Vicario nor former No. 1 Jim Courier had much of that commodity today in the third round at the wind-whipped Lipton Championships.
Sanchez Vicario, who hasn't yet won a tournament in 1995 but will retain the top spot regardless of the outcome of Steffi Graf's title defense here, was pounded into submission, 6-2, 7-5, by 33d-ranked Marianne Werdel Witmeyer.
The 27-year-old Californian had honed herself for this upset by ousting Gabriela Sabatini in the first round of the Australian Open in January.


Secretary Proposes Reshaping HUD to Save It
To stave off Republican efforts to eliminate his department, Housing Secretary Henry G. Cisneros today proposed consolidating scores of social service programs, replacing public housing with a voucher system for rent subsidies and closing up to 100,000 housing units considered beyond repair.
The plan, outlined in an 80-page booklet sent to Congress today, is an elaboration on the Secretary's earlier pledge to rethink the entire structure of the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
It provides the framework for legislation designed to trim costs and reduce administrative expenses at a Federal agency that has already lost $7.3 billion in cuts from its current $30 billion budget.


Property Bill Gives No Polluter Reward
To the Editor:
In "Want a Toxic Dump Next Door?" (Op-Ed, March 15), Dan Gordon perpetuates a popular myth about the property rights, or takings, legislation passed by the House of Representatives.


Johannesburg Journal; A New History to Heal the Wounds of Apartheid
Timothy Makhale was taught that South African history began only in 1652, when the first Europeans arrived.
His history book described blacks as savage and violent.
In the 1970's and early 80's, in Mr.
Makhale's school in the black township of Soweto, there was no official mention of Nelson Mandela, who is now President of the new South Africa, or of the fight against apartheid.
It was an education marked by rigidity, rote learning and at times even physical punishment.


CHRONICLE
PHILLIP (FLIP) AHRENS was, in his own words, "blown away" when he saw the silent films of Greta Garbo on Channel 13 some 15 years ago.
He began collecting Garbo memorabilia, particularly European and American magazine covers and posters of the 1920's and 30's.
Last week, a Garbo window, featuring about 120 items in his collection, was unveiled at the Gotham Book Mart, at 41 West 47th Street, and it's stopping passers-by in their tracks.


Firefighters Are Upset Over New Medical Duties
One after another, the firefighters rose to speak at the union meeting at a Queens banquet hall.
Weeks into the Fire Department's ambitious plan to use them to respond to medical emergencies, the rank and file were angry -- at the Mayor, at the department, at their own union leadership.
They had joined the department to fight fires, not to be doctors, they said at the emotional meeting last month.
The medical training was too difficult; the studying to master thick manuals on the cardio-pulmonary system was too taxing.
A pilot program, they said, appeared fraught with problems -- exposing them to disease, potentially endangering them at fire scenes, and often forcing them to race into their gear and through the streets only to find people waiting, with suitcases packed, for a free trip to the hospital.


Senate Republicans Reach Consensus on Selective Veto
After weeks of disagreement within their ranks, Senate Republicans today unveiled a new proposal to reduce the Federal budget deficit by allowing the President to veto any of the thousands of separate items in Federal spending bills.
The proposal would also allow the President to veto parts of a tax bill that grant favorable treatment to a particular taxpayer or to a "limited group of taxpayers."


Saints' Warren Calls It Quits
Defensive lineman FRANK WARREN, who spent 13 seasons with the New Orleans Saints and successfully battled back from a one-year drug suspension, said he no longer has the zest to play the game the way he once did.
"It's been great, but I know it's time to quit," the weeping Warren, 35, said yesterday.
"I just don't have the fire I had as a young man."


Cambodia Asks U.N. to Close Office Protecting Human Rights
The Cambodian Government is asking the United Nations to close its human rights center in Phnom Penh, one of the first field offices of its kind.
Cambodia said that constitutional guarantees to insure human rights are now in place, and that United Nations monitors would be welcome to visit the country at any time.
International human rights organizations call the decision premature in a country where a weakened coalition Government has been accused of retreating on democratic pledges and a fledgling free press is under growing pressure.


Survivors' Stories: How a Morning Routine Turned Into a Horror
Like most people on the crowded subway train this morning, Kazumi Ito never really knew what hit her.
As the inbound Hibiya line stopped at Kodenmacho station sometime after 8 a.m., an announcement told passengers to get off the train because there had been an explosion at the Tsukiji station, a few stops ahead.
Leaving the train was only the start of the horror.
"I was waiting on the platform, and I started to smell something," Ms.
Ito, 31, said.
"The smell was something I had never experienced."


Physicians Health Services (PHSV,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


After Years in Exile in South Florida, Nicaraguans Feel the Tug of 2 Homes
In her nine years in the United States, Maria Luisa Campos has learned a construction trade and become used to the nickname Marylu.
Most of her family is here, including her parents, four sisters and a brother, and her 11-year-old daughter speaks Spanish with the accent of an English speaker.
Ms.
Campos is among more than 100,000 Nicaraguans who came here fleeing war, economic hardship and a leftist government.
Like the Cuban exiles before them, the Nicaraguans have spent their years in exile in Miami building new lives, setting up businesses and staking out neighborhoods with streets and schools named after their most famous poet.


U.S. Intelligence Officials Baffled Over Possible Motives
The Tokyo subway attack created a great deal of head-scratching among United States intelligence officials today.
Was it a political statement?
Did it have any larger meaning?
These were questions being asked by officials from the Central Intelligence Agency, the State Department and other Government agencies.
Theories abounded.
Some pinned suspicions on an unknown group looking for recognition.
Others focused on a millennial religious sect.
Still more speculation centered on the far right or the far left of Japanese political life.


NBC's Ratings Soar Higher Than Jordan
Michael Jordan's return Sunday afternoon on NBC was, of course, a conspiracy -- done quite deftly to hide the deviousness of the plot.
The evidence:
1.
Dick Ebersol, the president of NBC Sports, was far from Indianapolis, inside a Big Bertha-proof television truck at a golf event in Orlando, Fla.
He later admitted that Jordan asked him: "Would my return really affect ratings?"


Nasdaq Proposes New System, But It's Not Without Criticism
The Nasdaq stock market proposed far-reaching changes yesterday that would make it much easier for individual investors to trade at better prices than they get now, but it stopped short of going as far as some critics had suggested.
Joseph Hardiman, the president of Nasdaq, said he thought the changes, embodied in a new trading system called Aqcess, would lower the profit margins of many brokers, but he voiced hope that it would stimulate enough additional trading to keep overall profits from falling.


METRO DIGEST
PATAKI CUTS IMPERIL AID FOR MENTALLY ILL
Fifteen months ago, Senate Republicans, including George E. Pataki, spearheaded the passage of landmark legislation that was intended to revolutionize care for the mentally ill and reduce the number of sick, disoriented people living on the streets.
Now, just as the first dollars have started to flow to local treatment programs, Governor Pataki has proposed repealing vital parts of the law and making large cuts in the very community programs that he and his fellow Republican senators had pressed Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to enact.
A1.
FIREFIGHTERS OPPOSE NEW MEDICAL ROLE
The push to get New York City's firefighters ready to respond to medical emergencies has not gone smoothly.
It has not only angered and exasperated the firefighters but left Emergency Medical Service workers uncertain of their futures.
There have been charges and counter-charges, widespread grumbling and some open revolt, as well as strongly worded directives from the Fire Department's top officials that "there is no turning back." A1.
NEW YORK CITY  20 HURT IN SMOKY FIRE ABOARD L.I.R.R.
TRAIN
A fire apparently caused by an overheated brake shoe sent smoke through a Long Island Rail Road train as it entered the tunnel leading to Pennsylvania Station, injuring 20 passengers.
B3.
After a poison-gas attack in Tokyo, authorities around the world are taking precautions against attacks.
The F.B.I. investigated a report of poison gas on a plane at Kennedy.
A12.
FORMER AIDE CALLS GIULIANI 'INSENSITIVE'
Two years ago, Carlos M. Rivera quit his job as Fire Commissioner under Mayor David N. Dinkins to campaign for Rudolph W. Giuliani, saying the Dinkins administration was anti-Hispanic.
Now Mr.
Rivera, who took a job with Mr.
Giuliani after he was elected Mayor, has accused the new administration of harming Hispanic residents through budget cuts.
B3.
REGION  ABORTION CLINIC OUSTER DELAYED
A Long Island abortion clinic that faces eviction because of its landlord's fears of anti-abortion violence can remain in place, at least until a trial next month, a judge ruled.
B5.
PENA, AT BLAST SITE, OFFERS SAFEGUARDS
Transportation Secretary Federico F. Pena visited the site of a gas explosion in Edison, N.J., that sent a fireball roaring skyward one year ago this week site and announced a plan to safeguard the country's four million miles of natural gas pipelines.
B5.
TWICE-CONVICTED KILLER IS EXECUTED
In the end, the execution of Thomas J. Grasso, inmate No. 209207, was almost anticlimactic.
The twice-convicted killer died quietly in an Oklahoma prison at 12:22 A.M.
After his death, prison officials distributed copies of a hand-scrawled "last statement" paying a kind of tribute to former Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's stubborn refusal -- despite Mr.
Grasso's expressed wish -- to let him die.
"Mario Cuomo is wright," the statement said.
"Life without parole is much worse than the death penalty." B6.
PATAKI IRKED BY BUDGET 'HORROR STORIES'
Concerned that protests against his budget are beginning to sway legislators, Governor Pataki accused his opponents of spreading "horror stories," particularly about the potential for hospital and university closings.
B6.
Our Towns by Evelyn Nieves B5  Chronicle B6


Corrections
An article in the Westchester Weekly on Sunday about development plans and the village election today in Briarcliff Manor misstated the role of John Rapoport, a mayoral candidate, while he was on the planning board.
He did not vote for a sports and cultural complex because the matter was never brought to a vote on the board.
It was the village board of trustees that voted for the complex.


Big Shock for Investors
Morrison Knudsen jolted the stock market when the troubled construction giant announced that its 1994 losses jwould be far larger than expected and that its acting chairman, William P. Clark, was resigning.
Business Day, page D1.


After 40 games, It's Still Up in the Air


Where Sputnik Once Soared Into History, Hard Times Take Hold
THIS is the desolate, enormous cosmodrome where Russian space flight was born, where it produced many of its most stunning achievements, and where it has clearly begun to die.
When the astronaut Norman E. Thagard became the first American to soar into orbit on a Russian rocket last week, it was a historic moment for both Russia and the United States.
But in many ways it has also served to publicize the deep flaws in the Russian space program, which just five years ago seemed an almost invincible symbol of Soviet power and pride.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
No Rodman?
No Worry  David Robinson scored 24 points and Chuck Person had 14 points and a season-high 11 rebounds as the San Antonio Spurs, playing without the injured Dennis Rodman, beat the Seattle SuperSonics by 104-96 last night in San Antonio.
Rodman, the National Basketball Association's leading rebounder, was placed on the injured list earlier in the day with a separated right shoulder following a motorcycle accident on Sunday.
He is expected to miss up to four weeks.
San Antonio, which never trailed, pulled away from a 58-58 tie early in the third quarter behind 8 points by Robinson.
Seattle, which had won five in a row, was led by Shawn Kemp's 23 points. (AP)


Double Blow for Morrison Knudsen: Loss Widens and Executive Quits
The Morrison Knudsen Corporation jolted the stock market yesterday with a double dose of bad news: Its 1994 losses are far larger than its recent pessimistic forecasts.
And its acting chairman, William P. Clark, is resigning from the giant construction company's board to return to his consulting business.
The company's stock, already battered by predictions that the annual loss for last year would hit $174 million, slumped yesterday morning when the company announced that its losses for the last year would actually total $310 million, by far the highest in the company's 83-year history.
News of Mr.
Clark's resignation drove the stock down further, to $6 before the market steadied in late afternoon.
The shares closed at $6.50, down $1.625.


Miss. State Flies High On Its Way To Renown
Their tradition is kindergarten age and their hometowns are smaller than Rupp Arena.
The Mississippi State Bulldogs are known only among their circle of friends -- the Southeastern Conference -- but at least their coming-out party is nationally televised.
There are several ways to gain attention, and defeating No. 1 U.C.L.A.
Thursday in the West Regional's semifinals would definitely get it done.
Mississippi State has all the necessary toys, too -- a 6-foot-11-inch center with fly swatters for arms; a guard with a shooting range of 30 feet, and a coach with imagination.


Cabletron Systems Inc.(CS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Chess
After nine games of the Professional Chess Association's final qualifying match to see who plays Gary Kasparov for the association's world title, Viswanathan Anand of India leads Gata Kamsky of Brooklyn by 5 to 4.
It takes 6 1/2 points to decide the 12-game series, which is being held in Las Palmas, Canary Islands.
The winner will face Kasparov in September in Cologne, Germany.


Essex Balancing Act Due Today
The Essex County Executive is expected to propose a 1995 budget today that would hold the line on property taxes while imposing some of the biggest spending cuts in county history.
The Executive, James W. Treffinger, will propose cutting $66.2 million from the $225 million portion of the budget that is under his control, a source close to county government said.


Patterns
Ellin Saltzman Keeps Busy
Ellin Saltzman has been very much in evidence at the European collections on her first foray into the ready-to-wear shows as corporate fashion director for the Limited Inc.
There had been speculation that Ms.
Saltzman, who has been fashion director of some of America's most expensive stores, would be unwelcome representing a lower-price retailer with a mammoth private-label business.


UNR Industries(UNRI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


United Industrial (UIC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


It's the Nightmare Team: U.S. Loses Another Game
Lost in the clamor of Michael Jordan's return, ignored amid the office-pool obsession with the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, is another sign that any advantage the United States has over the world in basketball is winding down like a 24-second clock.
The Unites States is suddenly 0-2 at the Pan American Games, losing by 101-98 to Brazil tonight, after squandering an early lead of 18 points on Sunday in a 68-67 loss to Argentina.
A gold medal is still within reach in this six-team, round-robin tournament.
But it is clear that even United States professionals are no longer guaranteed victory in international play unless they happen to be Roman-numeral descendants of the Dream Team.


Stabler Facing D.W.I. Charge
KENNY STABLER, the former National Football League quarterback, was free on $250 bond yesterday after being charged with drunken driving near Pensacola by the Florida Highway Patrol.
Stabler, 49, who gave a Mobile, Ala., address, was arrested early Sunday, hours after he was introduced to cheers as one of several celebrities attending the ROY JONES JR.-ANTOINE BYRD title fight Saturday night at Pensacola.
The highway patrol reported that Stabler recorded a blood-alcohol level of .12 percent and .125 percent on two breath tests.
The legal limit in Florida is .08 percent. (AP)


Governors' Frustration Fuels Effort on Welfare Financing
Gov.
Marc Racicot of Montana has shopped at the Safeway with families using food stamps.
One Saturday last month, he helped look for adequate subsidized housing for a once-homeless family in the state capital, Helena.
After two years as Governor, Mr.
Racicot thinks he has a good feel for the needs of Montanans on welfare.
So it frustrates him no end when the bureaucracy in Washington prevents him from meeting those needs the way he thinks best.
And he is by no means alone.


Pataki, in Switch, Seeks Cuts In Programs for Mentally Ill
Fifteen months ago, Senate Republicans, including George E. Pataki, spearheaded the passage of landmark legislation that was intended to revolutionize care for the mentally ill and reduce the number of sick, disoriented people living on the streets.
The new law required the state to begin closing its expensive and largely anachronistic psychiatric hospitals and to use the savings to expand a broad range of community mental health programs.
For three decades, the state had been emptying its psychiatric hospitals, then using the savings to help balance its budget, leaving thousands of former patients homeless and without treatment.


Sports Unions Flex Muscles With Financial Clout
Baseball owners are betting that striking players will fold soon after the season begins because their paychecks won't be rolling in.
Don't count on it.
The players have more financial backbone than traditional, larger unions like the United Auto Workers or the International Brotherhood of Teamsters.
The reason?
Licensing revenues from the sale of products like trading cards have turned sports unions into powerful, independent federations with small memberships and huge cash reserves.


Russia Warns Against Haste In Adding Members to NATO
Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev of Russia warned the NATO alliance today that a rush to take in new members from the former Warsaw Pact would create a new rift between Moscow and the West.
"Why rush things if we run the risk of creating new lines of division?" he asked at a conference, called by France, that approved a 52-nation stability pact for Europe this afternoon.
It concludes a series of agreements on borders, guaranteeing the integrity of existing borders and the rights of ethnic minorities.


CHRONICLE
Six years ago, GEORGE STONEY began "The Uprising of '34," a documentary on the textile strike of 1934, which involved hundreds of thousands of Southern textile mill employees.
His collaborators included a number of graduates and students of the Tisch School of the Arts at New York University.
So it follows that the first New York showing of the 90-minute documentary, tonight, will be -- where else but? -- at N.Y.U.


Rikers Officers Are Arrested In a Drug Sting
Four correction officers and two cooks on Rikers Island were arrested yesterday and charged with smuggling cocaine to inmates at city jails in exchange for bribes.
Yesterday's arrests bring to 26 the number of Rikers employees charged since 1990 with smuggling narcotics to prisoners, highlighting the flow of drugs to Rikers Island and the lure of money for jail employees willing to act as drug couriers.
As part of the same investigation, two other Rikers officers were arrested yesterday on drug-dealing charges unrelated to the jails.


Promotion for a Prep Coach
Florida International, which won its conference tournament and went to the N.C.A.A. tournament for the first time this year despite an 11-18 record, has chosen a popular local high school coach and alumnus to take over its basketball team.
MARCOS (SHAKEY) RODRIGUEZ, coach of Miami High's prestigious program for 14 years, was hired to coach the Golden Panthers yesterday.
Rodriguez, 42, won five state championships at Miami High and compiled a 428-62 record.
He replaces BOB WELTLICH, who announced his resignation in January.


Both Sides Test Negotiating Waters With Secret Session
The two sides in the slumbering baseball labor dispute stirred yesterday.
Sixteen days after negotiators for the striking players and owners last met, their leaders convened without fanfare in the Washington area to try to figure out how to proceed with the resumption of talks.


The Glory That Was Baikonur


Bad Bargain for Children
As Congressional Republicans shred the social safety net, gaping holes are opening in programs designed to protect the nation's most vulnerable children -- the victims of abuse and neglect.
As part of the assault on welfare, House Republicans want to overhaul federally funded foster care and adoption services.
They would consolidate many existing programs into block grants and chop funding by nearly $3 billion.
For a system that is already overburdened and underfunded, these proposals could spell disaster.
The child welfare system is a patchwork of programs, usually run by states and counties, that protect abused and neglected children and offer services to troubled families where children are at risk.
It also helps families who take responsibility for neglected and abandoned children through foster care or adoption.
The system has grown as families and neighborhoods, devastated by the economy, drugs and alcohol, have disintegrated.
In 1993, almost three million children were reportedly abused or neglected, an increase of 130 percent from a decade earlier.
Nearly 450,000 children were in foster care.


A Voyeur in Any Weather
He Jianjun's "Postman" is the unsettling, extremely quiet story of a shy young man whose new job processing mail affords him a window into the lives of his neighbors.
Given a route delivering mail in Beijing's "District of Happiness" after his predecessor is fired for reading letters, Xiao Dou (Feng Yuanzheng) is soon lured into voyeurism activities of his own.
The temptation is understandable.
"Postman" presents an outwardly staid, dull culture with a wealth of secrets beneath its surface, and Xiao Dou probes those secrets during this story.
Mr.
He, who was assistant director on "Raise the Red Lantern" and "The Blue Kite," incorporates striking social criticism into this simple story.
The letters that Xiao Dou begins examining reveal a range of secrets involving adultery, prostitution, homosexuality and drug use.
Even depicting such things in today's China constitutes a form of daring, and the film maker has since been forbidden to work in his native land.


Canadian Rail Strike Denting the Economy
A national rail strike that began in Canada Saturday, idling nearly 35,000 workers, has already started to affect auto makers and other industries dependent on rail shipments and forced commuters to find alternative ways to get to work.
Because of a shortage of parts, 6,200 Ford auto workers in Ontario were laid off or working half time.
Delays also hit shipments of forestry products and such diverse minerals as sulfur, potash and coal.


Franklin Quest Co.(FNQ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Marjorie Kahn Unterberg, Nursing Philanthropist, 84
Marjorie Kahn Unterberg, a philanthropist and volunteer in the health care field, died yesterday at Lennox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 84 and lived in Manhattan and Tinton Falls, N.J.
The cause was complications after surgery, said her daughter, Mary A. DeBare of Manhattan.


Mr. Dole's Transparent Tactics
Senator Bob Dole's calculations are pretty easy to figure out.
To secure the Republican Presidential nomination, he has to overcome his longstanding reputation as a moderate.
So he is running hard to the right, offering some slice of himself to every conservative faction.
He is against abortion.
He is against affirmative action.
Now he wants to revoke the ban on assault weapons passed as part of last year's crime bill.
Four-fifths of the American people and the police officers who protect them favor that ban.
But Mr.
Dole has a smaller audience in mind.
He is tailoring his position to please the 3.5 million members of the National Rifle Association.
Mr.
Dole is afraid that if he does not obey the N.R.A., its political contributions and support will go to someone else in the 1996 Presidential primaries.


A Bow to Purcell, An Opera Composer Ahead of Opera
Anniversary celebrations of dead composers send thoughtful listeners reaching for their earplugs.
Hommages in name, they are more often marketing opportunities.
Poor Mozart will undoubtedly survive a bicentenary so crushing in its completeness that one began almost to resent the great man's presence.
Time heals, and all those mediocre concerts of Mozartean marginalia have faded.
A few spiffy T-shirts remind us that we were there.
One is less wary of Henry Purcell, dead precisely 300 years.
England's one true musical light (at least until Benjamin Britten came along) is being more chastely remembered in 1995.
One example was the Metropolitan Museum's two-day program of concerts and lectures centered on Nicholas McGegan's period-instrument orchestra, the Arcadian Academy.
Theater, literature and architecture were used as metaphors for music.


Edison Bros. Stores Inc.(EBS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Protesting Education Cuts


Zubov Returns to Right Point To Right Rangers' Power Play
In a move he hopes will breathe some life into a slumping power play, Coach Colin Campbell said today that he plans on inserting Sergei Zubov back into the lineup Wednesday night when the Rangers take on the Devils at Madison Square Garden.
Zubov, who has missed three weeks after wrist surgery, will return to a team mired in a three-game losing streak, which matches its longest skid of the season.
A loss to the Devils would drop the defending Stanley Cup champions to the .500 mark.


Fear Stalks Tokyo: Safe No More
Surrounded by an ominous fleet of red fire engines, green army trucks and a gas container vehicle, eight men from a chemical warfare unit put on gas masks, slipped into orange spaceman-style suits and dashed down into what once was one of the safest subway stations in the world.
They carried a giant hose to spray a chemical, with an odor like chlorine, that would neutralize the poison gas that only hours earlier had sickened several thousand commuters on their way to work.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.00
5.95
3.36
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.76
5.72
3.61
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.91
5.86
3.90
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.11
7.10
6.55
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.39
7.36
6.95
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.28
8.24
7.79
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.35
6.34
6.01
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 8


Review/Fashion; Lagerfeld Tones Down The Look at Chanel
Claudia Schiffer stalked down the runway at Chanel, a coat clutched closely around her body.
The audience has seen this striptease before, when a terry cloth robe is whipped off to reveal a skimpy bikini with C's on the front of the G-string.
But today when Ms.
Schiffer threw away her sensible trench, with all the coy mugging of her bikini days, beneath was a thick wool suit, a mischievous punch line to a deliberately dowdy collection.


Pena, at Blast Site, Proposes Safeguards
Charred trees and a wide, smooth crater are the only evidence of a gas explosion that sent a fireball roaring skyward one year ago this week.
But skittish residents say they live in fear of another explosion, and cannot forget the fire that sent them running for their lives.
To reassure them, Transportation Secretary Federico F. Pena visited the explosion site today and announced a plan to safeguard the country's four million miles of natural gas pipelines.
The plan would require pipeline operators to establish programs to prevent damage to their lines, including providing detailed information about lines to construction workers who will be working near them.


U.S. Leather Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


The Women of America   Are On Board, For Now
The decision to add a male crew member to the previously all-woman America
team's yacht, Mighty Mary, has the potential to create far more consequences down the road than winning or losing the right to defend the America's Cup.
While most of the female crew on Mighty Mary has toed the company line so far in accepting the addition of a man on the boat, only time will tell whether such an important decision so late in an America's Cup campaign turns out to be fortuitous.
The switch was made in haste, and apparently without the knowledge of more than a handful of the crew.


Trilon Financial reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Circus Circus Agrees to Buy Gold Strike, Casino Owner
Circus Circus Enterprises Inc. announced yesterday that it had agreed to acquire Gold Strike Resorts, a closely held budget casino owner and operator, in a deal valued at more than $600 million.
Circus, a large casino company that caters to budget-conscious gamblers, also said it planned to expand its management team with several Gold Strike partners who are highly regarded in the gaming industry and who held key positions at Circus during the 1980's and early 1990's.


By Design; Little Quirky Tendencies
After scores of fashion shows, certain impressions remain of trends that may catch on and some that perhaps shouldn't.
There is all that shine.
Patent leather for shoes, bags, gloves and even clothing, from real patent on the skin side of shearling coats at Mario Valentino to fake at Bazar de Christian Lacroix.
Black satin for coats, pants suits and evening dresses.
Even models' hair is dyed lacquer black or dynel red like the wigs that went disco-ing in the 60's.


Forest Study Is First to Show Ozone Retards Growth of Trees
SCIENTISTS have determined for the first time that ground-level ozone retards the growth of at least one type of mature forest tree, a widespread timber species called the loblolly pine that contributes billions of dollars to the economy of the South.
Ozone in the stratosphere shields living organisms from harmful ultraviolet rays.
But at ground level, where it is produced mainly by the combustion of gasoline in motor vehicles, ozone has long been known as a human health hazard.
It has also been considered a significant threat to forests.
Previous studies have found that when closed chambers containing tree seedlings are flooded with ozone, growth is hobbled.
But there had been no definitive evidence that ozone in the real environment stunted mature trees.


Widower Pleads for Jury Forum
Robert Shollar, whose wife, Gail, was abducted from a South Plainfield shopping mall parking lot in 1992, then raped and killed by Scott Johnson of Plainfield, said yesterday that friends and relatives of a murder victim should be able to tell jurors of the impact on their lives.
After hearing Mr.
Shollar, who has said he wishes that Mr.
Johnson had been sentenced to death, the Senate Law and Public Safety Committee voted, 4 to 1, in favor of a bill to allow such testimony in the penalty phase of a murder trial.
The bill now goes to the full State Senate.
"I'm sorry it took Gail's death for us to realize we need to change the rules," Mr.
Shollar said.
In the sentencing hearing, his family was barred from telling the jury about the impact of the killing on them.
Mr.
Johnson's 6-year-old daughter was allowed to plead with jurors to spare her father, and they did, choosing life in prison.


Q&amp;A
Candy vs. Dogs
Q.  What is it in chocolate that hurts dogs?


Kelley Will Not Run at Boston
JOHNNY KELLEY, who has run in the Boston Marathon a record 61 times, won't take part this year, the Boston Athletic Association said yeterday.
The 87-year-old Kelley, who has finished the marathon a record 58 times, officially retired as a long-distance runner in 1992.
He ran the last 7 miles of the 26.2-mile course in 1993 and 1994.
However, Kelley's wife died two weeks ago, and he just wants to enjoy watching this year's race. (AP)


Sun Microsystems Releasing Its New Operating System
Sun Microsystems Inc. said today that its Sunsoft Inc. subsidiary would begin to distribute new operating system software to researchers and educational institutions this week.
The software, called Spring, is an experimental system featuring a number of technical innovations that may ultimately be incorporated in Sun's commercial operating system, Solaris.


Corrections
A note in the Money and Business section on Sunday inviting the reader to submit an article describing a personal experience involving finances or to express a point of view about a business or financial topic misstated the E-mail addresses.
They are:
*viewpts@nytimes.com for Viewpoints articles.


Rivera Accuses Giuliani of Being 'Insensitive' to Hispanic People
Two years ago, Carlos M. Rivera quit his job as Fire Commissioner under Mayor David N. Dinkins to campaign for Rudolph W. Giuliani, saying the Dinkins administration was anti-Hispanic.
But yesterday, Mr.
Rivera, who took a job with Mr.
Giuliani after he was elected Mayor, accused the new administration of harming the city's Hispanic residents through budget cuts.
He also said that the Mayor had reduced the number of top Hispanic officials in city government, saying Mr.
Giuliani was "insensitive to Hispanic people."


Don't Blame All White Men
To the Editor:
Authorities ought not make a racists' mistake when reviewing affirmative action.
Early reports of a Federal panel, the Glass Ceiling Commission, are not promising (news articles, March 16).


End of a Long March


Scandals Pit Some Younger Judges Against France's Establishment Elite
For decades in France, it has been an open secret that the nation's business and political elite had intimate and mutually beneficial ties -- far more blatant ones than in other countries.
French industrial giants channeled campaign contributions through offshore bank accounts, and in return, their exports were promoted by Government officials.
Within France they were given captive markets, and any bribes were considered a necessary cost of doing business.
And politicians and chief executives alike were kept mostly beyond the reach of the criminal courts.


Man Accused of Trying to Kill Clinton Begins Insanity Defense
The Colorado man accused of trying to kill President Clinton by shooting at the White House with an automatic weapon in October is a paranoid schizophrenic who was venting anger at government, not trying to murder anyone, his lawyer told a Federal court today.
The man, Francisco Martin Duran, a 26-year-old upholsterer, is charged with attempted murder of the President, use of a deadly weapon to assault four Secret Service agents, four other weapons violations and destruction of Federal property.
While no one was hurt in the incident, he could receive life in prison on the charge of attempted murder.
Each assault charge carries a maximum sentence of 10 years.


A Silver Lining To Base Loss?; Bayonne Mayor Sees Boon
Soon after the Pentagon announced that it wanted to shut its marine terminal here, Mayor Leonard P. Kiczek was walking through the 437-acre site on the kind of tour that is customary for politicians who are trying to fend off military base closings.
Such visits typically go like this: Attack the bigwigs in Washington.
Bemoan the loss of jobs.
Plead for the base's survival.
But Mr.
Kiczek said none of that.
He did not appear upset that the Army might pull out of the installation, which, with 2,445 workers, is the largest employer in Bayonne.
As he roamed past docks that have sent tanks, trucks and other cargo to dozens of battle zones since World War II, he sounded more like a real estate agent than a bitter municipal official.


W.F. Rickenbacker, Magazine Editor, 67
William F. Rickenbacker, an investment counselor and a senior editor of National Review magazine, died on Thursday at his home in Francestown, N.H.
He was 67.
The cause of death was cancer, his family said.


Then, the Fog Lifted


Corrections
An obituary of Eugenio Perente-Ramos yesterday gave an incomplete and partly inaccurate account of his activities and life.
The article noted that he was an organizer of migrant and seasonal labor, but information from his associates omitted the fact that he was also the leader of a group that has been characterized as a cult.
A corrected version, with fuller accounts by cult experts, parents of followers and a former wife of Mr.
Perente-Ramos, appears today on page D20.


Country Boy in National Spotlight
Few collegiate basketball players will experience the kind of career that Bryant Reeves has had.
He is a modern-day folk hero whose legend is measured not by points, but by a nickname.
Reeves, Oklahoma State's senior center, has assured that the nickname Big Country will have a life of its own.
Forget about the honors -- three-time all-Big Eight, Big Eight Player of the Year and third-team all-American.
Most people will talk about the nickname.


The I.R.A.'s Political Strongman
As a result of his delicate and much-publicized visit last week to New York, Washington and the White House, Gerry Adams appears to have strenghtened himself considerably as the political leader of the Irish Republican Army, the man most Irish people think has great influence in sustaining the I.R.A. cease-fire now in its seventh month.
And Mr.
Adams, back in Dublin, also seems to have achieved significant success on a number of tactical goals of Sinn Fein, the I.R.A.'s political arm.


Sarin Just One of Many Deadly Gases Terrorists Could Use
The poison gas attack this week against Tokyo subway riders has evoked a thrill of horror and revived memories of the ghastly casualties inflicted by chemical warfare agents during World War I. But although eight people were killed and thousands made ill in the Tokyo incident, future terrorist gas attacks could be far worse.
Sarin, the nerve gas used in the attack, is among the deadliest of all war gases, but it is relatively non-persistent; it is a liquid that evaporates rapidly and is dispersed fairly quickly in an environment with good ventilation.
By contrast, its nerve-gas cousins, Tabun and Soman, can contaminate even ventilated areas for long periods.


Republican Dissidents Want Narrower Family Tax Credit
Breaking ranks over a central plank in the Republican agenda, nearly half of the 230 Republicans in the House urged their leaders today to scale back a proposed $500-a-child tax cut to families, criticized by Democrats as a giveaway to the rich.
It was not clear whether party leaders would grant the request, made by 102 Republicans in a letter to the House Rules Committee, to limit the tax cut to families making $95,000 a year or less.
That is well below the $200,000 ceiling specified in the party's Contract With America and written into legislation now moving toward a House vote.


GBC Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Nothing New Is on the Horizon After Two Days of Talks
Two days of talks between Bud Selig and Donald Fehr produced nothing promising in their effort to resolve the baseball strike that yesterday became 222 days old.
At the conclusion of the second day of their meetings in the Washington area, both men issued terse statements that said little about their visit and offered no hope for the near future.


WALKING THE DOG WITH: Pablo Fenjves; Echoes of a Cry in the Night
The trial of O. J. Simpson has conferred instant celebrity on many people.
But it has produced only one truly memorable phrase, one that simultaneously captures the sadness beneath the circus, undergirds the prosecution's case and offers a morsel of poetry amid the cop talk, Californiaspeak and legalese.
The phrase is "plaintive wail," and the man who first uttered it -- and heard the sound -- is Pablo Fenjves.
On three occasions now, Mr.
Fenjves, a bookish 41-year-old screen writer who has found success in Hollywood after several lean years back East, has played a crucial role in the Simpson case.
The first time came at 10:15 on the night of June 12, 1994, as he and his wife, Jai Fenjves, who live in the Brentwood section of Los Angeles, watched the news in their bedroom.
Fifteen minutes into the program, he said, they heard a dog howling outside their window.
The howl came from the alleyway to the east, the one that runs between their apartment on Gretna Green Way and some other apartment buildings on South Bundy Drive.
It was a haunting sound, the harrowing "Arrrr-oo-oo-oo-oo" of a wolf baying at the moon.
And it would not stop.


Wilander Pushes Back Clock With a Victory
He's too old.
He plays a paceless, powerless game that went out of vogue 10 years ago.
He doesn't hunger for the No. 1 ranking, which he owned in 1988, the year he won this event.
And three years later, the pressure of living up to that ranking helped drive him away from tennis.
But comebacks are in vogue these days, and today 30-year-old Mats Wilander took his anachronism act all the way into the quarterfinals of the Lipton Championships.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Composer Takes Note Of a Performer's Strengths  Joshua Bell, violinist 92d Street Y
On records, Joshua Bell plays with an appealing combination of rich tone, virtuosity and judiciousness.
Some of those qualities were evident and others were elusive on Saturday evening, when he played violin sonatas by Beethoven, Prokofiev and Grieg and a work composed for him recently by Aaron Kernis.


CHRONICLE
JOHNETTA F. MARSHALL, the new president of the Older Women's League in Washington, admits to being a great-grandmother but brushes aside questions about her age by saying, "Ladies don't tell." She prefers to refer to the league as an organization for middle-aged and older women, she said, "because if you approach some women and tell them what the initials stand for, they say, 'My mother would be interested.' "
She said yesterday that one of her top priorities would be programs that address family needs.
Proper nutrition, she mentioned as an example, is a concern of older people but is equally important for schoolchildren.


Jaspers Get an Official Day
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani paid tribute to the Manhattan College basketball team yesterday at City Hall, thanking the Jaspers (26-5) for a superb season and declaring March 21 as "Manhattan College Jasper Day." After tossing autographed basketballs to Coach Fran Fraschilla and his assistants, the Mayor, a 1965 Manhattan graduate, gave the players bookmarks, baseball caps and T-shirts emblazoned with his official seal.
"In honor of all your achievements this year and all of the great honor you brought to the city of New York, we are proclaiming March 21, 1995, as Manhattan College Jasper Day," said Giuliani.
"During the St. Patrick's Day parade, it was wonderful to see the reaction of the millions of people who were lined up on Fifth Avenue, and saw the Manhattan banner out front. Just seeing the banner, the crowd wildly applauded all of your efforts because they were so proud of you as New Yorkers."


CHRONICLE
FRANK SINATRA JR. came to town yesterday to talk about a tribute to his father planned for July 24-26 at Carnegie Hall.
His part of the program, he said, will come on the final evening in a musical recollection of his father.
"Most of the music he made, from the early 50's to the early 70's, I was there watching," Mr.
Sinatra said.


Cooking With Pressure
To The Living Section:
Having grown up with the steady, metronomic chugging of a pressure cooker emanating from the kitchen almost daily and having received my own pressure cooker (which I still have) as the only gift my mother gave me when I left for college, I relished your article  [ "Pressure Cooking Without the Terror," by Suzanne Hamlin, March 15 ] .


Officer Is Indicted in Man's Death During Confrontation in Bronx
A grand jury in the Bronx has indicted a police officer in the death of a Florida man during an argument that began when a football thrown by the victim and his friends hit a police car.
Officer Francis X. Livoti, 35, was charged with criminally negligent homicide in the death of Anthony Baez, 29, outside his parents' home in University Heights on Dec. 22.
The charge is in the least serious category of felonies -- the same category as crimes like car theft and perjury in the second degree -- and is punishable by a maximum sentence of four years in prison.
Officer Livoti pleaded not guilty yesterday in State Supreme Court in the Bronx.


Business Travel; Ticketmaster looks beyond entertainment and toward booking flights, someday.
IF Fred Rosen of the Ticketmaster Corporation eventually turns his talents to selling airline tickets the way Ticketmaster sells $1.5 billion worth of tickets yearly for concerts, sports and theater, it could usher in the travel industry version of the Clash of the Titans.
And make no mistake, Mr.
Rosen, the Ticketmaster chief executive, "hopes to go ahead with the idea," according to Alan Citron, a spokesman for the privately owned company.
"He had the idea in his mind for years, but when the recent dispute arose between the airlines and travel agents, over the commission cap, it opened the door to taking a more active look."


2 Gasoline Marketers Pick New Agencies
Two gasoline marketers are ending long agency relationships.
The Amoco Oil Company said yesterday that it had selected Lintas Campbell-Ewald in Warren, Mich., to handle its account, with billings estimated at $30 million.
The account had been at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in Chicago for the last 40 years until that agency declined to participate when a review began in October.


People
*
Ted Block, executive vice president and regional director of Foote, Cone &amp; Belding/Asia and president of FCB/Japan, Tokyo, will return to the agency's San Francisco office in the new position of senior vice president and director for media and new technologies.


No More on Cravings!
To The Living Section:
Suzanne Hamlin's article "It's Hard to Ignore Cravings: Researchers Can't Resist"  [ Feb. 22 ]  helped me understand a question that has been plaguing me in my marriage for months.
How, in February, can my husband still not have opened the box of Godiva chocolates I gave him for our anniversary in September?
Maddeningly to me, the golden box remains sitting on our night stand with its plastic wrap undisturbed.


G.O.P. Switch on Term Limits, But Bill Is Still Lacking Votes
A Republican leader in the House announced today that he was switching his position and would support a constitutional amendment for term limits, but the measure still seemed several votes shy of passage.
The lawmaker, Representative John A. Boehner of Ohio, who ranks fourth among House Republicans, said at a news conference that he was reversing his longtime opposition to term limits because Americans clearly wanted them and that Washington would be arrogant not to respond to so overwhelming a desire.


COMPANY BRIEFS
APPLE SOUTH INC., St.
Madison, Ga., a restaurant owner, has acquired eight Applebee restaurants and the rights to develop other outlets for $17 million in cash.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.00
6.00
3.44
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.73
5.76
3.50
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.88
5.91
3.79
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.17
7.11
6.42
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.44
7.39
6.84
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.33
8.28
7.72
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.34
6.35
5.99
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 8


AT&amp;T Cutbacks in Japan Rattle Old Sensibilities
In a drab industrial district of Tokyo, where the AT&amp;T Corporation runs some Japanese operations, workers are handing out pamphlets attacking the American company's "bullying" of employees.
A half-day walkout has already been carried out, and the union is threatening a full-fledged strike if AT&amp;T does not stop conduct it regards as outrageous.
The problem is that AT&amp;T is being assailed for doing what American companies think they should be doing: cutting costs to improve the bottom line.


Fans Look for Mason as Knicks Look for Answers
It was another low point for the Knicks last night.
Their offense deserted them, and so did some of their fans.
They scored a season-low 69 points against the Charlotte Hornets, a possible playoff opponent that appears to have New York's number.
And the fallout from Anthony Mason's five-game suspension lingered, as both the Knicks and many fans obviously missed him.
During the third quarter, some fans at Madison Square Garden briefly chanted, "Mason, Mason," although he was nowhere in the building.


Compuserve Places Account in Review
The Compuserve on-line computer service has placed its account in review after 13 years at Sive/Young &amp; Rubicam in Cincinnati.
The billings were estimated at $8 million to $10 million.


U.S. Doesn't Gain by Blocking Iran Oil Deal
To the Editor:
Re "Conoco's Deal in Iran Faces Board Hurdle" (Business Day, March 14): The Clinton Administration's policy to isolate Iran by blocking the deal allowing Conoco to operate two large oilfields in Iran is an exercise in futility.


Corrections
An article yesterday about proposed cuts in housing programs for people with AIDS misstated the surname of a spokesman for Housing Works, a New York City program.
He is Rodney Sprauve, not Sprague.


Rangers Hope to Avoid Dropping to .500 Level
Some of the images at Playland Ice Casino this afternoon were surreal, yet somehow appropriate for this freaky, streaky Ranger season.
Around the glass during practice were actresses dressing up as nuns.
On the ice afterward was a big, yellow, old-fashioned, Checker taxi cab.
In front of it lay defenseman Joby Messier; on its hood rested forward Aleksei Kovalev.
And onto the scene next skated goalie Mike Richter, wearing padding that made him appear to weigh about 350 pounds.


Pakistan Asks for U.S. Help in Crackdown on Militants
Under growing pressure to crack down on Muslim militants suspected of plotting terrorist attacks abroad, Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto said today that her Government favored closing clandestine training centers in Pakistan's North-West Frontier Province but would need help from the United States.
"We in Pakistan simply don't have the resources on our own to carry out the entire cleansing operation," said Ms.
Bhutto, who met with American reporters ahead of a two-day visit by Hillary Rodham Clinton that begins this weekend.
Prime Minister Bhutto is scheduled to meet with President Clinton in Washington next month.


Arrest in School Gambling Case
The authorities arrested another teen-ager yesterday in the case of a gambling ring that is accused of taking bets from students at Nutley High School.
The Essex County Prosecutor, Clifford J. Minor, charged that the suspect, Michael Luzzi, 19, supplied an 800 telephone number that was used by student bookies and also collected money owed by students for bets.
Mr.
Luzzi, who graduated from Nutley High School in 1993, is the sixth suspect arrested in the case.


House Takes Up Legislation To Dismantle Social Programs
The House of Representatives today took up sweeping legislation that would dismantle many elements of the social welfare systems put in place by the Federal Government over the last 60 years.
There was little suspense about the outcome; Republicans predicted that the bill would be approved late this week on a party-line vote.


Tokyo Unnerved
Tokyo's 5.8 million subway commuters are frightened after Monday's coordinated attacks on three Tokyo subway lines with the nerve gas sarin.
So far, 8 people are known dead and 4,700 injured.
The authorities are puzzled about what kind of organization, with what kind of motive, could have conceived and executed these murderous attacks.
New Yorkers can understand the emotions of Tokyo's people and empathize with their plight.
New York too has been subjected to indiscriminate attacks on ordinary people, such as the 1993 World Trade Center bombing that killed 6 and injured more than 1,000.
New Yorkers also know what it means to have no realistic alternative to mass transit.
"If you say you won't ride the subway, you can't make a living in Tokyo," a Tokyo resident told The Times hours after the terrorist attacks.
It is as true in New York.


Fez Journal; Last Refuge of the Tall Tasseled Ottoman Hat
In the Middle East it still matters what you wear on your head.
The Sudanese have floppy turbans, the Palestinians red and black checkered kafiyehs and the Saudis the white ghutra.
But the maroon, brimless fez, once the epitome of old world courtesy and taste, has become, for most Muslims, politically incorrect.
"It's a hat of the oppressors," said 26-year-old Abdel Jouad.
"This is why no one wears it anymore."


Booster Shots for Academic Success
As part of his effort to boost academic success, New York City's Schools Chancellor, Ramon Cortines, would establish a special school for immigrant students and a new program aimed at qualifying more minority students for the city's most selective high schools.
Both ideas deserve support from the Board of Education.
Many immigrant students need extra help in navigating the city school system, so Mr.
Cortines would create the Newcomers School as a comprehensive resource for some 1,000 immigrant students and their families.
It would be in Queens, where an influx of foreign students has overwhelmed at least two local high schools.


Reprieve for Bus Riders
Bus riders in 10 central New Jersey communities do not need to find a new way to work -- yet.
Local 1589 of the United Transportation Union and TCT Transit had scheduled a walkout for midnight Monday but called it off.
Negotiators will meet here today to try to work out a contract for the local's 47 bus drivers, who have been without one for nearly a year.


Market Place; The Microsoft-Intuit deal tests the nerves of arbitragers.
WILL Microsoft, the world's largest computer software company, succeed in taking over Intuit, the leading purveyor of personal finance software?
The uncertainty surrounding the deal, which is being reviewed by the Justice Department's antitrust division, has created headaches for some of Wall Street's sharpest investors.
In recent days, the difference, or spread, between the value of Microsoft's offer and Intuit's share price has climbed as high as $22, one of the widest gaps in a major deal in recent memory.


Stocks Fall on Inflation Fears Raised by March Retail Sales Data
Breaking a three-session rally, traders bid stock prices sharply downward, after an unexpectedly strong retail sales report fanned fears of inflation.
The same report drove down bond prices, despite a surprise strengthening in the dollar overseas.
In the absence of similar market-moving economic reports, the dollar may be the main driver of the stock and bond markets in advance of the policy-setting meeting of the Federal Reserve on Tuesday.


Walter Cronkite With an Assessment of TV News
"Headlines and Sound Bites: Is That the Way It Is?" No, not entirely.
This assessment of how the news is being covered concludes that there is plenty of information out there, both on screen and in print, if only people would pay attention.
Television news is found to handle breaking stories well, even though it neglects more complicated events, particularly in distant places.
As an example of television at work, however, tonight's hourlong report may leave you wondering.
It goes in for pronouncements by personages attached to such estimable institutions as ABC News and The New York Times, all in tight close-ups as if the camera was trying to get at their brains through their nostrils.


2 More Charged in Robbery
A week after Brenda Wolf was shot dead in a botched jewelry store robbery, two more suspects are in custody, but the truth about what happened remains elusive.
Missouri officials said yesterday that Robert L. Williams, 19, of Kansas City, Kan., and Michael W. Guhse, 17, of Independence, Mo., had turned themselves in.
Each was charged with felony murder, conspiracy to possess firearms and robbery.
The Somerset County Prosecutor, Nicholas L. Bissell Jr., said the two were offered $25,000 to take part in the robbery.
He said they would be brought to New Jersey today.


Ouch. In More Ways Than One.


2 More Charged in Robbery
A week after Brenda Wolf was shot dead in a botched jewelry store robbery, two more suspects are in custody, but the truth about what happened remains elusive.
Missouri officials said yesterday that Robert L. Williams, 19, of Kansas City, Kan., and Michael W. Guhse, 17, of Independence, Mo., had turned themselves in.
Each was charged with felony murder, conspiracy to possess firearms and robbery.
The Somerset County Prosecutor, Nicholas L. Bissell Jr., said the two were offered $25,000 to take part in the robbery.
He said they would be brought to New Jersey today.


Wolves in Yellowstone Are Free To Roam After 50-Year Absence
For the first time in more than half a century, wolves are roaming free in Yellowstone National Park.
At 3:45 this afternoon, the first 6 of 14 Canadian wolves to be released in the park this spring were let out of their one-acre holding pen.


Riley Won't Make Any Guarantees On His Future
Although Pat Riley did not guarantee he would sign a contract extension, the Knicks' coach said yesterday that it was unfair to say he has been coaching with his mind focused on going somewhere else.
Riley discussed his future, which he rarely does, as the Knicks prepared to face the Charlotte Hornets at Madison Square Garden.
Although Riley has another year left on his five-year, $6 million contract, he is no closer to signing an extension than he was 18 months ago when talks began.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
Leaving an office building at Lexington Avenue and 40th Street, I feel great.
My meeting went well.
The day is cold but bright.
I start to walk uptown.
I see, walking toward me, a fellow who looks down at the heels and is holding a large soft-drink cup out in front of him.
An inner voice says, "Give him something, sport." As I pass by, I toss some change into the cup.
As I continue on, I hear, "Mister." I stop.
I turn.
It's him.
"Mister," he says, "thanks, but you ruined my soda." AARON KESSLER
. . .
Two well-dressed, fiftyish women were strolling on Fifth Avenue near 54th Street when Geraldine Gauthier overheard one say, "Anything you need at Tiffany's?" A few ounces of diamonds, perhaps?
. . .
Dear Diary:
The other evening, I found myself in Tower Records on the Upper East Side and saw a CD that I really had to have -- the soundtrack to "The Brady Bunch Movie." Embarrassed to let the young man behind the cash register know I was buying this for myself, rather than for say, a gum-chewing 12-year-old, I asked, "Do you wrap?"
I was greeted with a big smile, eyes full of hope and the eager response, "Why, yes, I do."
Not used to such enthusiasm when I've sought to have gifts wrapped in the past, I realized how my question was interpreted when the young man asked, "Are you an agent?"
"No, I'm just a lawyer," I said.
"I don't do entertainment law and I meant wrap with a 'w.' Sorry."
I left with my CD in tow, but I somehow felt as if I had dashed someone's dreams.
RANDY L. SHAPIRO
. . .
And on the West Side, in a 72d Street bakery, Aaron Silverman overheard this exchange:
Elderly gentleman: Do I have to keep this cake in the icebox?
Young salesgirl: No, just keep it in the refrigerator until an hour before you serve it.
. . .
Gilda Epstein of Old Bethpage, L.I., stopped at the local supermarket on her way home from work and discovered that she didn't have 60 cents in change for the coffee machine.
She dug out a dollar and asked customers in her vicinity if they could change it.
No luck.
She tried the nearby deli section, but the countermen explained that they didn't handle money.
"As I walked away, I heard, 'Lady, Lady,' from behind the deli counter," she recounted.
"I turned to see four smiling faces handing me a total of 60 cents. 'Here, we took up a collection. Enjoy your coffee.' I don't know which lifted my spirits more, the coffee or the way I got it."
. . .
HAPPY EASTER
A word from a mother who begs
You hark to her Eastertime ballads:
I'm all for your coloring eggs
Provided that later,
My egg-decorator,
You're all for a week of egg-salads! MAUREEN CANNON
. . .
Hans Engel of Mamaroneck, N.Y., met a friend for lunch at a Japanese restaurant in Manhattan.
As they were sitting, the friend's necktie caught in the zipper of hiscoat and resisted all attempts to dislodge it.
Finally, the coat was pulled off over the head with the tie still stuck in the zipper.
The friend called over a young waiter who had been looking on with amusement, and asked him to get a screwdriver.
The waiter dashed off and returned with an orange-colored drink.
"Your screwdriver," he said.
A real screwdriver was eventually found, and the zipper was opened.
When the bill arrived, the waiter sheepishly announced, "The screwdriver is on the house."


CUC Intl.(CU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Fleeing America's Relentless Pace, Some Adopt an Amish Life
This town of fewer than 400 people in southeastern Ohio, founded by Quakers and now home to a sizable community of old-order Amish, has always been a place apart, a quiet celebration of simplicity.
Its newest business, the nonprofit Center for Plain Living, will do nothing to disturb that tradition.
The center, a clearinghouse of criticism of technology-driven American culture, is little more than a desk, a table, an old printing press and several lamps housed in a 19th-century photography studio.
Yet it is a distinctly visible symbol of a small migration of families from East Coast and Midwest cities and suburbs, many with no previous rural ties, to a new and quiet life in which they adopt the customs and even the religious beliefs of the Amish, other Mennonites or the most conservative of the Quaker sects, the plain Quakers.


A Second Fiddle Is Now a Virtuoso
Tyus Edney may have exceeded the speed limit to beat Missouri, but he could have used a cane 10 minutes later.
Shuffling from interview to interview, he seemed to have a leg of tin.
As he limps, so limps U.C.L.A.
So these were tense moments.
Had the tendinitis in his right knee flared up?
Had his ankle ballooned?


Trump Loses Round in Empire State Suit
A New York State Supreme Court justice yesterday denied an effort by the owners of the Empire State Building to break a lease that the current tenants have held for the last 34 years and which does not expire for another 80 years.
In his decision, Justice Edward H. Lehner said the demand for an immediate end to the lease, made in a $100 million lawsuit filed last month by Trump Empire State Partners, was "totally devoid of merit."


Pete Rose Jr. Will Play With Father's Blessing
Pete Rose has supported the Major League Baseball Players Association in every work stoppage.
He was a part of the players' 50-day strike in 1981.
And he would have scoffed at the thought of the owners replacing him -- a player who would eventually be the game's career hits leader -- with some major league wannabe.
"It probably would have driven me nuts," Rose admitted today.


Iowan Will Head New Justice Dept. Office
Reaching out to several important constituencies, President Clinton today named a former Iowa Attorney General to head a new Office on Violence Against Women at the Justice Department.
He also released the first $26 million for community programs to combat abuse as part of the program, which was established by last year's crime bill.
The head of the new office, Bonnie Campbell, is a former Democratic state chairwoman and lost a bid for governor last year.
Her appointment was a nod to a state where Presidential caucuses are less than a year away and to female voters as a whole, who are central to Mr.
Clinton's re-election strategy.


Massachusetts Seeks to Help Fish Industry
With stocks of cod, haddock and yellowtail flounder at historic lows in New England waters, Gov.
William F. Weld of Massachusetts said today that he would ask President Clinton to declare the state's fishing industry a natural disaster and to authorize Federal relief.
Governor Weld, a Republican, is taking a new tack on the decline of the industry, and it might be one that is hard to support.
To qualify for Federal disaster relief, he must show that the shrinking fish populations are the result of uncontrollable forces of nature.


Sports of The Times; The Yankees And Their Rag Trade
IMAGINE for a moment that George Steinbrenner is a humble tailor who cuts suits.
Not the kind of tailor that Groucho Marx said his father was, one who always managed to sew the zipper on the pants off center.
But say George is a pretty good tailor.
And say you had been buying suits and pants from George for several years.
And say you had entered into a contract for George to provide you with the clothes for, oh, 10 years.
And one day you get a suit from him and the material is inferior, the pockets of the pants are too low, and the zipper is, well, from Groucho's father's school.
In the garment industry, there is a term of art for this.
It is called, "seconds." There is a another word for it, one found in the streets of the garment center.
The word is schmatte, from the Yiddish meaning rag.


Accounts
*
Goldberg Moser O'Neill, San Francisco, has withdrawn from a review being conducted by Epson America, Torrance, Calif., leaving four finalists competing for the account with billings estimated at $25 million: the incumbent, FCB Technology, San Francisco, and three New York agencies, Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas, Deutsch Inc. and TBWA Advertising.
A decision is expected April 1. *
San Diego Padres to Di Zinno Thompson Integrated Marketing Solutions, San Diego, formerly Di Zinno &amp; Partners, to handle the team's account, previously at Franklin Stoorza, San Diego.
The billings were estimated at more than $1 million.


Pity the Duck
To The Living Section:
People who were caught up by the hype of French cuisine and duck foie gras described in Florence Fabricant's article of Feb. 8  [ "Chefs Turn Out for Team That Brought Them Duck Foie Gras ]  should learn how foie gras is produced. Excessively large, fat livers are created by cramming the birds with grain mechanically. The bird's bill is forced open and around a spout leading to a supply of grain that is pushed down the throat. Tender mucous membranes are scraped and even torn as the bird struggles.


Whitewater Salesman Pleads Guilty to Fraud
The Arkansas real estate salesman who handled the Clintons' land dealings pleaded guilty today in Little Rock, Ark., to two charges of bankruptcy fraud, giving the Whitewater special counsel a witness with detailed knowledge of the venture.
The man, Chris V. Wade, handled the finances of the failed Whitewater enterprise from its earliest days and worked closely with James B. McDougal, the owner of a failed Arkansas savings and loan and Bill and Hillary Clinton's partner in the Whitewater Development Company.


Tip, of Course
To The Living Section:
To tip, or not to tip . . . that is the question.
In defense of cappuccino customers and au lait makers everywhere, I would like to comment on Dan Shaw's article about tipping at coffee bars  [ "Coffee-Bar Tipping? The Jury Is Still Out," March 1 ] .


Yesterday in Washington
TAX CUTS -- Breaking ranks over a central plank in their agenda, nearly half of the 230 Republicans in the House urged their leaders to scale back a proposed $500-per-child tax cut to families, a proposal that Democrats have criticized as a giveaway to the rich.
It was not clear whether party leaders would grant the request to limit the tax cut to families making $95,000 a year or less, well below the $200,000 ceiling called for in the Republicans' Contract With America and now in the bill.
WELFARE REFORM -- The House of Representatives took up legislation that would dismantle much of the social welfare system put in place by the Federal Government over the last 60 years.
Republicans predicted that the bill would be approved late this week on a party-line vote.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Farm Credit Bank is selling $100 million of medium-term notes due in 2000 through First Tennessee Bank.
The notes are callable in one year, carry an interest rate of 7.77 percent and are priced at par.


CHRONICLE
QUEEN ELIZABETH II, on a tour of South Africa, had one of her more unusual greetings Monday when some 40 corgis confronted her as she walked about Cape Town.
The London Evening Standard reported that the Queen, a corgi owner herself, remarked that "it is nice to see some friendly faces," perhaps because after waiting three hours in the hot sun, the dogs weren't acting snappish and aggressive, as they frequently do, but were standing still with their tongues hanging out.
One spectator didn't hold out any hope for a cool respite for her corgi.
"Now that he has seen the Queen, I won't bathe him for a week," she said.


Let a Free Market Take Its Course on Sex Shops
To the Editor:
The change in zoning for sex shops in Times Square and elsewhere in New York espoused by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, a Republican, and endorsed by your March 15 editorial, flies in the face of economic arguments presented by the United States Government to the world.


Personal Health; How to safeguard children from lead exposure.
DESPITE growing concern about the damaging effects of even low lead levels on the brains of young children, millions of American infants, toddlers and preschoolers continue to live and play in environments that are seriously contaminated with lead.
And despite national recommendations that every preschool child be tested annually for lead, Federal public health officials say most young children, including those most heavily exposed to lead, have not been tested even once to see if their bodies are harboring dangerous amounts.


Manor Care Inc.(MNR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


At the Nation's Table: San Francisco; At the Pyramid's Base, The Vertigo Restaurant
Alfred Hitchcock, known for his gourmandise as well as his suspenseful thrillers, would probably approve of a new San Francisco restaurant named for his 1958 spellbinder, "Vertigo."
The 200-seat restaurant, which opened Feb. 13, sits at the base of the Transamerica pyramid, the city's tallest building and a spire-shaped icon in the skyline.
Tucked along the structure's base under concrete pylons 13 feet high, Vertigo artfully embraces its massive partner, tempering the geometry of the pyramid with the whirling motifs of the film, which was set in San Francisco.


Antitrust Ruling Is a Defeat for Players
Handing professional athletes a second major judicial loss in two months, a Federal appeals court ruled yesterday that unionized employees cannot use the nation's antitrust laws to keep employers from imposing unilateral wage and other restrictions after the collapse of good faith collective bargaining.
The 2-1 decision by the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia had the narrow immediate effect of overturning a $30 million judgment imposed on the National Football League by a District Court jury in 1992, but the ruling also had implications for striking major league baseball players.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Cultural Divide  For an Afternoon  Stuttgart Chamber Orchestra Alice Tully Hall
Dennis Russell Davies's appointment to head the Stuttgart Chamber Orchestra is a step up from his previous European jobs.
What splendid musicians these players are, eloquent and sure to the last rows of the string sections.
Their best came first on Sunday afternoon: in a moving, yet delicate performance of Shostakovich's C-minor Chamber Symphony, an enlargement of the Eighth String Quartet.
The rest of this intriguing program consisted of Philip Glass's new Symphony No. 3, David Diamond's 50-year-old "Rounds for String Orchestra" and "Abii ne viderem," by the Georgian composer Giya Kancheli.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Lehman Debt Ratings Downgraded by Moody's
Moody's Investors Service downgraded its rating on $15 billion of Lehman Brothers Holdings' debt, saying Wall Street was facing increasing pressures on profits.
After Moody's announcement, Lehman said its earnings would exceed analysts' expectations.
The firm is expected to report its results for the first fiscal quarter today.
D2.
Paine Webber said it would lay off 5 percent of its work force, but not its army of brokers.
D2.
Retail Report Trips Dow; Bonds, Dollar Also Fall
The Dow fell 11.07 points, to close at 4,072.61, after an unexpectedly strong retail sales report raised fears of inflation.
D10.
The retail report also rattled the bond market, sending the yield on the 30-year Treasury up to 7.44 percent.
D6.
The dollar ended little changed after falling to a low against the yen.
D17.
Morrison Director Quits
Zbigniew Brzezinski, the national security adviser in the Carter Administration, resigned from the Morrison Knudsen board, a day after William Clark quit as the beleaguered company's acting chairman.
D3.
Lobbyists Drawn to Water
Companies like International Paper and groups like the Chemical Manufacturers Association have assigned dozens of lobbyists to try to influence a revised Clean Water Act, angering environmentalists.
A16.
No. 2 at Bank of England Quits
The deputy governor of the Bank of England resigned following discloses that he had an affair with an American journalist.
D2.
New Software Sparks Debate
Silicon Graphics has dismissed an employee who created a program to test computer networks' security and plans to distribute it over the Internet.
The employee, Dan Farmer, says he is performing a public service.
The company fears hackers will use it to break into computer systems.
D4.
Fininvest Fights Breakup
Fininvest, the TV empire owned by Silvio Berlusconi, the media baron turned politician, is fighting efforts to get voters to strip it of two channels in a referendum.
D7.
Companies Eye Machines Bull
Motorola and NEC are expected to take stakes in the money-losing French computer maker Compagnie des Machines Bull.
D7.
W.T.O.
Head Ready for Work
Renato Ruggiero, the first head of the World Trade Organization, said that "the past is the past" and that he and his former American opponents had a "meeting of the minds." D3.
Risk Building in Intuit Deal
The spread between the value of Microsoft's offer to acquire Intuit and Intuit's share price has been as high as $22.
That means investors see the deal as risky.
Market Place.
D10.
Ticketmaster Looks at Airlines
Ticketmaster is studying whether to start selling airline tickets.
Some travel agents say there is a lot more to their business than booking people on airplanes.
Edwin McDowell: Business Travel.
D7.
Union in Japan Threatens AT&amp;T
The union representing about 4,000 AT&amp;T workers in Japan is threatening a full-fledged strike if the company doesn't stop conduct the union regards as outrageous: cutting costs to improve the bottom line.
D8.
New York to Sell Stations
New York City will sell its radio and TV stations, WNYC, to raise $65 million to $75 million.
B3.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Released Mike Egelston, Kevin Tolar and Mark Smith, pitchers.
Reassigned Mark Huismann and Reggie Harris, pitchers, to the minor-league camp.


Data Documents Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Prosecutors Pursue a Link to a Palestinian Group at Terror Trial
Prosecutors yesterday tried to link a defendant in the terrorism trial under way in Federal District Court in Manhattan to a militant Palestinian organization in the Gaza Strip.
The prosecutors read a transcript of a taped conversation in which a defendant discussed buying night-vision goggles for the militant organization Hamas, to carry out attacks against Israel.


METRO DIGEST
4 SLAIN IN NEW JERSEY POST OFFICE
Four men were killed and a fifth critically wounded as a shooting in a Montclair, N.J., post office turned a quiet suburban setting into a bloody nightmare.
A1.
The people who live near the post office where four men were shot to death are not accustomed to bolting their doors and feeling imprisoned in their homes.
A1.


A Shudder, a Crash, a Cloud of Dust
It appeared as though a child, in a sudden tantrum, had slammed two clenched fists into a doll house, leaving each floor precariously pitched toward the one below and scattering the miniature furnishings to the ground.
But real people lived in the east wing of 142 West 140th Street in Harlem.
Just before 8 A.M. yesterday, as residents were getting ready to face the day, a six-story wall of the apartment building came crashing down into an alley below, and with it fell some of the contents of 12 apartments and the people inside.


Commercial Metals Co.(CMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Food Notes
Seafood at Vinegar Factory
Eli Zabar is adding fresh seafood to the Vinegar Factory, his market at 429 East 91st Street.
Joe Catalano, the owner of Catalano's, a small, high-quality fish market at 1652 Second Avenue (at 85th Street), will run the new seafood operation, which is expected to open in about a month.
Mr.
Catalano's lease at his own store expires this summer, and he said he did not plan to renew it.


Wine Talk
SOMETIMES it's a letter, but more often, a phone call.
Usually an urgent one.
The conversation goes something like this:
"I want to make a recipe I read in such and such a magazine," the caller will say, "but it goes with a wine that I can't find anywhere. What can I do?"


H. G. Peter Wallach, Political Scholar, 56
H.
G.
Peter Wallach, a political scientist specializing in American Constitutional law and contemporary German politics, died on March 13 while riding his bicycle near his home in Berlin, Conn.
He was 56.
The cause of death was a massive heart attack, his family said.
Professor Wallach was on sabbatical from Central Connecticut State University, where he was a professor of political science.
He was working on a book on political leadership.


Founder's Widow Bypasses Hirshhorn
Olga Hirshhorn, the widow of Joseph Hirshhorn, who founded the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden in Washington, has announced that she is donating her collection of paintings, sculpture and works on paper to the Corcoran Gallery of Art in Washington.
The collection includes at least 700 works by 19th- and 20th-century European and American artists including John Singer Sargent, Georgia O'Keeffe, Jean Dubuffet, Man Ray, Josef Albers, Henry Moore, Pablo Picasso and Willem de Kooning.
News of Mrs.
Hirshhorn's gift, which is believed to be worth around $10 million, appeared yesterday in The Washington Post.


Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd.(TEVIY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


I'm O.K. You're O.K. We're on Line
To her Rockland County hamlet, she is Judith Engelhardt, a wife, a mother and an electrologist at a local beauty salon.
But to the much larger community of computer users, she is Electrozap, a member of an on-line menopause support group that meets twice a week in a fast, furious and silent discussion about estrogen therapy, good iron sources and mood swings.
"Our mothers went through menopause quietly, but knowing other women are experiencing the same thing validates what I'm going through," said Ms.
Engelhardt, 50, of Nanuet, N.Y.


Times Raises Price For Sunday Paper
The New York Times announced yesterday that the suggested newsstand price for the Sunday paper in the New York metropolitan region would increase to $2.50, from $2, starting on April 2.
The weekly price for home delivery in the New York region, when provided directly by The Times, will also increase, to $6.70, from $6.10.


Council Blocks Giuliani Plan To Remove Fire Alarm Boxes
The City Council yesterday firmly rejected Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's plan to remove the city's 16,300 fire alarm boxes, overriding the Mayor's veto and sending the administration back to the drawing board.
The vote, which represents a significant setback for the Mayor, delays Mr.
Giuliani's plan to remove the boxes until a more thorough study is conducted on its impact on fire safety.
It was the fourth time the Council had overridden a veto since Mr.
Giuliani became Mayor and came after months of highly emotional public debate and court challenges on the Mayor's plan to dismantle the alarms.


Eugene J. Webb, 61, Professor at Stanford
Eugene J. Webb, a Stanford University professor who studied organizational behavior, or how businesses work and how people work in organizations, died on March 14 at Stanford University Hospital in Palo Alto, Calif.
He was 61 and lived in Palo Alto.
The cause was respiratory disease, the family said.


A Pivotal Generation In New York's History
TERRIBLE HONESTY Mongrel Manhattan in the 1920's  By Ann Douglas  Illustrated. 605 pages.
Farrar, Strauss &amp; Giroux. $25.
It is rare when somebody comes along to cast a new light, and a bright and clarifying one at that, on a subject that, as a result, will never again seem the same.
But Ann Douglas has done just that in her intensely analytical and, at the same time, readably anecdotal cultural history of Manhattan in the 1920's, the period when the United States, with that motley island she calls "mongrel Manhattan" at its modernist core, surpassed the rest of the world in the energy and originality of its popular culture.


Pitt-Des Moines Inc.(PDM,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


One Big Happy Family No More; At Kiwi Air Lines, Hazards of Employee Ownership
It was a tale of triumph over adversity in the mold of the movie "Rocky." Robert W. Iverson and some fellow pilots, knocked out of the industry when Eastern Airlines collapsed, pooled their savings and began Kiwi Air Lines in 1992.
With bitter memories of their long dispute with Eastern's management, led by Frank Lorenzo, the pilots vowed to work together as equals, and with other employees own the company.
The egalitarian vision at Kiwi worked wonders for customer service, as pilots helped to clean up the planes and flight attendants bought flowers for the planes' bathrooms.
When a fare war threatened the survival of the carrier, the employees volunteered to work at half pay.


Caution on the Line-Item Veto
The Senate Republicans' latest proposal to create line-item veto authority makes the same mistake as the version adopted by the House last month.
Both give the President too much power.
Senate Democrats have a better idea.
The House Republicans' Contract With America proposed a line-item veto in tandem with a balanced-budget amendment.
Having lost on the amendment, the Republicans want all the more to win on the line-item veto.
As a practical matter, the potential for relatively small budget savings is less significant than giving the President a tool to excise "pork-barrel" spending and tax favors for the few.


Reprieve for Bus Riders
Bus riders in 10 central New Jersey communities do not need to find a new way to work -- yet.
Local 1589 of the United Transportation Union and TCT Transit had scheduled a walkout for midnight Monday but called it off.
Negotiators will meet here today to try to work out a contract for the local's 47 bus drivers, who have been without one for nearly a year.


Elusive Solutions to a Simpson Mystery
Both sides in the O. J. Simpson murder trial battled today over one of the central mysteries of the case: why the bloody right-hand glove found behind Mr.
Simpson's house shortly after Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman were killed had no blood around it and what that says about Mr.
Simpson's guilt or innocence.
Lawyers for Mr.
Simpson, trying to neutralize one of the potentially most incriminating exhibits of the case, sought to show that if Mr.
Simpson had dropped the glove there and had been bleeding at the time, as the police said, drops of his blood would have been nearby.


Arrest in School Gambling Case
The authorities arrested another teen-ager yesterday in the case of a gambling ring that is accused of taking bets from students at Nutley High School.
The Essex County Prosecutor, Clifford J. Minor, charged that the suspect, Michael Luzzi, 19, supplied an 800 telephone number that was used by student bookies and also collected money owed by students for bets.
Mr.
Luzzi, who graduated from Nutley High School in 1993, is the sixth suspect arrested in the case.


Grief for a Victim of California Flooding


Brzezinski Is Giving Up His Seat on Knudsen Board
Zbigniew Brzezinski, the former national security adviser in the Carter Administration who became a director of the Morrison Knudsen Corporation last spring, said yesterday that he was resigning from the company's board.
A spokeswoman for Mr.
Brzezinski in Washington said he had joined the board to assist the company in expanding its international business.
Now, she said, "he feels the company will be so involved with things of a financial nature" that his reason for being there had been at least temporarily diminished.


A Biotech Company Is Granted Broad Patent and Stock Jumps
Shares of Genetic Therapy Inc. surged 17.6 percent today after the company was assigned a broad patent covering a fundamental approach to gene therapy, a type of treatment that scientists hope will one day successfully combat hereditary defects like cystic fibrosis and diseases such as cancer.
"Genetic Therapy Inc. now has a very important strategic position," said A. Paul Boni, a biotechnology industry analyst with the New York equity research firm of Mehta &amp; Isaly.
"I don't think people expected this patent. It's almost like patenting the idea of writing on paper."


Asset Investors Corp.(AIC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Carnival Corp.(CCL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Dannon Campaign's Research Is Noticed
An advertising campaign for Dannon yogurt took top honors yesterday at the Advertising Research Foundation's second annual David Ogilvy Award ceremony for excellence in research.
At the foundation's annual conference in New York, Dannon and its advertising and research agencies, Grey Advertising in New York and Marketplace Measurement Worldwide in Scarborough-on-Hudson, N.Y., were honored for research that best supported a successful campaign.
The Dannon campaign, carrying the theme "Taste why it's Dannon," was selected from among three finalists.
The others were a campaign by Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York and the Research Systems Corporation in Evansville, Ind., for Citrucel laxative, marketed by SmithKline Beecham, and a campaign by J. Walter Thompson Chicago and Research Systems for the Lunchable product line marketed by the Oscar Mayer Foods Corporation.


Vallen Corp.(VALN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


For the Takeout Bunch, Bad Sandwich News
THE people who condemned McDonald's Quarterpounders -- as well as kung pao chicken, fettucine Alfredo and movie-theater popcorn -- have had everyone's favorite lunchtime sandwiches analyzed for calories, fat and sodium.
The results?
Well, there's not much left to eat.
"People tend to think of a sandwich as just a bite to eat," Jayne Hurley, the senior nutritionist for the Center for Science in the Public Interest and the author of the study, said yesterday as she announced the results.
"But often sandwich shops are giving you an entire dinner's worth of fat and calories in between those two big slices of bread."


On the Heels of a Ballet Troupe, Through Drudgery to Glory
There is a tiny shock that comes from hearing the harsh thump of a toe shoe as it hits a rock-hard floor: how can a motion that looks so effortless and graceful sound like an ugly thud?
Frederick Wiseman's nearly three-hour documentary, "Ballet," explores that paradox, bringing his total-immersion style to the most glamorous of home-grown dance companies, American Ballet Theater.
Mr.
Wiseman followed the company in the spring and summer of 1992, and his film carries viewers into Ballet Theater's rehearsal space and offices on lower Broadway, and on tour to Athens and Copenhagen.
At its best, it captures the rigors, tenacity and even boredom of preparing a performance, ending with the glorious results.
Yet the picture also has serious holes.
"Ballet," which opens today at Film Forum, does not offer the comprehensive view of an insider, but the enticing perspective of an artistic peeping Tom.


Plea in Electrified Van Case
Last month, after repeated break-ins to his van, Jose Lopez of North Bergen wired the vehicle to deliver an electric shock to any intruder.
One night, Mr.
Lopez left a van window open.
It rained, and soon the van was emitting strange electrical noises -- so strange that a police bomb squad was summoned from Jersey City.


Countrywide Credit Industries(CCR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Suffolk Head Is Challenged
Launching a campaign that turned negative on Day 1, Tony Bullock, a Democrat and the East Hampton Supervisor, announced today that he was running for Suffolk County Executive.
Addressing a roomful of supporters and waving a Dracula doll, Mr.
Bullock attacked the incumbent Republican, Robert J. Gaffney, saying, , "The vampire County Executive should be ashamed of himself for sucking the blood out of Suffolk County."


Sect Says Government Staged the Gas Attack
The religious sect that was raided this morning has been in frequent disputes with the Japanese Government, and it says the Government staged the terrorist attack on the subway system with sarin gas to frame the cult's members.
"Aum Shinrikyo has absolutely nothing to do with this current sarin incident in the subways," said Yoshinobu Aoyama, a 35-year-old lawyer who has recently become the main spokesman for the group, at a news conference on Tuesday.
"The mass media describe us as a secretive, closed and dubious group which is involved in weird activities. They created such images of us, and I want to deny that clearly."


Patent Suit Names 'Gump'
A computer consultant has filed a patent infringement suit in Federal District Court here charging that he is entitled to a "reasonable royalty" from the makers of the film "Forrest Gump" for a computer process he says was used to make the title character, played by Tom Hanks, seem to converse with Presidents Kennedy, Johnson and Nixon in archival film footage.
Richard W. Bloomstein is suing Paramount Pictures and Lucasfilm Ltd., which handled special effects for what his lawyers said could amount to tens of millions of dollars.
Viacom Inc., Paramount's parent, and Lucasfilm said the claim was baseless and would be fought.


Two Exchanges Post Rises In Uncovered Short Sales
Open positions of short sales on the New York Stock Exchange set another record in the most recent period, rising 3.6 percent, to 1.949 billion shares for the month ended March 15, the exchange said yesterday.
The increase in uncovered short sales -- in essence a bet that stock prices will fall -- came despite a surge in the stock market that pushed the Dow Jones industrial average to more than 4,000 points.


Earlier Victims' Horror Revived: Was June Incident a Dry Run?
Hiroshi Morita, an assistant professor of medicine at Shinshu University here, saw the television reports about people collapsing in the Tokyo subways Monday morning and immediately suspected what was wrong.
Even before the police had reached their conclusion, Dr.
Morita was on the phone to Tokyo hospitals suggesting treatments for exposure to a deadly nerve gas -- sarin.
Dr.
Morita knew because he is one of the few doctors in Japan with experience in treating people affected by the gas, which was first developed in Nazi Germany.
Shortly before midnight last June 27, sarin from an unknown source wafted through a residential neighborhood in this picturesque mountain town, killing 7 people, leaving 44 in hospitals and injuring dozens of others.


Frederic Ramsey, A Writer, Historian And Jazz Expert, 80
Frederic Ramsey Jr., a writer and historian who specialized in black culture in America, died on Saturday at St.
Joseph's Hospital in Paterson, N.J.
He was 80.
The cause was complications after surgery, said his daughter Alida Porter.


Foreign Affairs; Yesterday's Man: The Sequel
Sunday's column was about how Warren Christopher should address Syria's President, Hafez al-Assad.
Today Mr.
Assad answers a visiting Mr.
Christopher:


A Dog and His Man, With One Bad Penguin
Academy Award-winning animated shorts are usually seen by, aside from the academy voters, about a dozen moviegoers.
Tonight PBS takes an admirable step toward remedying this unfair situation with a presentation of "The Wrong Trousers," Nick Park's delightful animated film, which did indeed win a 1993 Oscar. (Mr. Park also won one in 1991 for "Creature Comforts.") This gifted animator is English, and "The Wrong Trousers" was produced in association with the BBC.
The central characters, actually clay-and-wax creatures, are Wallace, a middle-aged inventor fond of cheese, and Gromit, his faithful dog.
Wallace is something of a scatterbrain; the ever-faithful Gromit is clever and smart, given to reading "Pluto's 'Republic' " and papers with headlines announcing that "Dog Reads Paper." Their Rube Goldberg-like house contains an electric train that figures prominently in the plot.


New Search for Rights Chief
Attorney General Deborah Poritz said yesterday that she would immediately begin a new search for a Civil Rights Division chief.
Her first nominee, Brenda Smith, said Monday that she did not want the job because of opposition from Hispanic groups.
The Attorney General said she was saddened by Ms.
Smith's decision, just one day before she would have been confirmed by the New Jersey Civil Rights Commission.
Ms.
Poritz promised an open process to select a new director, but she also said she had made a good choice in Ms.
Smith, who heads the Somerset County Public Defender's office and is black.


Italian TV Empire Resists Breakup at Polls
Running Fininvest, the $7 billion conglomerate owned by the Italian media baron-turned-politician, Silvio Berlusconi, is "like a kibbutz,"said Fedele Confalonieri, the company's 57-year-old chief executive.
"You shoot, and you spade," he explained, in words somehow characteristic of Mr.
Confalonieri, the old friend and associate whom Mr.
Berlusconi left in charge of Fininvest last year when he entered politics: direct, no holds barred, and, maybe, a little anachronistic.


Bonds Decline Sharply on Report of Robust Retail Sales
Prices of Treasury securities tumbled yesterday after a retailing industry report rattled investors' belief that the economy was slowing.
The market began with early gains in quiet trading, only to be jolted from its lull in the afternoon by the strength shown in a survey of the nation's leading department stores by the Johnson Redbook Service, a New York-based retailing consultant.
The survey indicated that retail sales growth through the third week of March was a strong six-tenths of 1 percent; most economists had expected no change.
The surprising gain challenged investor expectations of slower economic growth and subdued inflation.


Charges for a Police Officer
A veteran Newark police officer was indicted yesterday on charges that he trafficked in stolen property at a store that he owned in downtown Newark.
The officer, Odell Fields, 59, is accused of repeatedly deserting his post in a police booth at the intersection of Market and Broad Streets to go work nearby in the store, Market Street Gold Exchange.
At the store, Mr.
Fields and his partner, Mollie Chavis, 49, bought and sold stolen property from municipalities around northern New Jersey, the authorities charged.
DAVID STOUT


Lobbyists Helped Revise Laws on Water
When House members introduce their proposed revision of the Clean Water Act on Wednesday, it will contain major new provisions long sought by many of the industries and communities the law regulates.
That is because the bill's sponsors and a committee of lobbyists worked side by side on the bill, inserting one provision after another to satisfy industry groups like the Chemical Manufacturers Association, companies like International Paper, and organizations of the cities and states covered by the law.


Doctors Will Get More Immunity for Mistakes
To the Editor:
Re "A Mistake, a Rare Prosecution, and a Doctor Is Headed for Jail" (front page, March 16): Given the American Medical Association-supported movement in Congress to pass tort "reform" laws limiting the right of patients to bring malpractice lawsuits, your report illustrates many important issues.


No Headline
"They do what's called the Robin Hood principle -- they charge more to those who can pay in order to provide financial aid to needy students, rather than have empty seats or a monocultural student body." DAVID MERKOWITZ, of the American Council on Education, which represents 1,600 colleges.  [ B7:1. ]


Workers in Tiny Post Office Were Well Known to Community Residents
Ernie Spruill and Scotty Walensky were the men behind the window at the tiny, two-person postal station in Montclair, N.J., and everyone in the Watchung Plaza section of town knew them.
"Ernie was talking about taking it easy just the other morning," said Zack Bader, the owner of the Plaza Shoppe and Deli on Watchung Avenue, just 400 feet from the post office.
"I said to him, 'Ernie, you are looking good -- you are looking very fit.' And Ernie said, 'Got to stay in shape for my retirement.' "


In America; What Special Interest?
On Sunday more than 1,000 people, many of them children, rallied outside the Capitol in Washington to protest cuts in the school lunch program, which is just one of many excessive and cruel budget proposals the Republican majority in Congress is trying to hammer into law.
The theme of the rally was "Pick on Someone Your Own Size," which was another way of saying that the G.O.P. bully boys might consider spreading the budget-cutting pain around, rather than continuing their obscene offensive against the young, the poor, the crippled, the weak and the helpless.


4 Killed in Post Office Shooting
Four men were killed and a fifth critically wounded yesterday afternoon in a shooting at a small post office branch here.
The dead, tentatively identified by the Essex County Prosecutor as post office employees, were shot in what was apparently a botched after-hours robbery.
A relative of the wounded man said he was not a postal worker.
The gunman or gunmen escaped.
Page A1.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Mar. 17
Mar. 10
Mar. 18
1995
1995
1994
Gasoline production, daily
7.0
7.1
6.9
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.2
3.2
Gasoline stocks
218.3
221.8
222.7
Distillate stocks
120.1
119.9
102.3
Crude imports, daily
6.4
7.8
7.3
Product imports, daily
1.3
1.8
2.1
Crude stocks
325.6
326.0
341.2
Crude production, daily
6.6
6.6
6.7
Refinery utilization (%)
89.8
91.7
87.1
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Jay Inc. Is Chosen By Buick Dealers
The California Buick Dealers, an association of seven statewide dealer marketing groups that represent more than 130 Buick dealerships, said yesterday that it had selected the Los Angeles office of Jay Inc. to handle its account, with billings estimated at more than $12 million.
Most of the account was previously handled by Multi-Media Marketing Communications in Seal Beach, Calif.; Jordan Tamaraz Caruso Advertising in Chicago previously handled the San Diego marketing group.


Corrections
A picture caption on Friday about a State Senate hearing on corruption at the Javits Convention Center misidentified three people in some editions.
Standing at the left was Senator Thomas W. Libous, and next to him was Senator Nicholas A. Spano.
The woman at the rear was an unidentified aide, not Catherine M. Abate.


Increasingly, Those Paying Full Tuition Aid Poorer Peers
The Ivy League and a group of other leading colleges are using a record amount of revenue from tuition, which averages $19,110 this year, to subsidize scholarships for less affluent students.
Nearly 20 percent of students' tuition payments goes for financial aid, double the figure of 20 years ago.
The increase, experts say, is the result of shrinking government support for scholarships based on need, and of efforts by these institutions to diversify their student bodies.


Doctors Will Get More Immunity for Mistakes; Fearing to Act?
To the Editor:
Re "A Mistake, a Rare Prosecution, and a Doctor Is Headed for Jail" (front page, March 16): As the president of a medical public relations company that handles the ethical as well as treatment and procedural aspects of medicine, I am of two minds about your article.


Dismissal of Security Expert Adds Fuel to Internet Debate
Depending on your attitude toward Satan, a skilled computer security expert named Dan Farmer is either a genius or a menace.
Satan is a sophisticated software program, intended to find the security flaws in any computer system linked to the global Internet.
Mr.
Farmer helped create Satan and plans to begin distributing it free over the Internet early next month.
He sees its dissemination as a public service to computer administrators who want to identify the chinks in their security armor so they can fix them.


Bosnian Serbs Shell a Town And Steal Arms
Serbs shelled the northern Bosnian town of Tuzla today and stole weapons from United Nations peacekeeping troops near Sarajevo as Bosnia continued its slide toward a renewal of all-out war.
Chris Gunness, a spokesman for the United Nations forces here, said six shells had landed on Tuzla and 50 on a nearby airfield.


Collapse of Apartment Building in Harlem Kills 3
Three people were killed when a wall of an apartment building in Harlem collapsed yesterday morning.
The accident pitched sleepy residents to the ground as tons of debris rained down around them and left apartment floors and furniture dangling.
The six-story building, at 142 West 140th Street, had a long history of housing-code violations, many serious, city officials said.
But they said the building had no record of structural problems.


Scandal Is Infecting France, Sparing No Party
O.
J.
Simpson is not a household name in France.
Here, it is the trial of Bernard Tapie, a French Socialist politician, that has the country enthralled.
Mr.
Tapie, a former Urban Affairs Minister, is accused of fixing a match involving the Marseilles soccer club he owned in 1993.
More to the point, he is accused of lying to cover it up, a charge he hardly bothers to deny.


A Bad Team Brings Out the Worst in Nets
Terry Mills missed the game with a sore right foot.
Joe Dumars suffered a pulled groin muscle in the first half and did not return.
So the Pistons were down to Grant Hill and a smattering of extras.
For much of the season, the Nets have had an uninspiring habit of turning one team's misfortune into their own misery.
The Nets accomplished this in grand fashion again tonight, losing to the Detroit Pistons, 102-95, at the Palace of Auburn Hills in a game they desperately needed to win to stay in the playoff hunt.


At the Nation's Table: Winsted, Conn.; A Single-Screen Theater Becomes a Cinema Cafe
When Alan Nero and his former wife, Robin, bought the Strand Theater in Winsted, Conn., in 1985, they planned on turning it into a children's arcade.
But they realized there was little for the big kids in town to do: the dating crowd, the older folks and entertainment-starved parents.
So they leveled the floor of the theater, which was built in 1926; replaced the rows of seats with 75 tables, and turned it into the Gilson Cafe and Cinema.
The single-screen theater, a spare building with a simple candy counter and popcorn stand in the tiny lobby, is named for Warren Gilson, a master projectionist who taught Mr.
Nero everything he knows about running a movie theater. (In a story straight from the movies, Mr. Gilson had fallen in love with the ticket-seller at the Strand and ended up retiring in Winsted.)


With Oxtail Stew, Using Your Fingers Is Perfectly All Right
OXTAIL makes delicious soups and stews.
Although nearly 50 percent of its weight is bone, the small amount of gelatinous meat surrounding each piece is so rich, moist and flavorful that it is worth the effort required to extricate it from the bones.
This is definitely a dish to enjoy in a casual setting, since the best way to eat oxtail is to hold the bones in your fingers and chew on them until every particle of meat has been consumed.
Oxtail is never exorbitantly priced. I bought six to seven ounces a person for my stew.


World Trade Choice Draws Modest Praise Of U.S. Aides
Accepting the Clinton Administration's reluctant endorsement of his candidacy to be the first head of the World Trade Organization, Renato Ruggiero declared today that "the past is the past" and said he and the American officials who once opposed him had now had a "meeting of the minds."
Mr.
Ruggiero, who was once Italy's trade minister, spoke in Washington as the Administration formally declared that it would support his appointment at a meeting of the major trading nations scheduled later this week in Geneva.
The endorsement guarantees Mr.
Ruggiero the post, and places him at the head of the new worldwide grouping of 124 trading nations.


No Need to Be Elite to Love the Arts
To the Editor:
Charges of "elitism" in the fine arts given support by the National Endowment for the Arts are wrong when it comes to their audiences.
I am one of a number of social scientists who analyzed surveys of arts participation commissioned by the agency as part of the United States Census surveys in 1982 and 1992.


Republicans in Senate Seek Vote on Line-Item Veto Bill
Hoping to salvage another of their major legislative goals, Senate Republicans moved today to schedule a vote on legislation to give the President increased powers to block Congressional spending, but they ran into stepped-up Democratic resistance.
Democrats this afternoon introduced 33 amendments to the measure, which the majority leader, Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, suggested was a stalling tactic.
And Senator Robert C. Byrd, the West Virginia Democrat who led the successful floor fight against the balanced-budget amendment, mounted a fist-shaking, two-and-a-half-hour monologue on the Senate floor questioning the constitutionality of the measure, which would permit a President to veto specific items in a spending bill and certain items in tax legislation.


Education Consultant Faces Career Challenge as Philadelphia School Chief
David W. Hornbeck, one of the nation's leading education consultants, has sometimes been called a Dr.
Fix-It for ailing public schools.
Now he has set out to redesign one himself, choosing one of the country's most distressed school systems, Philadelphia.
"I got tired of telling people how to fix their schools," said Mr.
Hornbeck, the new Philadelphia schools superintendent, who earned his nickname by helping 20 states revamp their school systems and by serving on national education commissions.


Sex and Bank of England: Downfall for No. 2 Official
It is called the Old Lady of Threadneedle Street.
But for the last few days the Bank of England seems to have been located closer to Peyton Place.
Long a pillar of conservatism and rectitude, a place of stuffy offices populated by somber men in pinstripes, the central bank has been abuzz for the last two days over newspaper reports that Rupert Pennant-Rea, its highly regarded No. 2 official, carried on a passionate three-year extramarital affair with an American journalist.


The Multiple Talents Of a Chinese Marinade
IN this meal of warm steak with vegetables served over rice, the Chinese marinade does double duty: it adds flavor to the flank steak, and it goes on to season the vegetables.


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
From Bleak Anomie To Romance and Wit  'Class One-Acts' Festival Manhattan Class Company
The bleak world of pollution, addiction and anomie that unfolds in the first three entries in the Manhattan Class Company's annual "Class One-Acts" Festival gives way to high romance, literate wit, giddy Old World fantasy and unexpected modern love in the captivating "Sweet Talk," which closes a rewarding evening at the company's home in Chelsea, at 120 West 28th Street.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Magic Routs Suns  Shaquille O'Neal and Anfernee Hardaway each scored 26 points as the Orlando Magic beat the visiting Phoenix Suns, 126-102, last night in a showdown between the teams with the best records in the National Basketball Association.
The triumph stopped a three-game losing streak -- Orlando's longest this season -- and improved the Magic's Eastern Conference-leading record to 49-17, a half-game better than the Suns' Western Conference-best 49-18.
Charles Barkley, who sat out the fourth quarter, led Phoenix with 23 points and 11 rebounds. (AP) HEAT 97, PACERS 95: Glen Rice made a layup with 1.8 seconds to play to give the Heat the victory over Indiana in Miami.
Rice led Miami with 28 points, including 7 in the final 2 minutes 14 seconds.
Rik Smits had 30 points for Indiana. (AP)


We Can't Stop the Fight to Contain TB Now
To the Editor:
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's report on the record drop in tuberculosis cases in New York City shows that we are making great progress in our fight against the disease (news article, March 14).
The good news may turn to bad if the Newt Gingrich-controlled Congress continues down its path and guts the TB Prevention and Control Act.


A Showcase for Percussion's Power and Rhythm
To celebrate its 20th anniversary, the New Music Consort is presenting three concerts this week.
The first, on Monday evening at the Manhattan School of Music, was a percussion spectacular performed by the Pulse Percussion Ensemble, a subsidiary of the Consort.
Actually, the Pulse group had its own celebration in mind: it dedicated the concert to Raymond DesRoches, an influential new-music percussionist and teacher who was on hand to receive a plaque and to muse at some length about the happy state of contemporary percussion-playing.
The performance gave a listener no reason to challenge his assessment.
Certainly the work that closed the program, Charles Wuorinen's Percussion Quartet (1994), showed that no amount of textural and rhythmic intricacy is beyond the grasp of this ensemble's young players.
Mr.
Wuorinen's score is interestingly compressed: in any handful of bars there is a great deal of action and variety.
The second of the work's two movements presents an attractive, tactile and almost melodic facade beneath which an insistent rhythmic counterpoint drives the work forward.


Kmart Chief, Under Siege, Resigns Post
Joseph E. Antonini resigned yesterday as president and chief executive of the Kmart Corporation, bowing to pressure from shareholders and from a board that could no longer offer him its undivided support.
Given Kmart's poor performance in recent years, Mr.
Antonini has for some time been considered vulnerable to a board room coup.
But the suddenness of his resignation, which was effective immediately, took the retail community by surprise.


The $20 Million Question
The entire drama of Lee Bass's generous $20 million gift to Yale for a program in Western civilization, Yale's administrative fumble, Mr.
Bass's subsequent request that the money be returned and Yale's accession to that request is a drama poorly understood.
As one who believes that the great works of Western literature, philosophy, history and art are among the most wonderful things humans have ever created, I think that a truly distinctive program in Western civilization would have been a genuine contribution.
But the sorry tale of why this program never came to be bears little relation to what I have read in the press.
First, political correctness played no role in the delay in setting up the program.
Of course, there are a few professors whose quotes do fit a certain caricature, but the idea that political correctness has taken over the faculty is absurd.
Conspiracy theories are fascinating but the reason for the delay is obvious and banal: Benno Schmidt's abrupt resignation as president caused administrative chaos from which the university is only now recovering.


Study Finds Chance of Predicting Alzheimer's
A preliminary study has found that it may be possible to use brain scans to see signs of mental deterioration in people who are developing Alzheimer's disease even though their symptoms will not become apparent for years.
The study, by Dr.
Gary W. Small of the University of California at Los Angeles School of Medicine, Dr.
Allen D. Roses of the Duke University School of Medicine and their colleagues, compared positron emission tomography, or PET, scans of the brains of 12 people at high risk of developing Alzheimer's disease with scans of 19 people whose risk was much lower.
The subjects were in their 50's or older.


Natural Wonders reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


GREAT COOKS: George Germon &amp; Johanne Killeen; In Sync: One Couple, Two Kitchens
LOOK at these guys!" exclaimed George Germon, holding a crate of fidgety, fist-size ocean crabs as shiny and red as a clown's nose. "I think I'll take the meat out of these for a pasta; we can use the cooking liquids for sauce."
"And you'll make a great big mess doing it, too," Johanne Killeen, his wife and partner, added playfully.
The two, who have worked together for more than 15 years, own Al Forno, a northern Italian restaurant in Providence, R.I., that has garnered a national reputation for its lusty roasted meats and vegetables, grilled pizzas and herbal pastas.


DEATH IN THE POST OFFICE: 4 Shot Dead in New Jersey Post Office; Fear Walks In, and a Suburb Bolts Doors
The people who live near the post office where four men were shot to death this afternoon are not accustomed to bolting their doors and feeling imprisoned in their homes.
Rarely if ever do they yank their children from streets that are typically trafficked by a steady parade of mini-vans and luxury sedans.
But this evening was different.
As the authorities pursued suspects in the slayings, police officers went house to house in a tense search that comforted some, frightened others and forced many to question long-held beliefs about their security in this prosperous suburb.
If a quaint cubbyhole of a post office in Montclair becomes a target, then is anywhere safe?


Misguided Sanctions
Twenty-one years ago, when Arab oil exporting countries boycotted sales to the United States, Israel and the Netherlands, America helped create the International Energy Agency, largely to prevent the oil weapon from being brandished against oil-consuming countries.
That was good economics and wise foreign policy.
It was also good for American business.
Today, in the aftermath of President Clinton's executive order barring Conoco from going ahead with a $1 billion contract to develop an Iranian oilfield, the U.S. finds itself the leading exponent and practitioner of the oil weapon.
This is not only bad for business, it is silly economics and makes for a counterproductive foreign policy.


Corrections
An article by The Associated Press in some editions in Science Times yesterday about a blood test for prostate cancer referred imprecisely to the outcome when cancer spreads from the prostate gland.
Once the cancer spreads, it is incurable, but it often grows slowly and many sufferers die of other causes.


William Hogan, 64, Of Holy Cross Order
The Rev.
William Francis Hogan, procurator general of the Roman Catholic Congregation of Holy Cross, died last Wednesday at Salvator Mundi Hospital in Rome.
He was 64.
He suffered a brief illness, said a spokesman for the Robert J. Kane Funeral Home in South Easton, Mass.


Outcry Mounts In Philippines Over Hanging
President Fidel V. Ramos appealed to the nation today for "sanity and sobriety" as outraged Filipinos stepped up protests across the country over the execution last week of a Filipino maid in Singapore.
The protests have alarmed the Singapore Government, which today issued a formal protest over the burning of its flags here.
Singapore has also urged its citizens to avoid travel to the Philippines.


New York, Signing Off, to Sell Its Radio and TV Stations
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani announced yesterday that New York City would end more than 70 years of municipal broadcasting by selling the license of its public television station on the open market and turning over its two radio stations to a nonprofit foundation.
Mr.
Guiliani said the city would sell -- for a potential $65 million to $75 million -- the commercial television license for WNYC, Channel 31, which now offers a broad mix of news, cultural, foreign and documentary programs, as well as old movies.
The city will seek a private buyer over the next few months.


Catherines Stores (CATH,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a front-page article yesterday about plans for cuts in Federal spending misattributed a statement that senators on the Finance Committee had agreed to postpone tax reductions that might increase the Federal debt.
The speaker was the committee chairman, Senator Bob Packwood of Oregon, not Secretary of the Treasury Robert E. Rubin.


L.I.R.R. Victims Call for Life Sentence
In a daylong court hearing that became a virtual memorial service for the six people killed on a Long Island Rail Road train in 1993, victims and survivors today urged a judge to send Colin Ferguson to prison for the rest of his life.
The victims, many of them in tears, spoke one by one in advance of Mr.
Ferguson's sentencing, which is scheduled for Wednesday.


Year's Effort by 5-Nation Group Accomplishes Little in Bosnia
With great fanfare last spring, the United States, Russia, France, Britain and Germany formed the so-called contact group, confident that their collective diplomatic might would enable them to press Bosnia's warring factions to make peace.
A year has passed, and not only does peace in Bosnia seem as elusive as ever, but many diplomats also say the contact group is on the brink of falling apart.
Nowadays, the five major powers seem to spend more energy quarreling among themselves about Bosnia than exerting pressure on the Muslims, Serbs and Croats.


A Mother Learns to Live With Grief
AFTER she drops off Kayla, the youngest of her four living children, at nursery school tomorrow, Maria Santana plans to go to the small Bronx park where her son Robert Robles was shot to death a year ago when he was 16.
She will put down some flowers and then she will visit his grave.
If she has the strength, she will also keep her appointment with the therapist she has been seeing in unfulfilled hopes of easing her pain.
"Sometimes, I forget Robert is dead," said Mrs.
Santana, 39, in her apartment on East 138th Street.
"I'll be sitting here by the window, and I'll think, any minute he'll be home. Then, I'll remember what happened on March 23, 1994."


4 Killed in Post Office Shooting
Four men were killed and a fifth critically wounded yesterday afternoon in a shooting at a small post office branch here.
The dead, tentatively identified by the Essex County Prosecutor as post office employees, were shot in what was apparently a botched after-hours robbery.
A relative of the wounded man said he was not a postal worker.
The gunman or gunmen escaped.
Page A1.


Charges for a Police Officer
A veteran Newark police officer was indicted yesterday on charges that he trafficked in stolen property at a store that he owned in downtown Newark.
The officer, Odell Fields, 59, is accused of repeatedly deserting his post in a police booth at the intersection of Market and Broad Streets to go work nearby in the store, Market Street Gold Exchange.
At the store, Mr.
Fields and his partner, Mollie Chavis, 49, bought and sold stolen property from municipalities around northern New Jersey, the authorities charged.
DAVID STOUT


Gen. James Howard, 81, Dies; Medal Winner in Aerial Combat
Brig.
Gen.
James H. Howard, the only fighter pilot to win the Medal of Honor in aerial combat over Europe in World War II, died on Saturday at the Veterans Administration Medical Center at Bay Pines, Fla.
He was 81 and lived in Belleair Bluffs, Fla.
He had suffered a long illness, his family said.


The Governor Breaks a Promise
In a fiscally expedient flipflop, Gov.
George Pataki of New York now proposes to reverse a state mental health policy that he supported just 15 months ago.
He would renege on a promise to put more resources into community treatment programs as some of the state's expensive and outmoded psychiatric hospitals are phased out.
Instead he would close hospitals but slash funding for local programs, leaving mental patients even worse off.


No Heroics, Low Hopes, Happy to Break Even
With his scraggly beard, long legs and intermittent grin, Tom Petty looked like a cagy young geezer at Madison Square Garden on Monday night, someone who has been cheerfully holed up in his own private citadel.
The 41-year-old Mr.
Petty and his band, the Heartbreakers, have persisted for two decades, barely budging from folk-rock, but regularly ascending the pop charts.
Although Mr.
Petty's tone is calm and the tempos rarely rush, the music is at home in arenas.
Every so often, Mr.
Petty would walk out to the lip of the stage to draw extra cheers, or hold his guitar aloft in triumph.


New Search for Rights Chief
Attorney General Deborah Poritz said yesterday that she would immediately begin a new search for a Civil Rights Division chief.
Her first nominee, Brenda Smith, said Monday that she did not want the job because of opposition from Hispanic groups.
The Attorney General said she was saddened by Ms.
Smith's decision, just one day before she would have been confirmed by the New Jersey Civil Rights Commission.
Ms.
Poritz promised an open process to select a new director, but she also said she had made a good choice in Ms.
Smith, who heads the Somerset County Public Defender's office and is black.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  JAPANESE SECT RAIDED  More than 2,500 policemen all over Japan raided offices of a religious sect suspected of having used the kind of nerve gas used in the attack on the Tokyo subway system.
A1  SUSPECT GROUP OBJECTS  The sect raided by the Japanese police accused the Government of staging the terrorist attack on the subway system with sarin gas as a way of framing it.
A10


Queens Woman Is Found Guilty Of Killing 2 Priests in Car Crash
A Queens woman was convicted yesterday of killing two high-ranking Greek Orthodox priests when she crashed into their car after smoking a hallucinogen.
The woman, Lisa Bongiorno, 29, of Maspeth was found guilty of two counts of vehicular manslaughter after a jury deliberated for six hours in State Supreme Court in Queens.
Ms.
Bongiorno, who faces up to seven years in prison, was cleared of even more serious charges -- second-degree murder and manslaughter.


Conservatives Revive Bill on Protecting Flag
With new-found confidence, some of the staunchest conservatives on Capitol Hill today reintroduced a proposal to amend the Constitution to protect the American flag from desecration and said they expected the measure to pass.
A similar effort failed five years ago, but the measure now enjoys broader bipartisan support, including that of some Senate Democrats known for their more liberal stances.
Among them is Dianne Feinstein of California, who was not in the Senate when the measure was first considered.


Justices Restrict Government Appeals on Behalf of Individuals
The Supreme Court ruled today that Federal agencies cannot bring appeals on behalf of people whose interests they represent unless explicitly granted the authority to do so by Congress.
The 9-to-0 decision rejected an argument by the Department of Labor that the public interest in insuring adequate compensation for disabled maritime workers gave the department standing to bring appeals on behalf of injured workers who chose not to pursue their own cases.


Japanese Police Raid the Offices Of a Sect Linked to Poison Gas
More than 2,500 police officers all over Japan this morning raided offices of a religious sect that has been linked indirectly to the kind of nerve gas used in the attack on the Tokyo subway system.
The police taking part in the raids found dozens of bottles of acetonitrile, a solvent for the gas used in the terrorist attack, the Kyodo News Agency reported.
The police also found the solvent at the scene of the subway attack.


Book Notes
A Star Is Born
Before Aldrich Ames was uncovered as a Russian spy last year, he was considered as boring and inconspicuous as bureaucrats come.
Mr.
Ames, a C.I.A. officer, was by all accounts, mediocre, plodding and generally unattractive.
He is still thought of as mediocre, plodding and unattractive, but as a book subject Mr.
Ames has become quite the rage.
This month, "Sellout: Aldrich Ames and the Corruption of the C.I.A.," by James Adams, popped up in bookstores, the first of at least five new books on Mr.
Ames and the Central Intelligence Agency.
Consequently, publishers, agents and authors, irked that others had the same clever idea, have been scrambling for earlier publication dates and other ways to position their respective books as the most interesting of the lot.


Pep Boys--Manny, Moe &amp; Jack (PBY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Continental Homes Holding Corp.(CON,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


DEATH IN THE POST OFFICE: 4 Shot Dead in New Jersey Post Office; Wide Manhunt but Motive Is Not Clear
Four men were killed and a fifth critically wounded yesterday afternoon as a shooting in a Montclair, N.J., post office turned a quiet suburban setting into a bloody nightmare.
The police went door to door in the Montclair neighborhood seeking leads and searching for the gunman or gunmen in what the authorities theorized was a botched robbery.


Butter Bites Back
AMERICA is rediscovering butter, and butter impostors are on the run.
"Annual per capita consumption of butter in the United States was 4.2 pounds in 1994, the highest it's been since 1977," said Charles Timpko, the director of market research for Dairy Management, a trade group with headquarters in Rosemont, Ill.
At the turn of the century, he said, it was close to 18 pounds a person.


IN PERFORMANCE: DANCE
The Inventiveness of Tap With an Intellectual Side  Manhattan Tap Alice Tully Hall
Manhattan Tap, which performed on Saturday night, is devoted to the proposition that tap-dancing is music made visual, performed by dancing musicians.
The seven-member group usually appears with an onstage jazz ensemble, here the Hardbop Trio.
Much of what they dance is choreographed, although there were spots where individuals could jump into brief improvisation and back.


Plea in Electrified Van Case
Last month, after repeated break-ins to his van, Jose Lopez of North Bergen wired the vehicle to deliver an electric shock to any intruder.
One night, Mr.
Lopez left a van window open.
It rained, and soon the van was emitting strange electrical noises -- so strange that a police bomb squad was summoned from Jersey City.


Kingdom Vaults One Last Hurdle to Win
Roger Kingdom ran the 110-meter hurdles in 13.39 seconds today, took a victory lap at the Pan American Games and spoke buoyantly about his comeback hopes for a third Olympic gold medal.
An hour and a half later, he was disqualified for deliberately knocking over a hurdle.


Packers Get Ingram From the Dolphins
The Green Bay Packers acquired receiver MARK INGRAM from the Miami Dolphins yesterday in a trade that sent their fourth-round pick in this year's draft to Miami.
The Green Bay Press-Gazette reported that signing the 29-year-old Ingram will cost the Packers $720,000 against their $36.5 million salary cap.


Review/Fashion; Yves Saint Laurent's Shocking New Color: Black
In a season when the runways of Paris have been exploding with color, Yves Saint Laurent, the supreme colorist, took a cue from the way so many fashionable women dress: he went for black.
His show this morning was the last major one of the fall season here, and it left the audience feeling the master was in control.
Against a flaming orange and pink backdrop, Saint Laurent sent out scores of black suits and dresses for day and evening, leavened with charcoal gray and an occasional shot of red or purple.
The designer, who has been known to mix three unexpected colors in one outfit, managed to breathe new life into his familiar shapes by toning down his palette.


INSIDE
Kmart's Chief Is Out
Kmart's chief executive resigned under pressure from shareholders and the board.
Despite Kmart's poor financial showing, the move surprised the retail industry.
Page D1.
Fishing Disaster Aid Sought
Massachusetts wants President Clinton to declare the depletion of Atlantic fishing banks a natural disaster, although most studies have blamed overfishing.
Page A13.
Aid for College Students
The Ivy League and other colleges use nearly 20 percent of the money from tuition, which averages $19,110, to subsidize scholarships for less affluent students.
Page B7.
Kiwi Air's Unhappy Family
What caused the egalitarian vision at Kiwi Air Lines to dim?
The answer highlights the potential pitfalls of employee ownership.
Page D1.
Shooting Victims Remember
In court before Colin Ferguson's sentencing in the commuter rail deaths, Kevin McCarthy was consoled by his mother, Carolyn.
Page B5.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Pepsico puts on its skates to participate in the 'sponsor friendly' sport of roller hockey.
PURISTS who disdain the growing appeal of nontraditional organized sports like professional beach volleyball and indoor lacrosse are no doubt grumbling about a fledging league for roller hockey, a fast-moving, high-scoring game modeled after ice hockey and played on Rollerblades and other in-line skates.
But at a time when mainstays like organized baseball no longer seem particularly organized, America's ardent interest in athletic competition -- fueled by equally ardent interests among marketers to sponsor sports and television to cover them -- means that advertisers will soon be bringing you a second season of roller hockey played by teams including the Buffalo Stampede, Chicago Cheetahs, New Jersey Rockin Rollers and Sacramento River Rats.


Furon Co.(FCBN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Officer Is Charged In Deadly Argument
In a case that began with an errant football toss and ended with a man dead, a police officer has been charged with criminally negligent homicide in the death of a Florida man in a confrontation in the Bronx.


Lewis-Butler Set
LENNOX LEWIS, the former World Boxing Council heavyweight champion, said yesterday that he would fight the No. 2 contender, LIONEL BUTLER, at Arco Arena in Sacramento, Calif., on May 13.
The London-based Lewis, 25-1 with 21 knockouts, is the top-ranked contender in the W.B.C.
His bout with the Miami-based Butler, 22-10-1, is a title elimination with the winner to face the W.B.C. champion, OLIVER McCALL, by September.


America   Sponsors Staying on Board
The upheaval over adding a male crew member to Mighty Mary's formerly all-female America's Cup crew appears to have settled into business as usual.
Although some of the America
syndicate sponsors are looking more closely at their commitment to the team's effort, only one firm said today that it had taken measures to reflect the change in the makeup of the crew.
Racing was called off today on both the defenders' and challengers' courses because of a storm.
But discussion of the Mighty Mary's crew change continued unabated.


In a Gambler's World, Oscar Season Is Time To Place Another Bet
Tom Hanks can start making room on the shelf now.
Jessica Lange holds a slight edge over Jodie Foster.
And "Forrest Gump" looks like a solid favorite, but there's a perceptible groundswell of support for "The Shawshank Redemption."
No one will know how the members of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences have voted on the Oscars until the results are announced on Monday, but Bally's casino in Las Vegas, Nev., has put out its annual Oscar odds line, and Britain's betting shops are taking money on the major categories.


Mismanagement Is Found In Youth Agency Grants
Officials of New York City's embattled Department of Youth Services seriously mismanaged the awarding of city contracts to nonprofit agencies last year, an independent review commissioned by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani concludes.
The review, which was released yesterday, found that department officials repeatedly ignored city contracting rules, changed their own procedures without telling applicants for municipal contracts and generally bungled the awarding of contracts to nonprofit and community groups that provide programs for young people.


Here's One Fight That Certainly Won't Air on ESPN
The Phil Simms-ESPN donnybrook continued yesterday as the former Giant quarterback's agent said ESPN's negotiating tactics forced Simms into NBC's embrace.
Simms, who never signed his two-year ESPN contract, signed a three-year contract with NBC on Sunday worth at least $400,000 a year.
"ESPN is acting like a spurned woman," said David Fishof, Simms's agent, who said angry comments by Steve Bornstein, ESPN's president, about Simms's allegedly bad-faith behavior, "can't ruin Phil Simms's reputation."


Yves Saint Laurent, colorist supreme, surprises them with . . . black: C10.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Bringing Ives's Notes To Life With Ives's Voice  American Festival of Microtonal Music New York University Theater
It was long assumed that Ives's "Universe" Symphony, an attempt to depict in sound the chaos of the cosmos, amounted to little more than a daydream in the composer's aging mind.
But the sketches for what would have been Ives's fifth symphony are actually quite extensive, although far from coherent.
A performing version by Larry Austin was heard at the University of Cincinnati last year and recorded by Centaur Records.
Johnny Reinhard, a composer and wind player specializing in microtonal music, has now prepared a second version.
He announced his findings at the American Festival of Microtonal Music on Saturday night, and Joshua Pierce played an excerpt at the piano.


Thinkers and Doers on the Federal Bench
To the Editor:
Re "Mediocrity on the Bench" (Op-Ed, March 17): Jeffrey Rosen's argument that more high-powered liberal scholars should be appointed to the Federal bench to counteract the conservative scholar-jurists typifies the arrogance of those who view intellectual credentials as the sole measure of potential judicial distinction.


Switching to Store Brands
To The Living Section:
My wife and I loved Marian Burros's article about store brands  [ "Eating Well," March 15 ] .
For at least two years, we have been using "house brands," as we call them, not only in cereals, but also in pastas, soups, canned fruits and beans.
Just about all of them have proven equal to their advertised counterparts, so we were not surprised by your findings in the taste tests.


Fears of Link to Rev. Moon Slow a Celibacy Program
Months ago, when Sister Marjorie McGregor, Janet Gilroy and Joanne Fruhauf learned about a slide presentation on AIDS that stressed teen-age celibacy, they were eager to promote it.
The three women, who lead groups on Long Island that encourage family values and premarital celibacy, worked hard at distributing the presentation, "Free Teens, USA." They championed the show's creators, Richard A. Panzer and Dr.
William L. Bergman, at dozens of public and private schools, churches and doctors' offices on Long Island and in Brooklyn.


At the Nation's Table: Chicago; A Tribute to Elvis Over Sunday Breakfast
Elvis sightings are up in Chicago.
Or at least they are on Sundays, when Vinyl, a restaurant and nightclub in Clybourn Corridor, the city's evolving restaurant row west of Lincoln Park, has Breakfast With Elvis, a tongue-in-cheek tribute to the music, movies and palate of the King.
Cal Fortis, a k a Calvis, the owner of Vinyl, admits to a fascination with diners and the 1950's scene, but he credits his late partner, Nunzio Fresta, with suggesting the emphasis on Elvis Presley.
"Nunzio was a real fan," Mr.
Fortis said.
"He wanted to do an all-Elvis diner called Breakfast With Elvis." When Mr.
Fortis and his current partner, Ken Smith, decided to offer Sunday brunch at Vinyl, "the Elvis thing seemed like a natural," Mr.
Fortis said.


Loral Plans to Pay $800 Million In Deal for Unisys Military Units
While most military contractors are looking for ways to scale back in the face of spending cuts at the Pentagon, the Loral Corporation is avidly pursuing growth.
Yesterday, in the latest in a string of acquisitions during the last decade, Loral agreed to buy the military and aerospace operations of the Unisys Corporation for $800 million in cash, beating bids by the Hughes Aircraft Corporation and the Raytheon Company.
Loral, based in New York, said the deal would immediately lift its earnings by 20 cents a share and improve its capabilities in areas like radar, satellite communications and military information systems.
The sale will allow Unisys to leave the military industry with a large amount of cash to spend on its core computer businesses.


Victorians Valued Families and Soap
To the Editor:
Re "If Gingrich Only Knew About Victoria's Secret" (Week in Review, March 19):


Rappin' in the Rain


Pataki Vents Anger Over Stalling of Budget Talks
There is probably no better symbol of just how badly budget talks are going between Gov.
George E. Pataki and Democratic legislative leaders than the stress-relief ball that Mr.
Pataki demolished on Monday night.
The ball, which had been filled with sand, became the victim of an uncharacteristic explosion of rage by Mr.
Pataki after a heated negotiating session with Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, a Manhattan Democrat.


Relatives Speak on Ferguson's Fate
Carolyn McCarthy, whose husband, Dennis, was killed and whose son, Kevin, was wounded.
Colin Ferguson, I will give you no hatred.
I will give you none of my rage.
You are an evil person, so you are not worthy of my time or thoughts.
You are not worthy of my energy.


Learning How to Like Yourself Even if You Can't Lose Weight
GIVEN the difficulty of losing weight, psychotherapists have come up with a treatment aimed at easing the psychological suffering that comes with being overweight.
The therapy is not meant to discourage people from trying to lose weight, nor to deny the very real increased health risks that added pounds bring.
Instead it seeks to ease emotional suffering.
But, the results show, once overweight people get over the acute self-consciousness that keeps them, say, from exercising in public, they are often better able to keep to their fitness regime.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; Whitman's Budget Cuts Assailed
Lawmakers heard more than two dozen voices yesterday all afraid that Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's budget plans mean bad news for something they care about.


It Can Happen Here -- and Did
Can it happen here?
Are New York subway riders vulnerable to an attack with sarin, the nerve gas that killed 10 and injured 5,500 in Tokyo?
Yes, of course.
In fact, in 1966 the Army showed that the subway system was vulnerable to attacks with chemical and biological agents.


L.I.R.R. Killer Gets 200 Years


Bilingual Education in New York No Longer Serves Students
To the Editor:
A Brazilian student I know recently found himself in a Spanish bilingual program because of the sound of his last name and his score on the language assessment battery.
He had to fight his way out by proving to his teachers that he did not speak Spanish.
Most Hispanic students do not have that option.


Follower Rules Out Suicide
The only police officers to show up yesterday at the midtown Manhattan office of the Aum Shinrikyo sect appeared to be three undercover men who said they came to look into a complaint about reporters pounding on its red metal door and disturbing the people inside.
This week the police in Japan cast Aum Shinrikyo into the international spotlight, linking the sect, whose name means "teaching of the truth," to the kind of nerve gas used in the attack on the Tokyo subway system.
Some 2,500 Japanese police officers conducted raids on the sect's quarters all over that country and arrested some of its members.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; Homeless Man Killed by Train
A homeless man was killed when he leapt in front of a commuter train as it entered the station here yesterday morning.
The police identified the victim as Felix Beretta, 19, and said he had been living in the Fort Monmouth Homeless Shelter in Oceanport.


Essay; Happy V-E Day, Boris
The accommodationists in charge of Clinton foreign policy put on a show of internal agonizing about whether to celebrate the golden anniversary of V-E Day in Moscow.
A visit by a U.S.
President is eagerly sought by foreign leaders.
President Nixon bombed Haiphong and mined its harbor confident that Leonid Brezhnev would not let that action interfere with an upcoming Moscow summit.
Contrary to the dire predictions of dovish commentators, Nixon's provocative escalation did not stop the Moscow meeting.


A Flight Hazard Neglected
Only after 68 people died in the crash of a commuter airliner in Indiana last October did the Federal Aviation Administration finally see it was time to stiffen its 30-year-old standards for flying in icy conditions.
It is impossible to excuse the agency's -- and the manufacturer's -- failure to detect and correct the problem much earlier.
It no doubt comes as a shock to most travelers to find that the F.A.A. requires manufacturers to design planes to fly through tiny water droplets in clouds, but not through the larger droplets of freezing drizzle or freezing rain.
The rationale is that experience indicated that freezing rain was not a serious hazard.
Big jets flying above the weather do not encounter the larger droplets.
At lower altitudes, conditions that create such droplets can be forecast, and pilots warned to avoid them.


CHRONICLE
He wasn't looking for a job and the station wasn't looking for someone with his qualifications, but somehow they proved irresistible to each other.
So, VAN GORDON SAUTER, a former president of CBS News who has been working as a consultant to the Fox network, is to become president and general manager of public television station KVIE in Sacramento, Calif., on May 1.


CHRONICLE
Just what would bring together a group of lawyers that includes ROY BLACK, defense counsel for William Kennedy Smith; LINDA FAIRSTEIN, who prosecuted the Robert Chambers murder case; IRA D. LONDON, defense counsel for Joel Steinberg in his trial for the beating death of Lisa Steinberg; ERIC NAIBURG, defense counsel for Amy Fisher, and KENNETH GRIBETZ, who prosecuted Kathy Boudin in the Brink's robbery case?
The answer is a daylong symposium called "Media Coverage of Criminal Trials: Are Restrictions Necessary?" today at Hofstra University in Hempstead, L.I.


Low Note for the Knicks As They Head for West
Still hampered by problems both on and off the court, the Knicks prepared for a three-game road trip that could be rocky if their play does not improve.
Whatever momentum the Knicks had was halted by Tuesday's 78-69 home loss to the Charlotte Hornets.
A 69 is a fine score for a golfer, but not for a professional basketball team.
And New York must play at least two more games without Anthony Mason, the suspended forward whose status will be re-evaluated by the Knicks after Saturday's game against the Clippers in Los Angeles.


United Way Defendants Decline to Call Witnesses
In a surprise move, defense lawyers for William Aramony, the former president of United Way of America, who is on trial for fraud, money laundering and tax evasion, chose not to present any witnesses in his defense.
The Government has charged that Mr.
Aramony, who is 67, and two former aides, Thomas J. Merlo, 64, and Stephen J. Paulachak, 49, had channeled money meant for charity into their own pockets.
It also charged a for-profit company spun off from United Way of America, Partnership Umbrella Inc., with being part of the fraud.


Stylish Lamps, Inside and Out
BACK in the 1980's, when chintz was king, no room was complete without an English-style decalcomania lamp, the inside of its glass body decorated with botanical cutouts.
Many of the finest were made by Sheila Potter, whose mother taught her the secrets of the 18th-century craft, which is related to decoupage but requires more skill.
"It rains a lot in Ireland, so indoor projects came in handy," said Mrs.
Potter, who grew up on a horse farm in County Kildare.


Dreamworks and Microsoft in Multimedia Venture
Dreamworks SKG and the Microsoft Corporation said yesterday that they would form a software company to produce interactive and multimedia entertainment products.
Separately, William H. Gates, chairman of Microsoft, said his company would become a minority investor in Dreamworks; he did not disclose the amount of the investment.
On Sunday, Paul G. Allen, a co-founder of Microsoft, agreed to make an equity investment of $500 million in Dreamworks, which is raising a total of $900 million from outside investors.


For 4 Slain Postal Workers and Customers, Mourning With Memories
For commuters, the Watchung Plaza post office is a convenience -- they can whisk in and out, avoiding the snaking lines of the larger main office.
And as Montclair's population has grown, many residents found a soothing sense of connection in the tiny post office, in large part because of the two workers shot to death there on Tuesday afternoon.
People working or doing errands today at Watchung Plaza described the two, Ernest Spruill, 56, and Scott Walensky, 42, as sweet-tempered men who never lost patience with harried customers.
Lifelong residents and newcomers alike said the two men always welcomed them, and the post office on Fairfield Street offered a rare chance to meet up with fellow townspeople.


U.S. TRADE DEFICIT SOARS TO RECORD
In an ominous sign for the economy and the Clinton Administration, the nation's trade deficit soared by two-thirds in January to a record $12.23 billion.
There was strong evidence that the United States' usual imbalance, caused largely by Asian nations that export far more to this country than they buy in return, was being worsened as Mexico, recently a major importer of American goods, plunged deeper into economic crisis.


An Encyclopedic Englishman With a Keen Vision of Opera
The profession of directing opera is a curious one, far from an exact science.
It is notoriously overrun by people who talk up a storm and drown out the music.
Jonathan Miller is a significant exception: he fires off words at dizzying speed, but he knows whereof he spiels.
A fully accredited physician and neuropsychologist, a prolific author and lecturer, a veteran of the "Beyond the Fringe" comedy troupe, this English polymath knows more than a little about everything.
He combines qualities that shouldn't be contained in one person: he is both a performer and a thinker.
"I don't approach opera with what the Germans would call a Concept," Mr.
Miller said last week after a rehearsal for his new production of "Pelleas et Melisande," which opens tonight at the Metropolitan Opera.
The director had been asked about his conception for "Pelleas," and he declined to deliver a glib sound bite in response.


Tenants Say Complaints Foretold Building's Collapse
Residents of the Harlem apartment house that partly collapsed Tuesday, killing three people, said it was rife with conditions that independent experts say could have signaled structural problems.
Some tenants even said they had alerted city housing inspectors, who frequently visited the building, to the potential warning signs.
But the inspectors from the Department of Housing Preservation and Development, who went to the building in response to complaints like leaking pipes and a lack of heat, apparently did not report any potential structural problems to the separate city agency responsible for insuring that buildings are fundamentally sound.


Beyond 'Losing Isaiah': Truth in Shades of Gray
IN the new film "Losing Isaiah," a black lawyer representing a black mother who has abandoned her infant son argues in court that the child should be taken from his white adoptive parents and returned to his birth mother, a former crack addict, because "black babies belong with black mothers."
He asks the adoptive mother, played by Jessica Lange, whether any bedtime stories she reads to her son, Isaiah, have black characters.
When she says the books contain characters of all colors, the lawyer retorts: "So who is this child to identify with? The yellow Muppet?"


Ignoring Cortines, Students Plan to Protest School Budget Cuts
Despite the Schools Chancellor's admonitions, students at the Bronx High School of Science gathered in small knots at lunch time in the huge, noisy cafeteria, quietly discussing transportation plans to get to City Hall tomorrow for a protest rally against state and city education budget cuts.
They referred to the rally as "the thing" so that their teachers would not overhear and try to stop them.
In a small room nearby, Ian Zaider, a slender young man who is president of the student government at Bronx High, was hunched over lists of student leaders he has contacted at other high schools.
Like the others, he was trying not to attract anyone's attention.
"There's a lot of politics involved," he explained, "and we have to be careful."


The Man With the Sharp Elbows
SWIFTY My Life and Good Times  By Irving Lazar Written in collaboration with Annette Tapert  Illustrated. 288 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $24.
The Hollywood agent Irving Paul (Swifty) Lazar didn't always resemble a near-sighted Mr.
Magoo wearing black-framed eyeglasses that looked as if they'd come out of a novelty shop minus the big rubber nose.
To judge from the early photographs in his posthumously published memoir, "Swifty: My Life and Good Times," Mr.
Lazar once had a full head of hair and appeared tough and determined.


Rail Gunman To Spend Life Behind Bars
A judge sentenced Colin Ferguson today to spend the rest of his life in prison for the murder of 6 people on the Long Island Rail Road and the attempted murder of 19 others.
Victims who survived the shootings and members of their families cheered and applauded as Judge Donald E. Belfi of Nassau County Court imposed the maximum sentence of 200 years to life, ending an emotional three-day sentencing hearing.


Senate Vote Near on Line-Item Veto Bill
The Senate's Republican and Democratic leaders reached a compromise today that virtually assured passage of legislation that would enhance the President's power to block spending by Congress.
After more than a day of negotiations, the majority leader, Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, and the minority leader, Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota, announced from the Senate floor at midafternoon that they had agreed to end debate on the line-item veto legislation by noon on Thursday.
That would allow the Senate to vote immediately on an amendment proposed by Mr.
Dole on Monday night, and then to conclude debate on the full bill.


Jesuits Redefine Their Role and Relationship With the Pope
The Jesuits ended their 34th General Congregation here this week by approving documents, in the works for more than 10 years, that are intended to reinterpret the order's founding charter for modern times.
They also issued a document espousing the cause of women's liberation that the Rev.
John O'Callaghan, a member of the order's governing council, said had come as a "surprise."


Lorne Michaels Vows To Stay With His Show
Angry at persistent critics of "Saturday Night Live" and at NBC executives for failing to come to his support, Lorne Michaels, the comedy show's creator and its executive producer for 15 years, says he fully intends to stay on the job next season and fix whatever is wrong.
"Other than my family, there's nothing that matters more to me than 'Saturday Night Live,' " Mr.
Michaels said on Tuesday night in an interview in his office on the 19th floor of NBC headquarters at 30 Rockefeller Plaza in Manhattan.


Inmate Beats Ex-Trooper Who Faked Prints
David L. Harding, a former state trooper whose admissions to faking fingerprint evidence touched off a scandal in the New York State Police, was assaulted in a prison visiting room on Monday by a fellow inmate who was a victim of Mr.
Harding's evidence tampering, prison officials said.
Mr.
Harding was talking with his wife when Timothy Vail, a convicted murderer, walked up to him, said, "You're the reason I'm here," and punched him in the head, said James Flateau, a spokesman for the State Corrections Department.


Turks Reported Likely to Keep Troops in Iraq for Weeks
The Turkish Army, which has poured some 35,000 troops and commandos into a huge swath of territory in northern Iraq to root out Kurdish rebels, will probably keep its forces in the area for the next few weeks, Western diplomats say.
The incursion, the largest Turkey has ever mounted in northern Iraq, is aimed at wiping out the rebel base camps used by the Kurdish Workers Party.
Turkish forces also hope to capture arms depots, dismantle logistical support systems and capture or kill many of the estimated 2,400 guerrillas who they say mount cross-border raids into Turkey from northern Iraq.


Kemper Rejects Bids For Insurance Unit
The Kemper Corporation has rejected takeover offers for its insurance businesses from the General Electric Company and SunAmerica Inc., people close to the companies said this week.
The bid by SunAmerica was more than $1 billion and was considered to be competitive with an offer by G.E., a person close to the talks said.
The Kemper board rejected the offers last week, this person said.


A Japanese Amalgam
"Genchou" ("Phantom Bird"), performed on Sunday night at La Mama, ranges wide in its inspiration.
Yumi Terayama, the choreographer of the full-evening dance and theater piece, has drawn her stories from sources as old as Kojiki, the most ancient written stories of Japan, to the current world of the Super Mario Brothers video games.
The result was hard to follow, but full of goofy charm.
Miss Terayama, who makes her American choreographic debut with "Genchou," is on the graduate dance faculty of the University of Tsukuba in Japan.
But "Genchou" is far from academic, mixing ballet, modern dance, Japanese traditional dance forms and a robotic bounce for the video section.
That section is the clearest, with a slight woman who looks like a cartoon gamin becoming overwhelmed by the game figures she manipulates.


CD-ROM Sales Propel Profit At Broderbund
Buoyed by surging sales of multimedia personal computers and continued demand for interactive CD-ROM titles, Broderbund Software Inc. reported today that its earnings more than doubled in its fiscal second quarter, far exceeding Wall Street analysts' expectations.
The analysts said Broderbund benefited disproportionately from the accelerating growth in multimedia software sales because of its strong brand name and the staying power of its most popular title, "Myst," a mystery-exploration game.


International Briefs; Wharf Stock Drops On Modest Earnings
Wharf Holdings, a Hong Kong company with interests in real estate, telecommunications, television, hotels and transportation, said yesterday that disappointing sales of a Hong Kong office complex crimped 1994 earnings.
The statement drove down the price of Wharf's shares.
They fell 3.5 percent after Wharf said 1994 net profit had risen 13.8 percent, half what analysts had forecast.
Some analysts said they might now reduce earnings forecasts for 1995.


International Briefs; In Brief
Knoll A.G., the pharmaceutical unit of BASF, signed a contract with Ivax Corp., Miami, to set up a generic pharmaceuticals venture in Europe.
The new company, Knoll-Norton G.m.b.H., is expected to begin operation in Germany and expand to other European countries.


Sports of The Times; If Tyson Returns To Rooney
THE old gym above the police station here in this Hudson Valley town is where Mike Tyson learned to box, where he studied under Cus D'Amato, where he trained under Kevin Rooney, where yellowed newspaper clippings filled the walls with his ascent to the world heavyweight title.
And if Tyson, who will be 29 on June 30, were to spurn Don King and return here after his prison release on Saturday, Kevin Rooney will be waiting.
"If he walked in, I'd talk to him first to see where his head was at," Rooney said.
"I think I could sense if he really wanted it. Fighters are notorious liars. Not liars liars, but they're always trying to con you. If he was trying to con me, I'd sense it. Cus had a great saying, 'No matter what a person says, what they do in the end is what they meant to do all along.' "


Bilingual Education in New York No Longer Serves Students; Goodbye, Budapest
To the Editor:
Re "Bilingual Schools Can Work" (Op-Ed, March 18): In defending bilingual education, Peter S. Temes tries to make a point by saying how difficult it would be for an English-speaking student to learn anything in a Hungarian school.


Living With Parkinson's
To The Home Section:
My wife, Marian, and I have just read Elizabeth Gehrman's article "Illness Renews a Father's Early Lessons" (Close to Home, March 9), about her and her father, who suffers from Parkinson's disease.
I have Parkinson's and we think Ms.
Gehrman needs support just as much as her father does.
It's readily available.


Market Place; Short-selling penny stocks can prove a far from simple move.
WHEN most people describe short-selling, they usually refer to shares that are borrowed and then sold.
If the life and death of Hanover Sterling, a penny stock firm, proves anything, it is that things are not that simple.
Hanover's collapse last month, after it tried and failed to support the price of shares it had underwritten, has shed light on some of today's more extreme Wild West tactics of stock trading.
And it raises questions about whether market rules of the National Association of Securities Dealers are simply ignored by many traders.


Japan Needs to Face Its Shameful Past
To the Editor:
"Japan Confronting Gruesome War Atrocity," your March 17 front-page article on Unit 731 of the Japanese Imperial Army, is a superb piece of reporting and a timely reminder that Japan has a great deal of ugly World War II history it has yet to confront.


Japanese Police Find Chemicals And Gas Masks at Sect's Offices
A police search of a religious sect's training compound on Wednesday turned up about two tons of chemicals, including some similar to those used in the nerve gas attack on the Tokyo subway system, the police said today.
There were also gas masks and other paraphernalia, they added.
The police also reported finding a magazine being prepared by the sect that warned that poison gas attacks or other calamities would kill 90 percent of the people living in major cities in the coming years and that the world would end by 1997.


C.I.A. Nominee Backed U.S. Arms in East Timor
To the Editor:
The nomination of Deputy Defense Secretary John M. Deutch as Director of Central Intelligence is not consistent with promoting human rights and democracy in the world.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Trade Deficit Soars, But the Markets Yawn  The trade deficit jumped 68 percent in January to a record $12.2 billion amid strong evidence that the imbalance -- commonly caused by Asian exports -- is being worsened by Mexico's economic crisis.
The gap with Mexico totaled $863 million, in contrast to a $19 million surplus in December, and it seems likely to worsen.
The severity of the deficit, a result of a sharp decline in exports and a jump in imports, took the Clinton Administration by surprise.
The White House is concerned that the trade figures could keep the dollar weak.
A1.


2 Executions In Illinois, Rarity There
The first double execution in Illinois in 43 years, and the first outside the South since the 1976 Supreme Court ruling that allowed reinstatement of the death penalty, was carried out by lethal injection at the Stateville Correctional Center near here early this morning.
As killers go, the two men put to death were "just a couple of average Joes," and so the carnival atmosphere that often accompanies the end of more notorious criminals was absent outside the prison's high walls.


A Father's Adventures in Enlightenment
I WAS the last person anyone expected to try meditation.
Driven, intense and impatient, I'd lived my life in a state of overdrive.
I had no interest in gurus, or spiritual awakening.
All I wanted was a way to slow down.


Aetna Is Seen Seeking Buyer For Aeltus Investment Unit
The Aetna Life and Casualty Company is seeking buyers for Aeltus Investment Management, a subsidiary in Hartford that manages $22 billion of stock, bond and real estate investments for several hundred pension funds, according to investment managers.
Aeltus could fetch from $100 million to $200 million, according to people familiar with the company.
The effort to sell the unit comes at a time when executives of Aetna, the insurance giant, are telling investors that the company may soon be able to estimate its costs for settling insurance claims arising from environmental pollution.
In the past the company said those claims were too complicated and fraught with uncertainty to estimate the costs.


Sale Planned For Mirabella After 6 Years Of Losses
Mirabella magazine was put up for sale yesterday by Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation, after spending six years trying unsuccessfully to break out of the red.
As news of the planned sale spread, people in the magazine industry speculated whether publications aimed at intelligent young women who love fashion but also want more substantive articles would always be doomed.


Furniture Defying Time
ON spring days when the thick curtain of winter is still drawn, when the sky and ice floes of the St.
Lawrence River are slate gray, you understand the collector Pierre Moussard when he says that the legacy of luminously colored French Canadian furniture comes down to a "question of latitude" -- and to the emotional deliverance to be found in a can of paint.
It was in this region around the St.
Lawrence, so somber and unrepentant in winter, that the habitants of New France began building furniture, carved furniture in dazzling coats of ocher, rust, aquamarine, red, yellow and blue that has only recently begun to be widely appreciated.


Chirac, the Old Neo-Gaullist, in the Lead
Jacques Chirac, the Mayor of Paris, who has run for the French presidency and lost twice, now looks set to win on his third attempt, unless every public opinion poll is wrong or some nasty surprise turns up before the runoff on May 7.
A month ago Mr.
Chirac surged past his fellow conservative, Prime Minister Edouard Balladur, to become the favorite to succeed President Francois Mitterrand, a Socialist, who has been in office 14 years.


Failed Truck-Bomb Plot Chills Israel-P.L.O. Autonomy Talks
The Israeli-Palestinian peace talks may have been pulled out of the deep freeze they long were in, but they are still caught in a big chill, deepened this week by an apparent plot by radicals in the Gaza Strip to blow up a booby-trapped truck in the heart of southern Israel.
It has become a pattern that almost every time peace negotiators seem poised to make progress, they are set back once more by a terrorist act -- a phenomenon publicly lamented in Gaza by Yasir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization.


An Obscure American Classic
TREND alert: French collectors have discovered the work of an obscure American architect, Samuel A. Marx (1885-1964).
He helped design the landmark 1939 May Company store in Los Angeles, and his furniture brought a Barbara Stanwyck swagger to the classicism of Jean-Michel Frank.
"The look is European, but the scale is gutsy and all-American," said Liz O'Brien of 41, a gallery where vintage Marx is now on view.
There is an ivory-lacquered desk for $24,500 and a pair of tassel-shaped marble lamps for $4,500 (shown at right).


Pell Finds a New Job
CHARLEY PELL, whose inability to find a job in football contributed to personal problems that led to a 1994 suicide attempt, has been hired to coach at Lake Region High School, which will open this fall in Eagle Lake, Fla.


CHRONICLE
MUTSUYO OMATU, a 29-year-old dancer from Japan, said her English was too limited to express her emotions.
"I never imagined that anyone would have a benefit for me," she said.
"I got much shock, but I am glad about it."


Transactions
Baseball  MLB PROPERTIES -- Named Don Gibson senior vice president of business affairs.
American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Named John Maroon director of public relations and Bill Stetka assistant director of public relations.
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Signed Steve Cook, Tom Reddington and Fred Diaz, infielders; Earl Hinson, pitcher; and Aaron Iatarola, outfielder, to minor-league contracts.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Signed Billy Ripken, infielder, to a minor-league contract.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Signed Jerrome Williams, outfielder, to a minor-league contract.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Signed Mike Pagliarulo, third baseman, to a minor-league contract.
National League
ATLANTA BRAVES -- Released Reese Murdaugh, Keith Brown and Ken Willis, pitchers; Kevin Webb, Doug Wollenburg and Kevin Grijak, infielders; and Barry Jones, outfielder.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
LOS ANGELES LAKERS -- Activated Cedric Ceballos, forward, from the injured list.
Placed Randolph Keys, forward, on the injured list.
MILWAUKEE BUCKS -- Waived Aaron Williams, forward.
PHILADELPHIA 76ERS -- Activated Jeff Malone, guard, from the injured list.
Football  National Football League
CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Signed James Joseph, running back.
RAMS -- Re-signed Roman Phifer, linebacker, to a four-year contract.
Signed Turhon O'Bannon and Alexander Wright, wide receivers, and Torin Dorn, defensive back.
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS -- Signed Kirk Scrafford, offensive tackle, to a five-year contract.
Hockey  National Hockey League
DALLAS STARS -- Recalled Mark Lawrence and Grant Marshall, right wings, from Kalamazoo of the International Hockey League.
HARTFORD WHALERS -- Recalled Scott Daniels, left wing, from Springfield of the American Hockey League.
NEW YORK ISLANDERS -- Recalled Gord Dineen, defenseman, from Denver of the International Hockey League.
QUEBEC NORDIQUES -- Traded Ed Ward, right wing, to the Calgary Flames for Francois Groleau, defenseman.
Sent Paul Krake, goaltender, to Cornwall of the American Hockey League.
ST.
LOUIS BLUES -- Recalled Ian Laperriere, center, from Peoria of the International Hockey League.
VANCOUVER CANUCKS -- Traded Adrien Plavsic, defenseman, to the Tampa Bay Lightning for a 1997 fifth-round draft pick.
Soccer  Continental Indoor Soccer League
ARIZONA SANDSHARKS -- Named Luis Dabo assistant coach for the 1995 season. College
BALL STATE -- Announced the resignation of Pat Quinn, baseball coach, to become assistant athletic director.
CS NORTHRIDGE -- Announced the resignation of Bob Burt, football coach.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about a new course on murder that has become the most popular ever at Amherst College misspelled the college president's surname.
He is Tom Gerety.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
American General Corp., Houston, is selling $150 million of notes due in 2005 through Salomon Brothers.
The notes are noncallable and are priced at 99.656 to yield 7.80 percent.
The notes are rated A1 by Moody's Investors Service, AA- by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and AA- by Duff &amp; Phelps. *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $100 million of notes due in 1998 through Bear, Stearns.
Callable after six months, the notes carry an interest rate of 7.52 percent and are priced at par.


Lorillard Sued Over Licensing Deal
Harley-Davidson Inc. in Milwaukee and Lorillard Inc. in New York are fighting in court about an agreement under which Harley-Davidson licenses its name to Lorillard for a cigarette brand.
Harley-Davidson filed a lawsuit yesterday in Federal District Court in Manhattan in response to a suit that Lorillard filed last month in the same court accusing Harley-Davidson of frustrating the licensing agreement, which began in 1986.
Harley-Davidson's countersuit asserted that an unspecified Lorillard campaign for Harley-Davidson cigarettes was being aimed at children.
Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg in New York, which creates campaigns for Lorillard brands like Kent, is also agency of record for the Harley-Davidson cigarette.
The agency is not named in the suit.


A Korean Reactor by Another Name
North Korea has been throwing a tantrum over plans for South Korea to provide it with new nuclear reactors, part of the agreement to keep the North from making nuclear arms.
The new reactors would make it more difficult for the North to extract plutonium for bombs than it is with its current graphite reactors.
North Korea, not wanting to seem dependent on South Korea, pressed during negotiations last year for others to supply the replacement reactors, but no one else was willing to provide them free of charge.
To avoid loss of face for North Korea, the agreement left the identity of the new reactor manufacturer unspecified, though it was clear to everyone South Korea would build them.
Now Pyongyang is threatening to break the agreement.


Pepsi Will Take Another Swing At Market for Low-Sugar Cola
Pepsi XL: Is it a stealth drink?
An extra-large soda can?
Or a secret new super ingredient?
No, it's the new low-sugar cola announced yesterday by the Pepsi-Cola Company.
Why XL?
"It sounds like excel, and the X stands for excellent taste," said Amy Sherwood, a spokeswoman for Pepsi.
"The L stands for less sugar."


New Jersey Daily Briefing; Suit Cites Revenge in Layoffs
When Mayor Bret Schundler announced layoffs last August, he said he wanted to make city government more effective.
Fourteen city workers say he really just wanted to get even.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.00
5.97
3.47
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.70
5.73
3.45
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.84
5.88
3.77
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.19
7.17
6.48
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.45
7.44
6.89
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.34
8.33
7.73
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.37
6.34
5.97
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 8


New Jersey Daily Briefing; 14 Indicted in Immigrant Racket
A violent gang brought boatloads of Chinese immigrants to this country under extremely harsh conditions, then imprisoned them until each paid a $25,000 fee for their illegal passage, Federal prosecutors say.
The indictment of 14 reputed gang members yesterday is the first time the Federal Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act, used so often against organized crime figures, has been used in an alien smuggling case, said the United States Attorney, Faith S. Hochberg.


Journal; Jenny Jones's Victory
It took a homophobic murder for the morality watchdogs to discover that daytime television is a carnival of sex and emotional violence -- frequently watched by children, sponsored by family-minded corporations like Procter &amp; Gamble and produced by respectable media folk like Time Warner.
But as the 15 minutes of national scrutiny given to "The Jenny Jones Show" and its ilk now end, don't expect any reform to result.
Quite the contrary.
Even as this story made headlines, the new Congress was plotting behind closed doors to deregulate commercial TV and "privatize" public TV.
What this means in plain English is that there will soon be more trash TV, not less.


Madame Tussaud's Loses Bidding War and Drops Times Sq. Plan
After more than two years of negotiations to develop an entertainment complex in One Times Square, the sliver of a high-rise that anchors Manhattan's Great White Way, the British company that owns Madame Tussaud's wax museums says it has abandoned the plan.
The building, best known as the tower from which the New Year's Eve ball descends, has been acquired by Lehman Brothers, the investment banking firm, which outbid Pearson P.L.C., Madame Tussaud's corporate parent.
After winning the bidding war to buy the building from a French bank, Lehman then rejected a final offer from Pearson to buy it directly from Lehman, Pearson officials said.


To Read of Huck Finn
To the Editor:
Re Frank Rich's "Dropping the N-Bomb" (column, March 16): I was disappointed to find you had joined The Washington Post and The Washington Times in fueling the controversy over the National Cathedral School's decision to move "Huckleberry Finn" from the 10th grade to an 11th- or 12th-grade English class.


Giuliani, in Shift, Turns Fiscal Focus from Cuts to More State Aid
Acknowledging the fiscal and political realities in the state Capitol, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani today effectively abandoned his effort to persuade the Governor and Legislature to make additional cuts in Medicaid and welfare to save New York City money.
A month ago, Mr.
Giuliani had stunned lawmakers in Albany by asking the state to give the city less money, thus reducing the matching payments that the city is required to make in Medicaid and welfare.
But today, Mr.
Giuliani turned to the more familiar role the city's mayors have played and called for $350 million more in state aid in areas from prisons to probation to health care for the mentally ill.


Another G.O.P. Goal Becomes Law


Spain to Investigate Deaths of Basques in '83
The Interior Ministry opened an inquiry today into the killing of two suspected Basque guerrillas more than a decade ago, apparently at the hands of death squads linked to the Socialist Government.
The case, which provides new evidence of kidnapping, torture and killing by hit squads linked to former Interior Ministry officials, took a new turn this week with word that the bodies of the two Basques had been identified.
The men had disappeared in 1983.


BMW makes a sharp, sudden turn, leaving the Mullen agency for Fallon McElligott.
FOR weeks, Madison Avenue has been wondering how an agency review being conducted by Volkswagen of America will end.
Now it turns out another German auto maker has passed VW on the advertising autobahn, switching shops sooner.
BMW of North America, a unit of the BMW German luxury auto maker, said yesterday that it would dismiss Mullen Advertising in Wenham, Mass., only 25 months after awarding the iconoclastic agency the creative portion of its advertising account.
The dismissal, effective July 1, comes despite rising American sales for BMW -- and five days before BMW begins running a big television and print campaign by Mullen for its new 3-Series line of compact sports sedans.


UConn's Auriemma Has Celebrity Status
If we are heroes anywhere, most of us are heroes at home and nowhere else.
For Geno Auriemma, the women's basketball coach at Connecticut, it's almost the other way around.
Last Thursday night, when Connecticut was playing Maine in the first round of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, 9-year-old Alysa Auriemma was sitting in the players' lounge using a computer.
After the game, she came running out.


Times Company Sells $400 Million in Debt
The New York Times Company sold $400 million of notes and debentures yesterday through underwriters led by the CS First Boston Corporation.
The Times Company was able to increase the size of yesterday's sale from its original $250 million offering because of strong investor demand, the underwriters said.
They added that the 10-year notes were sold with a yield closer to 10-year Treasury yields than most comparably rated corporate issues.


Arizona St. Creating Its Own Tradition
Here you have Kentucky.
It has played its way into the national tournament 37 times.
Familiar with North Carolina?
Twenty-nine tournament appearances help.
Georgetown knows the way after 19 trips.
And then there's Arizona State. Eleven trips -- and counting.


COMPANY NEWS
BFP HOLDING CORP., New York, a commercial printing and graphic arts holding company, plans to merge its Treasure Chest Advertising Co. unit with two Sullivan Communications Inc. units, Sullivan Graphics Inc. and American Color, in a stock-for-stock transaction.
FRONTIER COMMUNICATIONS INTERNATIONAL, Rochester, signed a resale agreement with ALC Communications Corp. offering its customers nationwide long-distance services.
Terms of the agreement were not disclosed.


International Briefs; French Bank Chief Challenged on Job Cuts
Credit Lyonnais plans to cut "about 2,000 jobs" this year after eliminating 1,500 positions last year, its chairman, Jean Peyrelevade, said yesterday in an interview on the radio station France Inter.
Asked if that contradicted statements he had made last week at a news conference describing a bailout plan for the embattled French bank, which expects to lose $2.4 billion this year, Mr.
Peyrelevade said he had said merely that the company would cut "at least as many" jobs as it had in 1994.


Widow Sues Police In Death in the Bronx
The wife of a man who died in a confrontation with the police in the Bronx has filed a civil suit against New York City, the New York Police Department and several police officers, her lawyer said yesterday.
The announcement came a day after Officer Francis X. Livoti, 35, was arraigned on charges of criminally negligent homicide in the death of Anthony Baez, 29, outside his parent's home in the University Heights section last Dec. 22.


DEBATE IN HOUSE ON WELFARE BILL SPLITS G.O.P. BLOC
A furious debate over abortion sundered the ranks of House Republicans today, but party leaders ultimately prevailed by a slender margin in the first major vote on their bill to undo more than a half-century of social welfare policy.
By a vote of 217 to 211, the House approved a resolution, or rule, setting the terms of debate on the bill, which would replace several dozen welfare programs with direct cash payments to the states.
Approval of the rule was a victory for House Republican leaders because it limits the amount of debate and the number of possible amendments, precluding challenges to many contentious parts of the bill.


A New Apartment as Empty as Its Occupants
Michelangelo Antonioni's brooding meditations on urban alienation may not be fashionable in America right now, but they have exerted a powerful influence on modern Asian cinema.
"Vive l'Amour," Tsai Ming-liang's haunting second feature, is a virtual homage to the Antonioni films "La Notte" and "Eclipse." As in those early-60's masterpieces, the gleaming anonymous architecture and thoroughfares of a booming metropolis (here it is contemporary Taipei) frame the blank spiritual lives of characters who drift through the city in a state of melancholy disconnection.
The Taiwanese film, which has screenings this evening at 6 and on Saturday at 9 P.M. at the Museum of Modern Art as part of the New Directors/New Films series, has a wonderfully evocative central conceit.
Mei-mei (Yang Kuei-mei), a chic young real estate agent, misplaces the keys to a vacant duplex apartment in a spanking new high-rise.
Hsiao-kang (Lee Kang-sheng), a shy young man who is later revealed to be gay, finds the keys and begins living there surreptitiously.
When Mei-mei is not tidying up the apartment and communicating by cellular phone with her employer, she, too, uses the place, for trysts with Ah-jung (Chen Chao-jung), a man she picks up in a luncheonette for casual sex.


Novell's Wordperfect Unit to Replace Disputed Software Feature
Novell Inc. said yesterday that its Wordperfect unit would replace a disputed feature in its Quattro Pro spreadsheet program that allows the program to read sequences of commands from the rival 1-2-3 spreadsheet of the Lotus Development Corporation.
The move by Wordperfect comes two weeks after the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit in Boston overturned a United States District Court ruling that Borland International Inc., the creator of Quattro Pro and its former owner, had infringed the copyrights of Lotus.
Borland removed the contested feature after the ruling by the lower court in August 1993, and sold the program to Novell last March for $145 million.


A Robbery With a Kidnapping Is Defeated by a Visitor's Scream
Three men decided some time ago to rob a jewelry store on the Upper West Side, the police said, and they concocted a plan requiring attention to detail, daring and the coldbloodedness to use children as pawns.
The trio had those qualities, but did not have enough luck.
The police said one robbery suspect is in custody and two others are being sought.


INSIDE
Phone Law Expected to Gain
A key Senate committee is expected to approve a sweeping communications bill that eases the way for the seven regional Bell companies to offer long-distance service.
Page D1.
Agreement on Veto Power
Senate leaders from both parties compromised on how to give a President power to veto Congressional spending selectively.
Page A22.
Dole's Affirmative Action
Senator Bob Dole, who opposes preference programs, helped a black former aide get a Federal contract under such a program.
Page A22.
Waste Held to Be Explosive
Energy Department scientists endorsed the disputed thesis that underground nuclear waste could erupt in a nuclear explosion.
Page A18.


Simpson Guest Testifies Of Strains Before Killings
Brian (Kato) Kaelin, the shaggy-haired aspiring actor who played a bit part in the lives of both Nicole Brown Simpson and O. J. Simpson, testified today that Mr.
Simpson told him that at a dance recital on the evening she was killed, Ms.
Simpson had tried to keep her former husband from speaking with their young daughter.
On several occasions that day, Mr.
Kaelin told Marcia Clark, the chief prosecutor in the case, Mr.
Simpson told him that his on-again, off-again relationship with Ms.
Simpson was finally over.
He also said Mr.
Simpson had complained of the tight dress Ms.
Simpson wore at the recital and wondered if she would try to squeeze into the same things when she was a grandmother.


Lehman Earnings Exceed Forecasts; Stock Falls Anyway
As promised, Lehman Brothers Holdings reported fiscal first-quarter earnings yesterday that exceeded most analysts' expectations, and some said the results might mark the end of eroding profitability on Wall Street.
Still, Lehman's stock plunged 6 percent, mainly in reaction to a downgrading of $15 billion of the company's debt by Moody's Investors Service.


The Pop Life
Star Search
They wore all-black outfits in 70-degree weather, talked about contracts and royalties at barbecue houses and put a strain on the local alcohol supply.
They were more than 5,000 employees of the music industry, and they gathered here from March 16 through 19 for the South by Southwest Music and Media Conference, an annual feast of informational panels and nighttime concerts.
With hundreds of bands playing at local clubs, the festival was probably hardest on those representing the artists-and-repertory departments of recording companies.


AT HOME WITH: John Tesh; The Discreet Charm Of a New-Age Sport
There are people for whom the mere words "John Tesh: Live at Red Rocks" will always elicit titters.
They do not believe that the news reader with the towering forehead and swoosh of blond hair, the co-anchor of "Entertainment Tonight" on television, could have a second career as a musician.
They snicker as Bart Conner and Nadia Comaneci, the ex-Olympic gymnasts, perform to Mr.
Tesh's surging piano instrumentals in the video of that outdoor concert near Denver.
And they wince as the camera cuts to Mr.
Tesh's beatifically smiling wife, the actress Connie Sellecca.


Ruling on Definition of 'Family,' Justices Back a Welfare Curb
The Supreme Court today unanimously upheld a California welfare regulation intended to save the state money by counting all needy children living in the same household under the care of a relative as a single family.
The regulation replaced an approach under which only members of the same nuclear family were counted as a family unit when calculating monthly welfare grants.


House Group Set to Revamp Law Cleaning Water in U.S.
A bipartisan group in the House of Representatives today introduced far-reaching changes to the Clean Water Act, substantially reducing protection for wetlands and backing away from programs to control polluted runoff from farms and city streets.
The bill's prospects are good in the House, where most Republicans and many Democrats support it.
The Senate has not yet begun to work on changing the Clean Water Act.


Jacobsen Finds Starring Role
For most of his 19 years on the PGA Tour, Peter Jacobsen was a mystery -- a pleasant, smiling enigma.
People looked at him, they saw someone else.
Here he was, doing Arnold Palmer's whirlybird, out-of-balance finish.
There he was, a pile of golf balls bulging from the front of his shirt, doing Craig Stadler.
When they heard him, it was always someone else as well.
Seve Ballesteros or Chi Chi Rodriguez.
The lead singer of the rock band Jake Trout and the Flounders was another of his impersonations.
He could do everybody.
This year, Peter Jacobsen has added another golfer to his repertory.
It is by far his best impression yet.
It is of a 40-year-old reborn player, a pretty long hitter and great iron player who has become a short- game wizard, a personable guy who interacts with the galleries, laughs at bad breaks and acts the same way whether he's shooting 75 or 65.
Peter Jacobsen is doing . . .
Peter Jacobsen.
And what an act it is.
A man who had won four tournaments in his career has already won half that many this year.
And he has a tie for second and a third-place finish as well.
He has won more money in three months ($690,351) than he did in any of his previous 18 individual seasons.
Always a good player, Jacobsen is now borderline great.
Put it this way: the $3 million Players Championship gets under way Thursday at the Tournament Players Club at Sawgrass with a luminous array of golfing talent -- a field that includes the top 36 ranked players in the world -- and Jacobsen has to be considered one of the favorites.
He no longer has to do Nick Price or Greg Norman or Nick Faldo or Ernie Els.
He now has the game to think about beating them.
Jacobsen is the leading money- winner on tour, the leading all- round player, No. 1 in four statistical categories and certainly among the favorites.
And he is exactly the same person in every way but one.
For the first time in his career, he has developed a short game.
For someone whose touch was always impeccable when it came to the nuances of an impression -- he would always have the telling little raise of the eyebrow or the habitual movement down cold -- he had no real touch around the greens.
Last year he finally broke down and visited the short-game guru Dave Pelz in Boca Raton, Fla.
"I think we're all a little hard-headed," Jacobsen said.
"We don't realize our shortcomings, our weaknesses. I realized after all these years of playing golf and looking at all my stats that my putting and chipping were always somewhere near the back."
This is the concrete answer.
All the intangibles like confidence, self-assurance, rededication, they all come from an ability to get the ball in the hole.
And that is something Jacobsen is doing better now than at any time in his life.
A quick analysis of his statistics today versus last year at this time is revealing: he has added 10 yards of distance to his drives, averaging 269.7 this year; he is ranked first in greens in regulation compared with 53d; he is using his length and his touch to birdie more par 5's, ranking third in that department compared with 65th last year.
"Peter is getting closer and closer," Pelz said.
"For years he had been focusing on mechanics in the short game. Now he is focusing his mind's eye on speed and touch. I'll tell you, if you put Tom Kite's short game on Peter Jacobsen, you'd have the best player in the world."
What you have right now is one of the best-liked players in the world.
Jacobsen was always amiable enough, and that has broadened and developed into a comedic on-course demeanor that reaches out and embraces galleries.
It stems from something his father told him just before he died in 1992, when Peter asked him what was the most important thing about golf, the setup or the grip or tempo.
"He looked at me and said, 'Peter, it's a sense of humor,' " Jacobsen said.
That is one thing that always came naturally to Jacobsen.
Now, with the work on the one thing that didn't, he has become a complete player.
CHIP SHOTS
The heads of five of the world's leading professional golf organizations met here Wednesday to discuss existing international competitions and to map out plans for something that could eventually resemble a world tour. . . . .
ARNOLD PALMER was named as the captain of the United States team for the 1996 Presidents Cup.
DAVID GRAHAM will again be the captain of the International team.


Sports of the Times; In Trouble, the Celtics Call on Bird, Old Reliable
IN some strange, twisted way, it was like old times here these last two days for the once-proud Boston Celtics.
They found themselves in deep, deep trouble, so they blew a lot of Red Auerbach smoke and gave the ball to Larry Bird.
In addition to their 78-year-old patriarch, they trotted out Old Reliable, No. 33, as they retired No. 35 last night in the middle of a scandal that is out of control.
They gave the ball to Bird and hoped he could put a face-saving spin on the troubling Reggie Lewis saga, the way he used to flip a clutch reverse layup off the glass.


International Briefs; Big French Insurer Halves Dividend
The stock of Assurances Generales de France fell as much as 9.5 percent yesterday after the company, France's third-largest insurer, halved its dividend and reported a 10 percent decline in 1994 earnings.
AGF reported a net profit of 880 million francs -- $176 million -- last year.
It cut its dividend to 3 francs.


An Ending From Eliot
To the Editor:
Your account of the last hours spent by Thomas J. Grasso before his execution begins, "In an enigmatic statement scribbled on a piece of paper and handed to prison officials here at 3:15 yesterday afternoon, Mr. Grasso said, 'What we call the beginning is often the end, and to make an end is to make a beginning. The end is where we start from" (news article, March 20).


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Allspice
Q.  What are the plants used to make allspice? -- Helen Richardson, Commack, L.I.


Adm. Walter F. Boone, 97, Dies; Naval Academy Superintendent
Adm.
Walter F. Boone, who began a 43-year naval career during World War I and later became superintendent of the United States Naval Academy, died on Sunday at the Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington.
He was 97 and lived in Washington.
The cause was a heart attack, said a spokeswoman for the Academy, from which Admiral Boone graduated in 1921 and to which he returned in 1954 as the 38th superintendent.


International Briefs; Bombay to Reopen
The Bombay stock exchange will reopen today after officials said they had resolved a crisis caused by a broker's failure to pay for more than $6 million of shares.
The exchange has been closed for three days because of the default, which followed the collapse last week of a sale of $135 million of convertible debentures by M. S. Shoes East Ltd.
That collapse led to a default by a Bombay broker, R. S. Jhaveri. (Bloomberg Business News)


Smith's Name Off List for Wooden Award
Coach Gary Williams of Maryland said today that the removal of his all-America center, Joe Smith, as a finalist for the Wooden Award as national player of the year was caused by a misunderstanding.
Smith, a sophomore, was omitted from the list of 15 finalists for the award because he does not have a 2.0 (out of 4.0) cumulative grade point average, one of the requirements established for the award by the Los Angeles Athletic Club.
"Joe was as good academically as most of those players on that list," Williams said.
"There was a mix-up on that. It's all that was. He's in great shape academically, and doing very well."


UConn's Not-So-Easy Task: A Simple Way to Stop Joe Smith
The task has become simpler for the Connecticut Huskies as they prepared for the West Regional semifinal meeting with Maryland.
Not easier, simpler.
The stresses of dealing with a much lower seeded team were left behind in Utah.
Now all the Huskies have to do is find a way to deal with Joe Smith.
For the second consecutive game, Connecticut will face an approach similar to the method the Huskies used to build a 27-4 record.
"The thing I realize is that it won't be as much a battle of styles as a battle of wills," said Jim Calhoun, the Connecticut coach.
"Both teams want to play very similar; fast break, trap, press, run the ball up the floor and try to create opportunities off defense. I think the only difference is in the way they get it done."


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about a proposed acquisition of the Unisys Corporation's military and aerospace operations by the Loral Corporation misstated the given name of the chairman and chief executive of Loral.
He is Bernard L. Schwartz, not Benjamin.


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Tournaments
The significance of post-season conference playoffs was questioned following last weekend's four Division I tournaments.
In each case the No. 1-seeded team was defeated -- two of them in the first round -- and then the overall results were largely ignored by the selection committee when it made up the field for the National Collegiate Athletic Association's tournament.
That committee's task was easy because it had only to select four teams.
The other 8 positions in the field of 12 were filled by automatic bids.
First-place teams in regular-season standings and victors in the four tournaments all gained bids.
Review and Preview
ECAC -- Attendance at Lake Placid, N.Y., for two nights was 11,658, 312 more than last year.
The sixth-seeded team, Rensselaer, defeated No. 7 Princeton in the final, 5-1.
The Tigers had eliminated No. 1 Clarkson, 2-1, in the best game of the event.


Nets Can't Get It Done, So Beard Shouts It Out
The Nets are certainly not playing like a team fighting for a post-season berth.
They're playing more like a team looking forward to a summer vacation.
First, Coach Butch Beard and his team were roundly heckled and booed at Byrne Meadowlands Arena throughout their 102-85 thrashing at the hands of the San Antonio Spurs.
Then, the Nets held a 20-minute closed-door meeting, during which Beard could be heard screaming at his players in an expletive-laced tirade.


'3 Strikes' Law in California Is Clogging Courts and Jails
California's tough "three strikes and you're out" statute is having a dramatic effect on the state's criminal justice system, but not precisely what its supporters intended when Gov.
Pete Wilson signed it into law a year ago.
Most defendants in felony cases are now refusing to accept plea bargains, since three convictions mandate a sentence of 25 years to life.
As a result, courts in many areas are clogged, county jails are overcrowded and nonviolent inmates are being released early.


Measure Lets 7 Bells Offer Long Distance
After weeks of intense negotiations, the Senate Commerce Committee is expected to approve a sweeping communications bill on Thursday that would make it much easier for the seven regional Bell companies to offer long-distance phone service.
But the bill's ultimate prospects remain in doubt because the Republicans sponsoring the measure have so far failed to strike an agreement with Democrats or to mollify long-distance carriers like the AT&amp;T Corporation, the MCI Communications Corporation and the Sprint Corporation.
Thus, the legislation remains vulnerable to the same industry feuding and political gridlock that stalled earlier efforts.


Congressional Memo; A Day of Anger as Republicans Are Put on the Defensive
It was a measure of the heat of the welfare debate that a group of Republican women in the House held a news conference this morning to declare that they were not "ogres" or "mean spirited" or "black hats."
"Here you see us," said Representative Deborah Pryce of Ohio, flanked by several colleagues, many of whom talked about their experiences as mothers and teachers, all of whom pledged their commitment to easing the lot of the poor.
"Now, do we look like ogres?"


Egypt, Pressed by West, Eases Stand on Israel and Atom Pact
Egypt has dropped its threats to reject extension of the treaty that prevents the spread of nuclear weapons, taking the pressure off Israel.
Egypt's decision comes after heavy lobbying by American, Japanese and other officials, and it marks an easing of the rancor Jerusalem and Cairo have exchanged recently.


U.S. Treasury Issues End the Day Mixed
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed yesterday, despite concerns over the weakness of the dollar and signs of brisk consumer demand.
The price of the 30-year bond slipped 1/32 , to 102 4/32 .
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction from its price, edged up to 7.45 percent, from 7.44 percent on Tuesday.
But the rates on shorter-maturity bills dropped slightly as some investors sold longer maturities for the less volatile short end of the market.
The yield on the two-year note fell to 6.70 percent from 6.72 percent.


Sue or Not to Sue? The Ayes and Nays
On the affirmative side of "Resolved: We're Suing Ourselves to Death," tomorrow night's "Firing Line" debate, are four men with conservative affiliations who maintain that too many personal-injury suits are burdening businesses and consumers, doctors and patients and benefiting mainly the lawyers who churn up million-dollar suits for pain and suffering.
Led by William F. Buckley Jr., the only nonlawyer on the premises at Fordham University Law School, they favor Congressional efforts to discourage suits and reduce settlements.
Arguing the negative are two of those big-time personal-injury lawyers; a Naderite lobbyist, and Alan Dershowitz, the all-purpose advocate known to everybody with a television set.
They say restrictions on people's ability to sue will add injury to injury, bringing joy to negligent doctors and uncaring manufacturers.
The threat of a suit, they contend, discourages businesses from making defective products and doctors from being careless, and so they oppose the crackdown on tort litigation in the Republican Contract With America.


Former Montclair Postal Worker Charged With Killings in Robbery
A 29-year-old town laborer was arrested today and charged with killing four men and wounding one in a robbery at a small post office here where he once worked.
He was accused of forcing his victims, two of whom he knew, to lie face down before shooting them at close range in an act of violence that unnerved this suburban community.
The laborer, Christopher Green, told the police after he was taken into custody at his apartment in nearby East Orange that he had stolen more than $5,000 from the post office on Tuesday afternoon because he needed money to pay his back rent, said the United States Attorney in Newark, Faith S. Hochberg.


Bridge
A few of New York City's older players will recall Seidman's Law.
This concerns the situation in which a player has to guess which opponent has a crucial queen and states that a defender who plays instantaneously when the suit is led probably has the queen while a player who plays sluggishly probably does not.
This has a sound psychological basis: the player who has the queen is likely to be paying careful attention, while his partner may be wool-gathering.
The author of the law was Sol Seidman, a Brooklyn bridge expert who died of pneumonia on March 5 at age 85.
He gave much service to the game, particularly to the appeals committees at national championships, which he headed for many years, and to the Greater New York Bridge Association, which he assisted in many capacities.


Patterns of the City


A Tightly Wound Life
Tom Tykwer, the young German director of "Deadly Maria," has a big streak of Roman Polanski in him.
His icy, almost mocking portrait of a repressed woman who explodes out of a state of emotional claustrophobia strongly recalls Mr.
Polanski's 1965 classic, "Repulsion." With its ominous whispering sound effects that suggest inner demons about to emerge, and flashy cinematography in which the camera circles the characters like a beast about to spring, the movie keeps you aware at all times that the director is fiendishly pulling strings.
The title character (Nina Petri) is a woman who has been under a man's thumb for as long as she can remember.
Brought up by her repressive father in the dreary apartment he owns, she has been his sole caretaker since he was crippled in a terrible accident.
The scenes of her feeding and changing him and dragging him back and forth to the bathroom convey with a cruel detachment the horror of a life of service to an embittered invalid.


3 Paths, Winding and Sometimes Hard, End in Rubble
At 76, Ozzie Payne was about seven years older than the building whose collapse killed her, a building she had called home for "25 or 30 years," her sister recalled yesterday.
Mrs.
Payne and two others lost their lives Tuesday in the collapse of a six-story Harlem building that had apparently been left to deteriorate into a neglected home for squatters.
But all three shared dreams that were not bound by the decrepit confines of their home.


Bigger Is Not Better
To The Home Section:  William Hamilton's article about small living spaces, "All the World in One Room" (March 9), is a real blow to the common "bigger is better" wisdom.
It's easy to find examples of this in daily life, from the popularity of all-you-can-eat buffets all the way to the continued desirability of enormous luxury automobiles.


A Tiny Shop That Thinks It's Not
WHAT'S got a waiting list, complementary wine or cappuccino, free delivery and occasional Winona Ryder sightings?
Brodean Fine Dining, a downtown discount china shop with uptown amenities.
But the real appeal of the store is the savings.
Its owner, Andrew Mellon -- a dashing 26-year-old Englishman who is also an executive chef -- offers discounts of as much as 40 percent off the most popular names in flatware, linens, crystal and china.
Dozens of china manufacturers are stocked, including Richard Ginori, Haviland Limoges, Spode and Swid Powell.
Prices for five-piece place settings are $30 to $1,500.
There is a lively assortment of napkins and vintage copper pots and pans -- relined, restored and similar to those Mr.
Mellon used when he hung his toque in a stately English manor.


Giuliani Finally Gets The Word to Albany: Send More Money
THE rebellion is over, the silence broken.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani really does want more from the state budget, he revealed yesterday.
He waited so long to make his request that he's not likely to get everything he wants.
But New Yorkers can relax.
After flouting convention and asking the state to cut some programs even deeper so the city could piggyback on the savings, Mr.
Giuliani has adopted the comfortable, familiar role of supplicant.
For weeks now, the big political question here has centered on the Mayor.
Where was he?
Negotiations over Gov.
George E. Pataki's austere budget, which is supposed to be passed in nine days, were going into high gear.
Anyone who had anything to do with the business of government was making demands.
The Mayors of Buffalo, Rochester, Yonkers and Syracuse put in their orders.


Wolves Are Cleared to Roam Yellowstone
The doors to two pens holding part of Yellowstone National Park's new wolf population have been opened, and park officials say they expect the imported wolves to begin establishing a free-roaming population.
Biologists opened the first pen, on Crystal Bench in the Lamar Valley, on Tuesday and placed a deer carcass outside it.
But the five male wolves and one female wolf there did not leave the one-acre enclosure.


A Stunning Leap to the Top at Sony
He vaulted over two levels of management, including at least 10 higher-ranking executives.
Almost no one had pegged him to be chosen, and even he was too shocked to say anything when he was first approached about his promotion.
And there was little in his resume that made it obvious why he was the ideal man.
But today, the Sony Corporation chose this 57-year-old dark horse, Nobuyuki Idei, as its next president, the man who will guide it into a new era in which it will be without the leadership of its visionary co-founder, Akio Morita, who retired as chairman last November after suffering a stroke the year before.


Smith Barney Unit Is Shaken by Infighting
Infighting is tearing apart Smith Barney's highly touted investment banking group.
The firm's investment banking group, which was hailed two years ago as the engine that would propel Smith Barney into the financial big leagues, has split into warring factions over Wall Street's most divisive issue -- compensation.


Cape Town Journal; Britain's Queen Comes Bearing a Gift: Acceptance
The last few weeks have brought the prospect of higher taxes.
A major opposition party may still pull out of the Government.
And the question of how to deal with Winnie Mandela, President Nelson Mandela's estranged wife, haunts the political leadership.
But for a few days at least, South Africa, a country with plenty of tribal kings and princes, has been in a fit of royal fever.
It has put its problems aside temporarily, turning to pomp, ceremony and the British monarchy.


Co-Workers Are Stunned: 'No, It Couldn't Be True'
William Harris was gloomy.
His shoulders slumped and his hands stuffed into his jacket pockets as he left the Department of Public Works garage late this afternoon.
He and other employees had just learned at a staff meeting that a co-worker, Christopher Green, had been charged with murdering two postal workers and two customers and wounding another customer a day earlier.
Mr.
Harris shook his head slowly and sadly.
Mr.
Green, who police say confessed to the brutal execution-style murders, was well-liked by his co-workers.


Turkey Crosses a Line
In one of Turkey's largest foreign military operations since the days of the Ottoman Empire, 35,000 troops poured across its border with Iraq this week to attack the Kurdish guerrilla group known as the Kurdistan Workers Party, or P.K.K.
Turkey contends its only purpose is to destroy a violent separatist group by wiping out its Iraqi base camps.
But sending troops across another nation's border is a violation of international law that deserves harsh condemnation.
The world would become even more dangerous if countries with strong armies and border frustrations felt free to take the law into their own hands.
France, which currently leads the European Union, a group Turkey desperately wants to join, has rightly condemned this invasion.
The United States should have condemned it too.
Instead, Washington, along with Moscow, has expressed understanding for the Turkish attack.


Corrections
A report in the Food Notes column of The Living Section yesterday about a special dinner for smokers at a Manhattan restaurant, Morton's of Chicago, misstated the dates for the dinner and for the start of a ban on smoking in New York City restaurants that seat more than 35 people.
The dinner will be held on April 7; the ban will go into effect on April 10.


Most Balkan Refugees Fled Because of Serbs
To the Editor:
Michael Zegarac (letter, March 15) would have us believe that anyone who fled from home in what was Yugoslavia did so for only one reason.
Many ethnic Serb refugees I met in Serbia and Montenegro did in fact fear that Croat and Muslim neighbors might turn on them.
This was made more real because Serbs knew what had been done by hard-liners in the name of the Serb nation.


Mickelberry Agrees To Buyout by Chief
Mickelberry Communications Inc., which owns three agencies including Partners &amp; Shevack in New York, said yesterday that it had agreed to an offer by James C. Marlas, its chairman, president and chief executive, to acquire all the shares of its common stock that he does not already own.
Mr.
Marlas, who owns approximately 48 percent of Mickelberry's stock, proposed in November to acquire the remaining shares for $3.25 each, or about $9.94 million.
The offer Mickelberry agreed to yesterday was for $4.25 a share, or about $13 million.
The agreement is subject to approval by shareholders.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Flyers' Winning Streak Ends  Defenseman Adam Burt scored with 2 minutes 30 seconds left in the third period and the Whalers ended the Philadelphia Flyers' eight-game winning streak with a 4-3 victory in Hartford last night.
Philadelphia's Mikael Renberg tied it at 3 with seven minutes remaining.
But Burt, assisted by Andrew Cassels and Geoff Sanderson, beat goaltender Ron Hextall with a low shot for the go-ahead goal.
The Flyers had outscored opponents by 36-21 during the winning streak, which included five one-goal victories. (AP) NORDIQUES 6, BRUINS 2: Peter Forsberg scored a goal and set up two others as Quebec regained first place in the overall National Hockey League standing with a victory over visiting Boston.
The Nordiques (20-6-3) have 43 points, one more than idle Pittsburgh. (AP)


Economic Scene; A simple proposal for cutting down on securities fraud suits.
LET'S say you run a video game company.
You've just been told that promised deliveries of this year's planned blockbuster, "Burn 'Em in Salem," will be delayed at least three months.
The trouble is that the pitiful screams of the witches in the test version cannot be heard above the roar of the flames.
Who do you call first?
Your ad agency?
The big retail chains?
Members of the corporate board?
Ghostbusters?


New Jersey Daily Briefing; U.S. Indicts 2 School Officials
The superintendent and the business administrator for the Lincoln Park school district in Morris County were charged yesterday with embezzling more than $20,000 and evading taxes on more than $180,000 in income, The Associated Press reported.


What Made the Dollar Swoon? Try the Deficit
To the Editor:
Peter Passell's March 16 Economic Scene column on the dollar ignores the most important factor behind the long-term decline of the dollar relative to most major currencies: the prospect that our huge budget and trade deficits will remain unless policies are changed.


Iona's Father-Son Show
JERRY WELSH, head basketball coach at Iona the last four seasons, retired yesterday for medical reasons and was replaced by his son, TIM WELSH, an assistant coach with the Gaels since 1991.


Lawyer Forces Bomb-Trial Witness to Admit Trail of Lies
In the defense's first chance to cross-examine the main prosecution witness in the terrorism trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and 10 others, a defense lawyer battered away at the credibility of the Government informer yesterday, forcing him to admit that he had built his life in America on dozens of lies.
As soon as the informer, Emad A. Salem, finished two and a half weeks of testimony for the prosecution in Federal court in Manhattan, Lynne F. Stewart, a lawyer for Mr.
Abdel Rahman, pounced on him, compelling him to own up to a string of lies he told to his wife, his mistress and intelligence agents both here and in Egypt, where he was born.


Christopher Says Russia May Pay High Price for Chechen War
Secretary of State Warren Christopher warned Russia today that its military intervention in Chechnya could delay its efforts to win quick integration into the West.
Describing Russia's invasion of Chechnya as "foolhardy" and "tragically wrong," Mr.
Christopher said its actions there had badly hurt Russia's image overseas and could frustrate Moscow's desire to gain full participation in several international groups, including the Group of Seven industrial nations.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; Trump Has Plans for Steel Pier
Donald J. Trump says he is close to hooking up with a Tokyo video games giant, Sega Enterprises Limited, to renovate the Steel Pier here.


Young Boxer Finds More Fights In Daily Life Than in the Ring
Lance Whitaker spent the morning sparring, not with another boxer, but with a mattress.
The Pan American Games are nearing an end, and the American superheavyweight has yet to hit an opponent who could hit him back.
He won his first match in a walkover, when Andre Stewart of Grenada said he couldn't fit his hands inside a pair of 10-ounce gloves.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  JAPAN'S SEARCH YIELDS CHEMICALS  A police search of a religious sect's training compound in Japan turned up poison gas paraphernalia and tons of chemicals, including some like those used in the nerve gas attack in the Tokyo subway.
A1


Setting Higher Sights for Animation
Television's world of animation is tumbling out far beyond the confines of Saturday-morning cartoons for selling toys.
A move to a new and hipper level was signaled by the prime-time success of "The Simpsons." Now animation bristles with social satire in series like "The Critic" on Fox and USA's "Duckman." And multiculturalism is being given a long-overdue whirl in HBO's "Happily Ever After: Fairy Tales for Every Child." It's a wide and often wonderful world.
From the producer of "The Simpsons," Gracie Films, "The Critic" had a short run last year on ABC.
Now it's on at 8:30 P.M.
Sundays on Fox.
"You may remember me from ABC," the film critic Jay Sherman (voice of Jon Lovitz) recently told Fox viewers.
"They put me on against Tonya Harding." Changes have been made in Jay's life.
He has a new girlfriend named Alice, a Brett Butler type with a young daughter. ("Shouldn't you be watching cartoons with pointless violence?" Jay asks.) His boss at Phillips Broadcasting, however, is still the discouraging Duke, who warns Jay, "At this time in my career I'd be hoarding nuts, little squirrel."


Rhythm and Ritual in an African Setting
Dance Theater of Harlem had its audience cheering as the curtain fell on the company's fourth and final program at the Brooklyn Academy of Music Opera House (30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene), where it performs through Sunday.
It wasn't an evening of star turns or razzle-dazzle choreography, although there was plenty of excitement and grandeur on the stage.
It wasn't only the great pleasure of seeing the choreography breathing freely through music played live by a first-rate ensemble.
Essentially, Dance Theater was doing what it does best, bringing new life and an affecting devotion to what it dances.
"Etosha," choreographed by Ron Cunningham and named for a national park with a shallow lake in Africa, is one of those pieces that plunks classical ballet down into an exotic natural setting to no discernible purpose.
The women wear stylish feathers in their hair, and Carol Vollet Kingston's dark unitards give the dancers the look of swift-running animals.
Patrick Johnson, the ballet's sensuous beast of prey, gets to maul Simone Cardoso and Lorraine Graves, the two lead gazelles, in stylized fashion (over that insufficient water hole, one presumes).


Guatemalan Agent of C.I.A. Tied to Killing of American
A Guatemalan military officer who ordered the killings of an American citizen and a guerrilla leader married to an American lawyer was a paid agent of the Central Intelligence Agency, a member of the House Intelligence Committee said today.
The intelligence agency found out about the killings ordered by the Guatemalan colonel on its payroll, but concealed its knowledge for years, the committee member, Representative Robert G. Torricelli, said in a letter he sent today to President Clinton.


Ruth Melville Berlin, A Philanthropist, 74
Ruth Melville Berlin, a Connecticut philanthropist, died on March 15 at her home in Southport, Conn.
She was 74.
She died after a brief illness, her family said.


New Curbs Proposed on Foreign TV Programs in Europe
In a protectionist move that was promptly criticized by the United States, the executive commission of the European Union proposed new rules today that would tighten restrictions on foreign programming on European television stations for the next 10 years.
The main effect of the proposal would be to strengthen a requirement that European television stations must dedicate at least 51 percent of broadcast time to European programming.
Many stations have avoided meeting the quota by relying on a modifying phrase -- "where practicable" -- in the requirement.


The Early Bird Gets the Audition; Lining Up for Hours to Sing for Three Minutes or Less
At 6 A.M.
Monday, the sun was still weak in the sky but 35 actors had already lined up by the Actors' Equity Association building on West 46th Street, waiting to sign up for auditions that would begin at 8 A.M.
First in line was Alexandra Kolb, who had risen at 2 A.M., driven an hour from Lacey, N.J., and parked herself at the building entrance at 4:30 A.M.
"It just keeps getting earlier and earlier," sighed Ms.
Kolb, who at 22 is a four-year veteran of the New York audition scene.
"This month is the craziest I've ever seen it."


Stocks Are Little Affected by Latest Trade Deficit Data
The trade figures released yesterday should have sent all the financial markets reeling, but stocks closed mixed and the 30-year bond dipped only slightly.
The dollar was relatively stable against the German mark but slipped to another record low against the Japanese yen.


Survivors of Collapse Lose All to Demolition
Ethel Johnson and her boyfriend, Robert Jacob, watched in terror Tuesday morning from the living room of their Harlem apartment as half their life's possessions vanished from their bedroom in a thunderous rush.
Yesterday morning, as they stood sullenly in front of the building, they were told that a wrecking ball would claim the other half -- demolishing the eastern corner of their building at 142 West 140th Street, which officials condemned after determining that it was too unstable for anyone to enter again.


Dole Helped Ex-Aide With Program He Now Denounces
Although he now denounces preference programs based on race as "absolutely poisonous to race relations," Senator Bob Dole once used his influence to help win a lucrative Federal contract for a former staff member under such a program.
A 1988 Congressional investigation of Mr.
Dole's activities on behalf of his former employee determined that he had done nothing wrong, but today Democratic supporters of Federal affirmative action programs seized on the issue, saying it suggested that the Senate majority leader, an aspiring Republican Presidential candidate, tailored his view on racial and sex-based preference to the prevailing political winds.


Chilly Season for Spring Training Towns
For the more than two dozen towns in Arizona and Florida that are home to major league teams during the exhibition season, spring training has always had a tint of Darwinism about it.
Survival of the fittest is the endless theme, with major league teams perennially demanding to know what communities from Vero Beach, Fla., to Tempe, Ariz., have done for them lately -- and which town farther down the road might do more.


Japan Needs to Face Its Shameful Past; 'Sea and Poison'
To the Editor:
"Japan Confronting Gruesome War Atrocity" (front page, March 17) suggests the Japanese were unaware of the extent of torture performed on civilians and prisoners of war in the 1930's and 40's.


Building A Ballet Of Bodies And Space
"Ogive," Eliot Feld's fourth new ballet for his company's current season, shares the nostalgic perfume that wafts through his other recent works to French music.
Enhanced by this aura and Erik Satie's score, the piece acquires a rich dimension, moving beyond its more obvious and striking level of design.
Handstands, headstands and gymnastic support were clearly not all that this piece was about when Feld Ballets/NY performed it on Tuesday night at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea).
Satie's title for his music was "Ogives," a reference to the ribs of a Gothic vault, which may be behind the choreography's architectural inspiration.
Yet what this little ballet says in its terse and direct way is that dance, like architecture, uses forms in space for expressive ends.


Hospitable Rangers Throw Devils a Garden Party
Coming into their game with the Rangers at Madison Square Garden last night, the Devils probably believed they had a fair chance to beat their cross-river rivals.
The Devils had been playing well; the Rangers were in a slump.
But probably not many of the visitors from New Jersey expected to embarrass the defending Stanley Cup champions with an easy, 5-2 stroll through Madison Square Garden.
This should have been one of the peak games of the season for both teams, the exciting renewal of a local rivalry that charged on stage during last season's playoffs.
Instead, the match had all the zest and edge of exhibition baseball games played by strikebreakers.


International Briefs; French Workers Strike At 3 Renault Plants
Renault S.A., trying to end a two-week wage dispute, offered its workers a 4.5 percent pay increase.
Employees at three plants went ahead with planned strikes anyway.
Production was halted for several hours at the state-owned auto maker's factories in Flins, Le Mans and Sandouville, in France, although other factories resumed full production, Renault officials said.


Diego R. M. Del Vayo; Stockbroker, 65
Diego R. M. Del Vayo, a stockbroker in New York City, died on Monday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 65 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was complications from diabetes, according to his physician, Dr.
Robert Abrams.


International Briefs; Midland Bank Job Cuts
Midland Bank P.L.C., a subsidiary of HSBC Holdings, said yesterday that it would cut 1,745 jobs at branches in Britain as it reorganized its banking services.
The bank said it was returning to "strong local management" by merging its regional banking centers for business accounts into branches that primarily cater to private clients.
Senior managers will be moved into these branches. (Bloomberg Business News)


The No. 1-Seeded Teams Are Having an Easy Time
If you like to bet on long shots, you may have a better chance at the race track than in women's basketball.
The National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament swings into the Sweet 16 Thursday night, and with one exception, the four highest-seeded teams in each region have survived.
The only casualty has been Penn State, seeded second in the Midwest Region, a 2-point loser to North Carolina State.


Events: Classes, a Talk And Two Exhibitions
Tree Care Courses  Trees New York, 280 Broadway (Chambers Street), Suite 432; (212) 227-1887.
Classes in caring for street trees will be offered in Brooklyn starting on April 3, in the Bronx on April 10, in Queens on April 11, in downtown Manhattan on April 12 and in uptown Manhattan on April 20.
The courses, which will last 12 hours, incorporate lectures and hands-on training.
The fee is $60.
A schedule and location information are available by calling.


Yesterday in Washington
WELFARE REFORM: A furious debate over abortion sundered the ranks of House Republicans, but party leaders prevailed by a slim margin in the first major vote on their bill to undo more than a half-century of social welfare policy.
By 217 to 211, the House approved a resolution, or "rule," setting the terms of debate on the bill, which would replace several dozen welfare programs with direct cash payments to the states.
The vote suggests that Republican control of the House, on this issue, is more precarious than previously believed.
CLEAN WATER ACT: A bipartisan group in the House introduced far-reaching changes to the Clean Water Act, substantially reducing protection for wetlands and backing away from programs intended to control polluted runoff from areas like farms and city streets.
The bill's prospects are good in the House.
The Senate has not even begun to work on changes in the measure.


U.S. Says It's Worried About Iranian Military Buildup in Gulf
The Pentagon has grown more concerned about the Iranian military buildup at the mouth of the Persian Gulf after discovering that a closely watched deployment there now includes 6,000 troops and chemical weapons, Administration officials said today.
That reflects a sharp increase over the buildup described by military officials last month, and it prompted a strong warning from Defense Secretary William J. Perry, who was traveling in the region.


Black Magic 1 Pulls One Out
For the first time since the America's Cup challengers' trials began here last January, Team New Zealand's crew stared at the stern of another yacht for most of a race today.
But in a dramatic turnaround in the fifth leg, the Kiwi team's Black Magic 1 came on hard and fast to leeward of One Australia and forced the Australian team to tack away for clear air.
When the two boats came back together, Black Magic 1 was four boat lengths ahead.
At the finish, Black Magic 1 had defeated One Australia by 39 seconds.


Applying Pressure on Tax Cuts


Harassment Case Tarnishes Cornell Star's Luster
Each fall, nearly 2,000 Cornell University undergraduates enroll in Psychology 101, taught by Prof.
James B. Maas.
Dozens of students work as production staff on his award-winning films about sleep deprivation.
Thousands of parents and alumni attend Cornell fund-raising events where he speaks.
But Professor Maas's luster as a star of the Cornell faculty was tarnished in December, when a faculty ethics committee found him guilty of sexually harassing four former students who worked for him as teaching assistants, as staff on his film crews and, in one case, as a nanny.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; Many Points in Trustee's Favor
Patrick Ewing, the all-star center for the New York Knicks, and four others have been elected to three-year terms as trustees at St.
Peter's College.
Mr.
Ewing was an All-American at Georgetown University, which, like St.
Peter's, is a Jesuit institution.


Public TV to the Rescue For UConn-Alabama
The Connecticut home of Big Bird, Charlie Rose and Lamb Chop will be the place to watch the top-ranked University of Connecticut women's basketball team tonight.
When the Rebecca Lobo-led Huskies play Alabama at Gampel Pavilion in Storrs in the East Regional of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, CBS will not be there.
Nor will ESPN.
But Connecticut Public Television will.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; Arrest in 4 Post Office Killings
A 29-year-old town laborer was arrested and charged with killing four men and wounding another in a robbery at a post office here where he once worked.
The authorities say the suspect told them he needed money to pay back rent.
Page A1.


Accounts
*
United Technologies Corp., Hartford, to Brouillard Communications, New York, to handle its corporate advertising account, previously inactive.
The billings were estimated at $4 million to $5 million.


Oregon Coach Staying
Oregon Coach JERRY GREEN, who spent two days talking with Nevada-Las Vegas about the Runnin' Rebels basketball coaching vacancy, is staying at Oregon.
The 51-year-old coach returned to Eugene, Ore., on Tuesday night and met with DAN WILLIAMS, who is serving as Oregon's interim athletic director. (AP)


No Headline
"The vicious acts you committed on Dec. 7, 1993, were the acts of a coward. What could be more cowardly than entering a train filled with unsuspecting, homebound commuters and systematically shooting them at point-blank range?" -- JUDGE DONALD E. BELFI, sentencing Colin Ferguson.  [ B1:5. ]


Award Goes to Marbury
STEPHON MARBURY, the 6-foot-2-inch senior point guard who led Abraham Lincoln High School to the Public Schools Athletic League A Division championship this season, was named national high school player of the year yesterday.


Clean Up the Javits Center


Seles Is Invited For the Fed Cup
Billie Jean King was hoping to drop a bombshell here Thursday by announcing the United States team that will face the Netherlands next month in the Federation Cup.
Encouraged by Monica Seles's apparent interest in playing in the Olympics next summer, King, the team captain, said she intended to speak with Seles tonight about her availability.
King also planned to get in touch with Jennifer Capriati, the 1992 Olympic gold medalist, as part of her recruitment efforts.
Last year, Capriati agreed to be a Fed Cup alternate.
To be an eligible Olympian she must participate in the Fed Cup in 1995 or 1996.
Seles must be available both years to qualify as an Olympian.


Corrections
An entry in the Executive Changes listing of Business Day on March 7 about an appointment at Armstrong World Industries misstated the new title of Frank A. Riddick 3d.
He is senior vice president and chief financial officer, not president and chief financial officer.


Man Who Beat Bowe Challenges Him Again
The contemporary black knight, Jorge Luis Gonzalez, waited impatiently at the top of the escalator, wearing his signature black Stetson.
A man who fancies himself a spiritual descendant of the knights of old, Gonzalez has also described himself as "a man who will fight with my own sword."
So he stalked the hall outside a ballroom of the Crowne Plaza on Broadway yesterday, waiting for Riddick Bowe to appear to announce their June 17 meeting in Las Vegas, Nev.
Bowe happens to hold the World Boxing Organization heavyweight championship title, and gloats about it.


Carat Opening New York Office
The Aegis Group P.L.C., which owns Carat, Europe's largest media services company, said yesterday that Carat was opening an office, to be named Carat North America, in New York.
"This is a toe in the water," said Roger Parry, the former group development director of Aegis, who was named group vice president of Carat North America.
"Within a few years' time, I suspect we'll be in it up to our neck." Aegis had hoped to expand into North America three or four years ago, he added, but postponed those plans to digest several acquisitions in Europe and wait out the worldwide advertising recession.


A Surprising Vault To the Top at Sony
The Sony Corporation chose a dark-horse candidate as its next president yesterday and as the man who will guide it into a new era in which it will be without the leadership of its visionary co-founder, Akio Morita, who retired as chairman last November after suffering a stroke.
The new president, Nobuyuki Idei, 57, vaulted over at least 10 more senior executives.
Almost no one had pegged him to be chosen, and there is little in his resume that makes it obvious why he is the ideal man.


Russian Branch Attracts Members and a Lawsuit
The Japanese religious sect that has been linked to the kind of poison gas used in the attack in the Tokyo subway this week has made remarkable inroads in Russia, where it claims to have recruited 30,000 members.
And the sect, one of the country's more aggressive and successful evangelizing religions, is also one of the more controversial.


METRO DIGEST
EX-POSTAL WORKER HELD IN KILLING OF 4 A 29-year-old town laborer was charged with killing four men and wounding another in a robbery at a Montclair, N.J., post office where he once worked.
He was accused of forcing his victims, two of whom he knew, to lie face down before shooting them at close range.
A1.
The two slain postal workers "were friends to all of us," one resident said.
B7.


Theory on Threat of Blast at Nuclear Waste Site Gains Support
A team of scientists from the Department of Energy yesterday strongly backed the recently proposed idea that atomic wastes buried deep underground might erupt in a nuclear explosion.
Although the thesis has been hotly disputed, the show of support from scientists at the Savannah River nuclear site near Aiken, S.C., is likely to widen and deepen the scientific debate.
It is the first such support for the idea.


Where to Find It
EVERY year, thousands of outdated computers are relegated to the closet, usually by frustrated owners who don't know what to do with them.
There they sit, gathering dust and becoming more obsolete by the second.
To computer enthusiasts, they've become known as closetware.
And the problem is growing.
A 1991 study by Carnegie-Mellon University predicts that by 2005, the nation will have discarded approximately 150 million computers.


Paul Bancroft, 90, California Developer
Paul Bancroft Jr., a San Francisco developer who was an early promoter of the Mexican fishing village of Puerto Vallarta as a resort, died on Monday at his home in San Francisco.
He was 90.
A prominent social figure, Mr.
Bancroft bought a home in Puerto Vallarta, on Mexico's Pacific coast, and helped make the town into the fashionable international resort it has become in the last 30 years by attracting his friends and many other socialites.


Boston Journal; A Bittersweet Salute to a Fallen Hero
At the John A. Shelburne Community Center, one place where young people can come in off the tough streets of this city's Roxbury section, life beats to the bounce of a basketball and every night is Reggie Lewis Night.
No jersey is more popular at the center than No. 35, the number worn by Mr.
Lewis, the Celtic captain who died of a heart attack in July 1993 at the age of 27.


Man Recently Freed From Prison Is Charged in 2 Sodomy Attacks
A Brooklyn man who was recently released from prison after serving time on sodomy charges was arrested and charged with burglary and sodomy in two attacks in Greenwich Village, the police said yesterday.
The man, John Rosado, sodomized a 21-year-old nanny in January, then returned to the same area a month later and sodomized an 11-year-old child, the police said.


Recycling Trick: From Plastic To Velvet
AT next month's High Point furniture fair in North Carolina, the Thomasville showroom will introduce the latest in recycling chic -- chairs and sofas clad in Eco Spun, fade-resistant woven velvets made from plastic bottles.
The velvets, produced by Malden Mills, a textile concern known for earth-friendly manufacturing, feature rich, Renaissance-style patterns.
Furniture dressed in Eco Spun will appear in stores next fall.
Information: (508) 468-1155.


Market Place; J. P. Morgan tries to reclaim its once-deft touch with clients.
YESTERDAY, a big New York commercial bank that makes most of its money by trading for itself announced a major reorganization so that it could get closer to its clients.
Bankers Trust, right? No. J. P. Morgan.


Cutbacks to Save Washington From Bankruptcy Leave Residents Angry and Fearful
With magnolias in bloom, tour buses crowding the streets and other welcome signs of spring in the nation's capital all about, Ollie Blocker stood in the noonday sun thinking about rats.
"I'm scared to death," she said, "With the city not picking up the trash, I'm fearful of them entering my house. All that debris, you know, that's how they breed."


A Press Secretary Under Fire; Giuliani's Spokeswoman Draws Criticism From Reporters
Cristyne F. Lategano, press secretary to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, was in her usual seat, next to her boss in his van.
The car was heading south to City Hall on Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive, and Ms.
Lategano was on the phone, doing something she didn't really want to do: an interview that focused on her, not him.
"It's not what I'm about," she said.


'Impeccable' Effort Puts Huskies Among the Elite
The comparison has been made more than a few times through years of Connecticut winters, when a state would carry on its happy obsession with a basketball team the rest of the nation did not know.
Connecticut fans were Red Sox fans, hoping for the best but fully expecting the worst, a reality that did not change when the Big East turned the Huskies into a national team and tickets became impossible to find.
That is why what happened tonight could make a state blink in disbelief.
The Huskies defeated Maryland, 99-89, in a West Regional semifinal at Oakland Coliseum Arena to reach the final eight of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament for the third time in school history and the second in five years.
Connecticut (28-4) will meet the U.C.L.A.
Bruins on Saturday afternoon.


Moss Enters Drug Program
The former Wisconsin running back BRENT MOSS, who helped lead the Badgers to a Big Ten co-championship in 1993, entered a drug treatment program in Madison, Wis., on his release from jail, his lawyer said yesterday.
Moss, 23, the most valuable player in Wisconsin's 1994 Rose Bowl victory over U.C.L.A., was dropped from the team in November after his arrest for marijuana possession.
He pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor drug charge.
He was arrested again Friday in his hometown of Racine, Wis., on a probation violation, and he admitted the violation, his lawyer GERALD W. MOWRIS said.
Moss, who rushed for 1,637 yards and scored 16 touchdowns in 1993, was heading toward the school rushing mark of 3,709 yards when injuries and the drug arrest sidelined him last fall. (AP)


The Met Shows Off Its New Titles
After several months of private tests, the Metropolitan Opera gave its first public demonstration of the new Met Titles translation system yesterday during a dress rehearsal of Puccini's "Madama Butterfly." Unlike most conventional supertitling systems, in which the translation is projected on a screen over the proscenium, the Met's system uses individual screens mounted on a bar about two inches above the back of each seat.
The screens are about 8 inches long and 1.75 inches high, and can accommodate two 40-character lines of text.
The $2 million system will be installed during the summer and will be used at all performances beginning next season.
Titling has been a matter of considerable dispute at the Met, one of the last major opera houses to resist simultaneous translation.
James Levine, the company's artistic director, has said that supertitles would be used "over my dead body," and in a news conference after the demonstration, both Mr.
Levine and Joseph Volpe, the company's general manager, reasserted their opposition in principle to translations.
But they added that their strongest objection was to projected titles, which they said interfere with the stage action and also disturb those who prefer not to use translations.


Secretive Japan Sect Evokes Both Loyalty and Hostility
The last time a lawyer tried to take on the Aum Shinrikyo religious sect, he and his family disappeared.
That was six years ago, and the lawyer, Tsutsumi Sakamoto, his wife and a 1-year-old boy have not been heard from since.
Now, partly in memory of their friend, Yoshiro Ito and four other lawyers have taken on his cause, becoming virtually the only legal team bold enough to challenge the sect in court.


Parche's Re-trial Begins
MONICA SELES's assailant was trying to stab her a second time before he was overwhelmed by guards, witnesses told a German court yesterday in Hamburg.
The testimony could prove damaging to the defense strategy taken in court by the defense for the assailant, GUNTER PARCHE, 40.


Sammons Sells Remainder of Its Cable Systems for $800 Million
Sammons Communications Inc. completed its exit from the cable television business yesterday, selling its remaining cable systems with 440,000 subscribers for $800 million to a pair of companies associated with Tele-Communications Inc.
A spokeswoman for Tele-Communications, LaRae Schlichting, said the giant cable operator would divide the Sammons cable systems between the Lenfest Group, which is 50 percent owned by Jerry Lenfest and 50 percent owned by Tele-Communications, and TKR Cable, a joint venture of Knight-Ridder Inc. and Tele-Communications.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-8  FAMILIES CHALLENGE JAPAN SECT  The attack in the Tokyo subway has focused attention on the practices of the Aum Shinrikyo sect, including its methods of mind control.
Hundreds of families have turned to a legal team in the hope of finding sons and daughters who joined the sect and then disappeared.
A1  C.I.A.
FOUGHT DISCLOSURE  After telling an American that they had no word on the fate of her Guatemalan guerrilla husband, Administration officials began perusing files.
What they found horrified them, they say, yet the C.I.A. fought to prevent disclosure of its links to the man's killer.
A3


The Umbilical Kinship of Painters and Poets
Wallace Stevens (1879-1955) was literary hero to a generation of younger poets -- Frank O'Hara and John Ashbery, among them -- who were also notable art critics.
Yet Stevens' own connection with art has been little examined: "Painting in Poetry/Poetry in Painting: Wallace Stevens and Modern Art" at Baruch College in Manhattan is the first exhibition devoted to the subject.
It is a small, serious, imaginatively conceived show, though one with problems, most of which have to do with the apples-and-oranges nature of the mediums involved.
Art can be poetic and poetry can be highly visual (as is the case with Stevens, especially his early work), but correspondences between the two disciplines tend to work best when viewed metaphorically rather than literally.


Sportmart Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Senate Panel Approves Communications Bill
Senate Republicans retreated today from their plan to eliminate all cable television price regulation, clearing the way for the Senate Commerce Committee to approve a comprehensive bill to overhaul the nation's creaky communication laws by a vote of 17 to 2.
If it becomes law, the measure would knock down a slew of regulations and usher in an era of free-for-all rivalry among local telephone, long-distance and cable television companies.


Dean Foods Co.(DF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 26


Sports of The Times; For Iverson, Curtain Falls On Act I
THE much awaited, highly touted freshman season of Allen Iverson came to an end last night as North Carolina defeated Georgetown in a Southeast Regional semifinal.
Iverson's last act of the 1994-95 season was a foul at midcourt on Donald Williams with 56.5 seconds to play and his team down by 73-61.
When the whistle blew, there was a grimace and a smile -- almost of relief, as if some great weight had been taken off his shoulders.
Iverson had scored 24 points -- 21 in the second half -- while his team was being dismantled by Jerry Stackhouse and Rasheed Wallace, while North Carolina's "system" had forced him into a wretched first half.
But he had signed his name to the game.


The Spoken Word
DIGITAL PUBLISHING SEMINAR, American Museum of the Moving Image, 35th Avenue at 36th Street, Astoria, Queens.
The first of three weekends of discussions and visual presentation on the future of CD-ROM's.
Tomorrow at 2 P.M.
Admission: $10; $7 for museum members.
Information: (718) 784-4520.
JACKIE MASON, 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue.
A lecture by this comedian, now appearing in the Broadway show "Jackie Mason: Politically Incorrect." Sunday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $16.
Information: (212) 996-1100.


Sci-Fi From the 60's For a New Generation
With Fox's "X-Files" making waves, get ready for a tidal burst of sci-fi series.
Showtime is reaching back to the mid-1960's to offer an updated revival of "The Outer Limits," an anthology that had a modest original run of about a year and a half.
Showtime has already committed to 43 new weekly episodes.
As the millennium approaches, extraterrestrials and the supernatural are obviously going to be with us for a while.
Batten down the hatches, kiddies.
This new version of "The Outer Limits" retains the Control Voice that warns at the fuzzy outset of each program: "There is nothing wrong with your television. Do not attempt to adjust the picture. We are now controlling the transmission. . . . We will control all that you see and hear. You are about to experience the awe and mystery which reaches from the deepest inner mind to 'The Outer Limits.' " Oh, dear.


Sequa Corp.(SQA.A,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Case of the Missing Gravel
The police here think they've solved the case of the missing gravel, all 100 or so tons of it.
The gravel turned up, they say, along with other township property, on the horse farm owned by Daniel M. Sommo, manager of Chatham's Department of Public Works.
He is now under arrest.
RONALD SULLIVAN


Exel Ltd.(XL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Tar Heels Beat Hoyas On Inside and Outside
One given with North Carolina basketball for so many years, for so many games, for so many N.C.A.A. tournaments, is this: No matter where the ball flows or rolls along the perimeter, eventually, it is always coming back inside.
North Carolina rarely fails to feed the post.


Defying the Holocaust With a Love Story
Jiri Weiss's semi-autobiographical film, "Martha and I," commemorates a brave and sympathetic couple whose religiously mixed marriage defied the iron laws of the Holocaust for a time.
When Ernst Paul Fuchs (Michel Piccoli), a distinguished obstetrician in Czechoslovakia, impulsively marries his German maid, Martha (Marianne Saegebrecht), his three sisters are outraged that he should marry a gentile from a lower class.
It is the mid-1930's, and Ernst, revered as "the doctor with the golden hands," lives in a mining town near the German border.
Although Nazism is on the rise, Ernst, who is Jewish but calls himself a freethinker, senses no threat.
Even when Martha's brother Werner, a rabid Nazi, delivers a furious tirade at the couple's wedding banquet, no alarms are rung.


New Ranger Verbeek in Hurry to Suit Up
Seeking a right-handed shot for their power play and a little more aggression for their forward lines, the Rangers today obtained Pat Verbeek from the Hartford Whalers in a multiplayer deal that cost them no key player from their current roster.
The 12-year veteran, a former Devil, played against the Islanders tonight for the defending Stanley Cup champions, who had lost their previous four games.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Farm Credit Bank is selling $100 million of medium-term notes due in 1997 through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
Callable in a year, the issue is priced at par to yield 7.21 percent.


Lennar Corp.(LEN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Top Houghton Editor To Join New Publisher
John Sterling, editor in chief of Houghton Mifflin's adult trade division, is leaving to become editor in chief and vice president of a new division at the Bantam Doubleday Dell Publishing Group, the division's president and publisher, William Shinker, annoucned yesterday.
The appointment is effective April 17.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a report yesterday in the Daily Briefing column in New Jersey copies about a lawsuit involving Jersey City layoffs misstated the location of the Federal District Court.
It is in Newark, not Jersey City.


Kathy Bates Stars as a Sardonic Murder Suspect
"Dolores Claiborne" follows "The Shawshank Redemption" as a Stephen King-based film that deserves a disclaimer: this is no stereotypically scary Stephen King tale.
Not even if it begins with Kathy Bates, so memorably deranged in "Misery," holding a rolling pin over the inert body of a woman who is her apparent victim.
Far from playing another psycho, Ms.
Bates is now a long-suffering workhorse whose life has been one long hardship.
She's at the center of a Stephen King character study -- and that's not even an oxymoron.
Written as a book-length harangue from its heroine's point of view, and directed efficiently by Taylor Hackford, "Dolores Claiborne" has become a vivid film that revolves around Ms.
Bates's powerhouse of a performance.
If the role's strength is that Dolores actually has her feet firmly on the ground, that is its weakness, too: a lack of shock value a la King.
Only after the film has carefully laid the groundwork for a story of old wounds and violent mishaps does the anticlimactic truth become apparent.
In terms of solving a mystery, there's no rabbit to pull out of this hat.


Rangers Talk Like Winners in Loss
The struggling Rangers played the struggling Islanders tonight and both teams went home with plenty to be happy about after a tense and interesting struggle.
The Islanders ended their five-game losing streak on a third-period goal by Steve Thomas, just enough for a 1-0 victory before the usual roaring, chanting, capacity crowd of 16,297 the Rangers attract to Nassau Coliseum.


A Quirky Whitney Biennial
BY now so much has been said about this year's Whitney Biennial that you might almost think the show has come and gone.
First there was the early hoopla when the museum identified the artists to be included and even showed slides of their works.
Then came the inevitable backlash, the published lists of those neglected, the complaints about the ones chosen: that there aren't enough young and hip artists, that there is too much painting and not enough Conceptual and political art, that some artists are too well known, others are completely unknown and a few are just friends of the exhibition's curator, Klaus Kertess.
Critics agreed about only one point: that the 1995 biennial isn't like the politically top-heavy 1993 show.
Biennials are the art world's Rorschach tests.
They are what you bring to them.
I like this one, despite the eccentric and occasionally pallid choices Mr.
Kertess has made.
The show, which opened yesterday, is low key.
It feels spacious and respectful: each work has room to breathe and a viewer has room to think, since the emphasis is on art that doesn't harangue you with its message.


From 1936 and 1956, Documentary Artworks
There's no reason that an exhibition whose sole organizing principle is to present photographs taken in a single year should be meaningful, let alone interesting.
If anything, the opposite is true: the overall quality of work produced in a given year is apt to be average.
On the other hand, no period is without some good work; judicious selection could make any year look good.
And such a selection might suggest other understandings about the period in question.


International Briefs; Nestle Earnings Increase by 12.6%
Nestle S.A., the Swiss food manufacturer, said yesterday that its profit rose 12.6 percent in 1994, to 3.25 billion Swiss francs, or $2.8 billion, even as the strength of the franc cut the value of foreign earnings.
Nestle said the figure for its net profit, which compares with 2.89 billion francs in 1993, reflected a one-time net gain of 306 million francs from the sale of businesses to L'Oreal S.A., the French cosmetics company.
The increase of 12.6 percent in the net profit for Nestle was at the upper end of expectations, with analysts having expected a rise of 3 percent to 12 percent, depending on the impact of the currency.


Brookstone Inc.(BKST,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


TLC Beatrice Intl. Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


School Plan Gets Cool Reception
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman wants to give private schools a shot at joining the public school system as "charter schools."
But judging by the icy reception to the proposal at a hearing yesterday, legislators don't like this idea any more than they liked the administration's earlier plan to give parents state-financed vouchers to send their children to private schools.


Atlantic Gulf Communities Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Vicorp Restaurants Inc.(VRES,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 19


Russia Sees Long Fight in Chechnya
The commander of Russian troops in Chechnya conceded today that the war would not be over soon, but he expected the Russian forces would control most of the breakaway republic by summer.
"It won't end so quickly, unfortunately," the commander, Col.
Gen.
Anatoly S. Kulikov, said in an interview.
"The war has its own laws and stages, and we calculate that by the summer period, we can establish control of two-thirds of the territory, which will let us move from military to political means and allow us to hold elections and establish a new, legitimate power."


Officer Indicted in Death Faces Inquiry in a Choking
A Bronx police officer indicted last week in the death of a Florida man is facing new police administrative charges after the Civilian Complaint Review Board found credible evidence that he needlessly slapped and choked a 16-year-old boy for joy-riding in a go-cart 18 months ago.
The charges are the second case involving apparent choking by the officer, Francis X. Livoti, 35, and raise new questions about whether the Police Department took sufficient precautions to monitor him before the death of Anthony Baez last Dec. 22.


SENATE APPROVES MEASURE GRANTING PRESIDENT A VETO OVER ITEMS IN BUDGET BILLS
With wide bipartisan support, the Senate today voted to give the President unprecedented control of the Federal purse -- the power to veto specific items in spending bills and some future tax benefits.
The Senate passed the bill, on a vote of 69 to 29, nearly eight weeks after the House had approved a different version of the line-item veto.
A central piece of the Republican agenda, the veto is being pushed as a budget-cutting tool.


Art in Review
'The City' 'New York Visions, 1900-1995'
ACA Galleries  41 East 57th Street  Manhattan  Through April 1
Dealing with the first half of the century, "The City" concentrates on images of daily life: neighbors chatting on a tenement rooftop, unemployed men loafing in front of garish storefronts, the boardwalk at Coney Island.
The heroic modernist vision of New York is evoked in a few works on paper by Abraham Walkowitz, Joseph Stella and John Marin.
Otherwise the tone is set by pictures like Edward Laning's 1931 "Street Orator" and Reginald Marsh's 1940 watercolor of guys and dolls at the beach.
The subject matter is modern, but the style is not: the listeners surrounding Laning's orator are wearing suits and dresses of monochrome yellow, red, blue and green, like the saints in a quattrocento altarpiece, and Marsh's near-nude beachgoers are positively Michelangelesque.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "THE MOLIERE COMEDIES," Roundabout Theater at the Criterion Center, 1530 Broadway, at 45th Street.
A double bill of "The School for Husbands" and "The Imaginary Cuckold"; featuring Brian Bedford, Suzanne Bertish and Remak Ramsay; directed by Michael Langham.
Through Sunday.
Performances: tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $50.
Information: (212) 869-8400.


Now Inmate No. 95A1838, Ferguson Starts Life in Prison
Colin Ferguson, shackled and surrounded by six guards, was transferred this morning from the Nassau County jail, where he spent the last 15 months, to the state prison system, where he will spend the rest of his life.
With emergency lights flashing, a two-car caravan left the jail in East Meadow at 6:30 A.M., joined commuters on the Long Island Expressway and arrived at the Downstate Correctional Facility in Fishkill, in Dutchess County, at 8:30 A.M.
He was assigned the inmate No.95A1838.


No Headline
"This is Frankensteinian science at its best." DR.
CHARLES S. ZUKER, of fruit flies with eyes on their legs.  [ A1:4. ]


Art in Review
Deborah Kass 'My Andy: A Retrospective'
Jose Freire Fine Art  130 Prince Street  SoHo  Through April 8
Call it what you will -- hero worship, transference, feminist critique -- Deborah Kass and Andy Warhol have finally merged.
The process began a few years ago when Ms.
Kass adapted and personalized some of Warhol's signature images, in one case substituting for Elvis Presley, one of Warhol's sex symbols, one of her own: Barbra Streisand dressed as the male rabbinical student in the film "Yentl."


Defending Affirmative Action, Clinton Details Plan to Review It
President Clinton today offered his most articulate defense yet of the concept of affirmative action -- and his most extensive explanation of his review of existing Federal programs to determine whether to drop some preferences based on race or sex.
Mr.
Clinton said he wanted to find out which programs work, whether even some of those that do have resulted in reverse discrimination, and whether some economically disadvantaged groups are not adequately covered by current preferential treatment for women and minorities in hiring, promotion and Government contracts.
But over all, he argued, such programs have greatly benefited American society since the mid-1960's.


Filipino Puts Ties With Singapore to Test
President Fidel V. Ramos has announced that he will break off diplomatic relations with Singapore if a Philippine investigation shows that a Filipino maid executed in Singapore last week was wrongly convicted of murder.
In a statement on Wednesday, he also said that Filipinos would not be allowed to take new jobs as maids in Singapore and that the more than 75,000 Filipinos employed there would be offered the chance to return home on military planes.
He said that the Philippine Ambassador would be recalled "immediately and indefinitely."


Rex Stores Corp.(RSC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Inside Art
Selling Off a House as Well as Art
When the Museum of Modern Art inherited Gordon and Nina Bunshaft's estate last year, there was speculation about what exactly the museum would do with the bonanza of contemporary and modern art, not to mention the Bunshafts' 1962 house in East Hampton, L.I., a 2,600-square-foot pavilion of glass, travertine, marble and concrete.
The house had been designed by Mr.
Bunshaft, the internationally known architect and partner at Skidmore Owings &amp; Merrill, which designed such New York City landmarks as Lever House and 1 Chase Manhattan Plaza.
He died in 1990 and his wife last May.


Wisconsin Has Big Loss In Derivatives
In the latest fallout from the use of the complex financial instruments known as derivatives, The State of Wisconsin Investment Board said yesterday that one of its funds had lost $95 million speculating on the Mexican peso and on European currencies.
The board sought to play down the impact of the losses, saying they would be spread over many years and would not affect the fund's principal.


Obstructing Clean Water Plan Could Cost New York $6 Billion
To the Editor:
The move by the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation to obstruct New York City's efforts to acquire land in the upstate watershed region (front page, March 17) is extremely ill advised.
It threatens the city's attempt to implement a balanced program that provides safeguards for the upstate communities while moving to save New York City and Westchester County taxpayers more than $6 billion.


U.C.L.A. Makes Sure It's Easy
The day before potentially the most significant basketball game in the history of his school, T. J. Honore, the Mississippi State guard, was more right than he ever would have wanted to know.
As his team prepared for the West Regional semifinal game against U.C.L.A., Honore was asked about the narrow second-round escape that had kept the Bruins in the national collegiate tournament.
"I look at it like maybe that was a wake-up call," Honore said.
"Maybe they thought they're U.C.L.A. and they can walk through the West region."


Lechters Inc.(LECH,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Home Video
The Future of Rentals
Suppose it's 2001 and movies come not in videocassettes but on five-inch digital video disks.
But you can't rent them.
You can only buy.


Pavin's 66 Leads by a Stroke, But West Wind Hits Hardest
As they walked from the 16th green to the tee at the 17th hole today, you could see it clearly, even from a distance.
Shoulders bent and jaws tightened.
The body language of the golfers was unmistakable.
It said fear and it said loathing.
And with good reason.
The first round of the Players Championship dawned with a hard west wind whipping across the T.P.C. at Sawgrass, and that put the sharp teeth back into the golf course.
Nowhere is the bite more evident than at the 17th, the malevolent "Island Hole," the scariest short par-3 this side of Augusta's 12th, and the place where golf balls splashed like hail into the black waters of the lake.


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan art shows: DAVID REED, Max Protetch Gallery, 560 Broadway, at Prince Street, SoHo (through tomorrow).
Mr.
Reed's trademark scrolls and volutes look three-dimensional but are absolutely, impeccably flat.
Previously arranged in monochrome bands, the scrolls are now surrounded by expanses of white, transforming them into sculptural groups.
The paintings, probably the best of his career, are accompanied by a silly installation piece involving a bed and a clip from Alfred Hitchcock's film "Vertigo" (Pepe Karmel).


Prof. Menelaos D. Hassialis, 85, Adviser on Manhattan Project
Menelaos Dimitri Hassialis, a professor of mining at Columbia University who was a consultant to the Manhattan Project, died on March 16 at his home in Ridgewood, N.J.
He was 85.
He died after a brief illness, his family said.


CHRONICLE
MICHAEL MINDLIN performed his 90-minute monologue, "Memories of an Unknown Celebrity," for an invitation-only audience in New York three years ago.
Since he is not a professional actor, he took the theatrical good-luck wish "break a leg" a little too literally.
"I did the show off Broadway, so I only broke a toe," he recalled.
The accident happened the afternoon of the performance.
Having paid his theatrical dues and hoping that his toes will remain intact, he is returning Off Broadway on Wednesday.
This time, "Memories," directed by Phyllis Newman, is to run until April 23, at the William Redfield Theater on West 45th Street.


Stunned Town Seeks Reason For Slayings
Nothing in Christopher Green's background, his acquaintances say, offered any hint that he would some day be arrested for a horrible crime in his hometown.
He was a well-regarded electrician's helper for a small electrical company in South Orange in the 1980's, and in the last two years a dependable laborer for Montclair's Department of Public Works at a salary of $26,600 a year.
Last October he passed a statewide police entrance exam and his name was placed on a waiting list for departments with openings for patrolmen.


International Briefs; German Metal Concern In Deal on Creditors
An effort to revamp Metallgesellschaft A.G., the troubled German metals and engineering conglomerate, was bolstered yesterday after Germany's two biggest banks agreed to buy out the company's American and French creditors for $107 million.
The last-minute move by Deutsche Bank A.G. and Dresdner Bank A.G. strengthened Metallgesell schaft's plan to seek fresh equity capital from stockholders.
The plan, presented to shareholders today, had been opposed by nearly a dozen American and French bank creditors, notably Societe Generale and Credit Lyonnais of France.


CHRONICLE
GERMAINE GREER, the feminist writer, was raped at age 19 in her native Australia, never reported it to the police and never before now talked publicly about it.
This week she wrote about it "with deep reluctance" in a column for The Guardian in London, hoping, she said, that it would encourage "the hundreds of thousands of women who have had to live down a rape to declare themselves."


Challenge to Multimillion-Dollar Settlement Threatens Top Texas Lawyers
On Oct. 23, 1989, about 40 tons of flammable vapor were accidentally released and ignited at the Phillips Petroleum Company's Houston Chemical Complex, killing 23 people and injuring hundreds.
Three years later, Phillips had settled virtually all the resulting claims for an amount said to exceed $400 million.
The law firm representing most of the plaintiffs received contingency fees -- based on a percentage of the settlements -- of $65 million.


Viewers Must Wonder About Real Weasel After Uncensored Clip on Channel 2
Bernie Smilovitz's 14-month reign of ditziness at WCBS-TV/Channel 2 has been marked by a total failure to inject humor into sportscasting because he is as funny as Warren Christopher and as memorable as Jerry Azar.
I've stopped watching him, except by mistake.
Given a choice, I'd rather watch Storm Field, Frank Field, Sidney Fields or Mrs.
Fields deliver the sports.
But if he wanted to snag some attention Wednesday, he did.
It was time for his "Weasel of the Week" feature, sadly the most creative work Smilovitz does (except wiggling his eyebrows and exhibiting his tongue).
Why, that weasel stuff has music (see "Weasel, Pop Goes the") and animation!
Busby Bernie, do your nutty stuff! (Rock Rote, come back, all is forgiven!)


For Children
'Theatersports'
John Houseman Studio Theater  450 West 42d Street  Clinton  (212) 642-8202  Recommended ages: 9 and up  Through April 8
Improvisation doesn't come lightly.
In this program you can see actors and actresses hemming and hawing their way along the steep hills and dales of this art, all for the sake of the thrill.
In this competitive program, presented by the Freestyle Repertory Theater, two teams of actors a night take turns chasing theatrical glory (last Saturday it was the Kung Fools versus the Waiters for Godot).
Luckily, the audience gets to travel with them.


Trade Won't Make Cuba More Democratic
To the Editor:
Re "Cuba: Time to Change Direction" (editorial, March 19): The claim that trade and contact will bring about the end of the Castro regime ignores facts that make the argument inapplicable to Cuba.


Lonely and Literary Behind a Surly Facade
In portraying the sullen desperation of working-class people from the grimier outskirts of town, the English kitchen-sink film makers of 35 years ago had nothing on Ana Kokkinos, the Australian director of "Only the Brave." From the looks of her first feature film, the atmosphere around the industrial fringe of Melbourne seems permeated with a poisonous murk.
The movie's hapless central character, Alex (Elena Mandalis), is a tall, plain girl with long stringy hair who dresses in leather and mopes about with her best friend, Vicki (Dora Kaskanis).
A pyromaniac given to fits of uncontrollable rage, Vicki likes to regale Alex with her vivid fantasies of being a heavy-metal rock singer.


Error at Intuit Exposes Users of Tax Software to Tampering
Yet another serious flaw has been uncovered in a popular tax-preparation software program, and this time the error has exposed thousands of Federal and state tax returns to unauthorized viewing, tampering, or deletion, a computer software company acknowledged yesterday.
Intuit Inc. of Menlo Park, Calif., best known for its popular Quicken personal finance program, conceded yesterday that its programmers had inadvertently included information in its Macintax tax preparation program that would enable computer users with modems to gain access to the central computer that stores the electronic tax returns filed by Intuit's customers.


Unmasking, but Without Prurience
THOMAS MANN  A Biography
By Ronald Hayman
Illustrated. 672 pages. Scribner. $35.
Contemporary readers of Thomas Mann tend to focus on his dexterous use of myth and symbolism: turning an Alpine sanitarium into a metaphor for pre-World War I Europe in "The Magic Mountain" for instance, and turning the Faustian career of a composer into a parable for Germany's embrace of Nazism in "Doktor Faustus." Yet his work was always deeply autobiographical, as the continuing publication of his diaries has recently made clear.
And this impulse is vividly underscored by Ronald Hayman's magisterial new biography, a biography that not only explicates the many intimate correspondences between Mann and his own heroes but that also demonstrates just how minutely the overarching themes of his work -- art, death and illness -- remained rooted in his own emotional and familial conflicts.


Seahawks Sign Sweeney
The Seattle Seahawks signed the free-agent center JIM SWEENEY yesterday.
The 6-foot-4-inch, 284-pound Sweeney had played his entire 11-season N.F.L.
League career with the Jets, who recently released him.
He has played in 166 career games, starting the last 158 in a row. (AP)


Kentucky Clobbering Foes
Of the final 16 teams, Arizona State supposedly faced the the most impossible task.
Popular thinking here was they could stay within 14 points of Kentucky.
Wrong.


Penn Traffic Co.(PNF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


How Senators Voted on Line-Item Veto
Following is the 69-to-29 roll-call vote by which the Senate tonight approved a bill giving the President greater power to veto spending programs passed by Congress.
A "yes" vote was a vote in favor of the line-item bill.
Voting "yes" were 19 Democrats and 50 Republicans.
Voting "no" were 27 Democrats and 2 Republicans.
Alabama: Heflin (D) Yes; Shelby (R) Yes.
Alaska: Murkowski (R) Yes; Stevens (R) Not Voting.
Arizona: Kyl (R) Yes; McCain (R) Yes.
Arkansas: Bumpers (D) No; Pryor (D) No.
California: Boxer (D) No; Feinstein (D) Yes.
Colorado: Brown (R) Yes; Campbell (R) Yes.
Connecticut: Dodd (D) No; Lieberman (D) Yes.
Delaware: Biden (D) Yes; Roth (R) Yes.
Florida: Graham (D) Yes; Mack (R) Yes.
Georgia: Coverdell (R) Yes; Nunn (D) No.
Hawaii: Akaka (D) No; Inouye (D) No.
Idaho: Craig (R) Yes; Kempthorne (R) Yes.
Illinois: Moseley-Braun (D) No; Simon (D) No.
Indiana: Coats (R) Yes; Lugar (R) Yes.
Iowa: Grassley (R) Yes; Harkin (D) Yes.
Kansas: Dole (R) Yes; Kassebaum (R) Yes.
Kentucky: Ford (D) Yes; McConnell (R) Yes.
Louisiana: Breaux (D) Yes; Johnston (D) No.
Maine: Cohen (R) Yes; Snowe (R) Yes.
Maryland: Mikulski (D) No; Sarbanes (D) No.
Massachusetts: Kennedy (D) Yes; Kerry (D) Yes.
Michigan: Abraham (R) Yes; Levin (D) No.
Minnesota: Grams (R) Yes; Wellstone (D) Yes.
Mississippi: Cochran (R) Yes; Lott (R) Yes.
Missouri: Ashcroft (R) Yes; Bond (R) Yes.
Montana: Baucus (D) No; Burns (R) Yes.
Nebraska: Exon (D) Yes; Kerrey (D) No.
Nevada: Bryan (D) No; Reid (D) No.
New Hampshire: Gregg (R) Yes; Smith (R) Yes.
New Jersey: Bradley (D) Yes; Lautenberg (D) No.
New Mexico: Bingaman (D) No; Domenici (R) Yes.
New York: D'Amato (R) Yes; Moynihan (D) No.
North Carolina: Faircloth (R) Yes; Helms (R) Yes.
North Dakota: Conrad (D) No; Dorgan (D) Yes.
Ohio: DeWine (R) Yes; Glenn (D) No.
Oklahoma: Inhofe (R) Yes; Nickles (R) Yes.
Oregon: Hatfield (R) No; Packwood (R) Yes.
Pennsylvania: Santorum (R) Yes; Specter (R) Yes.
Rhode Island: Chafee (R) Yes; Pell (D) No.
South Carolina: Hollings (D) Yes; Thurmond (R) Yes.
South Dakota: Daschle (D) Yes; Pressler (R) Yes.
Tennessee: Frist (R) Yes; Thompson (R) Yes.
Texas: Gramm (R) Not Voting; Hutchison (R) Yes.
Utah: Bennett (R) Yes; Hatch (R) Yes.
Vermont: Jeffords (R) No; Leahy (D) No.
Virginia: Robb (D) Yes; Warner (R) Yes.
Washington: Gorton (R) Yes; Murray (D) No.
West Virginia: Byrd (D) No; Rockefeller (D) No.
Wisconsin: Feingold (D) Yes; Kohl (D) Yes.
Wyoming: Simpson (R) Yes; Thomas (R) Yes.


Ameron Inc.(AMN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Cancer Drug Overdoses: Rare but Deadly
Doctors say that disastrous accidental overdoses of cancer drugs are rare but that they can and do occur, despite elaborate checks to avoid them or detect them before it is too late.
The problem, said Dr.
Marc Lippman, who directs the cancer center at the Georgetown University School of Medicine in Washington, is that overdoses of cancer drugs are almost always lethal.
"There are very few drugs that if you take ten times the recommended dose, much would happen to you for too long," he said in a telephone interview.
"You'd get over it. But with cancer drugs, you'd be dead."


Public Hospitals Chief Quits, Opposing Giuliani Over Cuts
The chairman of New York City's Health and Hospitals Corporation resigned unexpectedly yesterday, saying he could not support the deep Medicaid cuts that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Gov.
George E. Pataki are seeking.
The chairman, Luis A. Miranda Jr., resigned minutes before the agency's board of directors was to vote on a resolution condemning the cuts, which would effectively slash the agency's budget by close to 30 percent.


Spray in a Subway Car Sends 9 to Hospitals
Nine riders on a downtown No. 1 train, including two children, were taken to nearby hospitals with minor injuries after someone sprayed a noxious substance inside the car, the Transit Police said.
The incident occurred as the train entered the Cathedral Parkway Station at 110th Street and Broadway yesterday afternoon, said Capt.
Robert Nocera, a spokesman for the Transit Police.


I.B.M. to Introduce New Computers (Hold the OS/2, Please)
After delaying the introduction of its new generation of personal computers last fall because a new version of its OS/2 operating system was not yet ready, I.B.M. has decided to introduce the machines this spring, even though the new version of OS/2 may not be generally available until early next year, according to I.B.M. executives and others familiar with the company's plans.
"These guys don't have a hope of shipping OS/2 anytime soon," said an industry executive familiar with I.B.M.'s plans.


Guest Traces Simpson's Steps and Moods
Brian (Kato) Kaelin, the man who apparently saw O. J. Simpson more often on June 12, 1994, than anyone else, testified today that at no time did Mr.
Simpson seem angry, agitated, depressed, despondent, preoccupied, out-of-sorts or anything else to suggest he was about to kill his former wife and an unfortunate friend.
It was the third day on the stand for the shaggy-haired would-be actor who lived behind Mr.
Simpson's home last June.
Mr.
Kaelin, a man of torn loyalties and a sometimes fuzzy perception of reality, once again offered something to hearten both sides in the case; in essence, Mr.
Kaelin testified that while Mr.
Simpson might not have been in a mood to kill, he clearly had the time.


Bosnia Seeks Short Extension Of Operations of U.N. Force
The Bosnian Government said today that when the peacekeeping mandate for the former Yugoslavia expires at the end of this month, it wants no more than a 30-day extension, during which time the operation in that country should be reviewed and strengthened.
The Bosnian demand, made in a letter to Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali by President Alija Izetbegovic, comes in the middle of negotiations over a new peacekeeping force for Croatia.


Schnitzer Steel Industries(SCHN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


On Stage, and Off
Lonely, and Perhaps Empty-Handed
Here's an unsettling thought for Sir Andrew Lloyd Webber: it may be nice to have very little competition for "Sunset Boulevard" at the Tony Awards, but it's deadly to have none.
You can't win a Tony in a category with only one entry, and it's beginning to look as if "Sunset" will be alone in two: best book and best score.
A number of rule changes and producers' decisions have conspired to knock one musical after another out of the contest.


Matthew Guinan, 84, Dies; Led Transit Union
Matthew Guinan, an Irish-born trolley car operator who was a pioneer and president of the Transport Workers Union of America, died on Wednesday in Lauder Hill, Fla.
He was 84.
Mr.
Guinan died after a brief illness, relatives said.
He had lived in the Bronx for many years.


Art in Review
'Maux Faux'
Ronald Feldman Fine Arts  31 Mercer Street (below Grand Street)  SoHo  Through April 15
Last fall, Ronald Feldman held a show devoted to "Faux" art: painting and sculpture examining "the concept of artificiality." The gallery now returns to this topic with "Maux Faux," showing seven of the same artists and eight new ones.
The tutelary genius of "Faux" was Andy Warhol; this time round, that role is taken by Yayoi Kusama, the Japanese artist best known for her 1960's sculptures of ordinary objects covered with soft phallic protrusions.
Unfortunately, there is only one of these here, a baking pan filled with silver phalli.
It is accompanied by one of Miss Kusama's "net" paintings, a large 1960 canvas with thousands of little yellow-orange loops on a black ground.


U.S. and Russia Agree to Try to Extend Fraying Bosnia Cease-Fire
Secretary of State Warren Christopher and Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev of Russia agreed today to try to extend the fraying cease-fire in Bosnia and American officials disclosed details of a revised peace plan that would no longer require Serbia to recognize Bosnia formally.
Under the plan, Serbia is being asked to approve constitutional principles that would keep Bosnia's territory intact; in return Serbia would win a partial lifting of sanctions.


QVC Inc.(QVCN,NNM) reports earnings for Year to Jan 31


House Bill Links Licenses To Child-Support Payment
Bowing to pressure from Democrats, the House of Representatives voted today to require states to take more vigorous action against people who fail to pay child support.
Under the bill, states would have to have procedures to suspend driver's licenses and professional licenses of people who refused to pay child support.


International Briefs; Lufthansa Reports Profit for 1994
The German airline Lufthansa said yesterday that it moved into profitability in its first year as a private carrier in 1994, after three years of losses under state ownership.
Lufthansa, the world's largest cargo freight carrier and third-leading passenger carrier, said it had a pretax profit of $216 million in 1994, after a loss of $37 million a year earlier.


Detroit Utility Is Cleared as Sole Supplier to Big 3
Regulators in Michigan yesterday approved a precedent-setting plan under which the Detroit Edison Company is to become the sole supplier of power to 54 assembly and parts plants for the Big Three auto makers for 10 years, in return for which the auto companies will get substantial savings on their electric rates.
The trade-off agreement, the largest of its kind so far between a utility and its major industrial customers, is expected to be tried by other utilities.


United Stationers Inc.(USTR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Is Organized Crime Back at the Table?
Just a few steps from the Cafe du Monde, a popular tourist spot here, is Frank's, a casual, Italian-style restaurant that not long ago caught the eye of a different class of sightseer -- the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
The restaurant's habitues included some intriguing characters with nicknames like Noogie, Mr.
A and Muffaletta Frank.
And their table talk was not limited to food.
Based largely on F.B.I. surveillance, Federal prosecutors won indictments last year of 17 suspected members or associates of the Marcello crime family here and the Genovese and Gambino families in New York.


Merrill Corp.(MRLL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Reggio Emilia Journal; Tell These Italians Communism Doesn't Work
At a time when Italian politics and public administration are in disarray, this quiet, prosperous town of 135,000 remains a pocket of consistency, and even efficiency.
Incomes are high, unemployment is low, services are ample and helpful, and the former Communist Party -- which has run the town hall since World War II -- remains firmly in charge, if under a new name.


International Briefs; Guinness Profit Up
Guinness P.L.C. said yesterday that its pretax profit rose 5 percent on the strength of higher earnings from its brewing operations.
Guiness, the world's most profitable alcoholic drink company, said it earned pretax profit of $:915 million, or $1.45 billion, last year.
Its 1993 pretax profit was $:875 million, before a one-time charge of $:173 million.
The profit growth last year came from the Jamaican brewing interests that Guinness acquired in November 1993 and from increased earnings from beer sales in Malaysia and Spain.
The spirits division received $:29 million from fluctuations in exchange rates.


With New Fly, Science Outdoes Hollywood
Combining elements of the sublime and the macabre, scientists have created flies that grow large, perfectly formed eyes on the most inappropriate parts of their bodies: on their wings, on their legs, on the quivering tips of their antennae.
The experiment offers graphic evidence that scientists may have discovered what they call "the master control gene" for the formation of the eye, one of the most complex structures in nature.
Researchers in developmental biology have been struggling, with scant success, to identify the genetic signals that initiate the growth of the body's specialized components, whether limb, liver or brain.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Magic Turns Back Hornets, 105-93  Shaquille O'Neal scored 34 points last night, and his highlight-film jam over Alonzo Mourning during a 10-0 fourth-period run helped the Orlando Magic pull away to a 105-93 victory over the visiting Charlotte Hornets.
The victory was the 50th of the season for Orlando, tying a franchise record set a year ago, and also was the 100th of coach Brian Hill's career. (AP) JAZZ 112, ROCKETS 104: In Houston, HKarl Malone scored 15 of his 30 points in the third quarter, preventing Utah from blowing an 18-point halftime lead and carrying the Jazz to victory over Houston.
Utah leads the N.B.A. in field-goal percentage and the Jazz showed it, taking a 60-42 lead at halftime by hitting 57 percent. (AP) MEN'S COLLEGE BASKETBALL Canisius Wins and Gains N.I.T.
Semifinal  Michael Meeks scored 18 of his 24 points in the second half to lead Canisius to a 89-80 victory over Washington State in a National Invitation Tournament quarterfinal game last night in Buffalo.
Canisius used a 13-0 run to come back from an early deficit and held the lead for the final 28 minutes of the game.
The Golden Griffiths (21-12) reached the N.I.T.
Final Four for the first time since 1963.
Canisius plays Virginia Tech in Monday's first game at Madison Square Garden.
Marquette plays Penn State, which beat Iowa by 67-64 last night in the other semifinal. (AP) GOLF Three Tied for Lead on 69's in Dinah Shore  Penny Hammel, her game steady despite swirling wind and rain in the afternoon, shot a three-under-par 69 yesterday to share the opening-day lead in the Nabisco Dinah Shore at Rancho Mirage, Calif.
Muffin Spencer-Devlin and Nanci Bowen, who teed off in the early morning, also shot 69's, getting in much of their round before the weather turned bad.
Five players were in a group two shots off the lead in the first of the L.P.G.A.'s majors in 1995 as only eight players managed under-par rounds at Mission Hills Country Club. (AP)


13-Hour Appreciation Of Ravel and Debussy
The lives and legacies of the French composers Maurice Ravel and Claude Debussy will be celebrated tomorrow in 13 hours of music, dance, readings and film at Symphony Space, Broadway at 95th Street, from 11 A.M. to midnight.


Speedy Da Hoss Gets Test With a One-Mile Distance
Da Hoss, a son of Gone West and grandson of Mr.
Prospector, has won all 4 of his starts by a combined total of 17 lengths.
In one of them, he even rocketed six furlongs in the record time of 1:071/5 when he was still 2 years old.
The question is whether this speedball can step up to the big leagues and race the longer distances required to be a Kentucky Derby threat.
He will get his chance tomorrow when he runs against 10 other colts in the $250,000 Gotham Stakes at Aqueduct.
Da Hoss drew the No. 9 post yesterday in the one-mile race, but his strongest rivals were nearby.
Devious Course, who won the Nashua Stakes at Aqueduct last fall and just missed winning the Swale Stakes at Gulfstream Park two weeks ago, drew No. 10.
And the Canadian juvenile champion of last year, Talkin Man, drew No. 7.


Milo Morrow, Costumer, 73
Milo Morrow, who headed the costume shop of the New York Shakespeare Festival for more than 20 years, died on March 14 at his home in Manhattan.
He was 73.
The cause was a heart attack, said Carol Fineman, a spokeswoman for the festival.


Court Upholds Law Banning Unsolicited Fax Ads
A Federal appeals court has backed the rights of fax machine owners over those of some small advertisers by upholding a law banning unsolicited advertising by fax.
The ruling could lead to curbs on other advertising, lawyers said.
The unanimous decision by a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, in San Francisco, upheld the right of Congress to stem the flow of costly and unrequested commercial faxes to businesses and homes.
In doing so, the court rejected arguments that the 1991 Telephone Consumer Protection Act violates commercial free speech.


Text of Pataki Statement
Following is the statement issued today by Gov.
George E. Pataki about protests of his proposed cutbacks in funds for the State and City University of New York.
New York is facing a $5 million budget deficit for the upcoming fiscal year.
We must close this deficit and bring desperately needed fiscal sanity to the budget process.


Tax Software Flaw May Expose Returns
Intuit said a flaw in a popular tax preparation program, Macintax, has exposed thousands of Federal and state tax returns to unauthorized viewing, tampering or deletion.
The software flaw enabled computer users with modems to gain access to the central computer that stores electronic tax returns filed by its customers.
The announcement follows the disclosure of more minor flaws in the company's tax preparation software.


Zoom! Splat! It's the Future And It's Weird!
I HAVE just jumped from the roof of a building.
I don't fall.
An updraft sends me sailing out over roads and buildings, rivers and farms.
This card-carrying acrophobiac is hang-gliding!
Suddenly, I begin to wobble.
Hey, I'm spinning out of control.
I over-correct for my over-correction.
I'm nearly upside down.
A building looms in front of me . . .
Splat!
Your correspondent is now, it seems, virtually dead.
Well, big deal.
It won't be the last time today.
I'm back at the joystick within seconds, and gradually getting the hang of this fragment of virtual experience, scientifically known as having a television strapped to your face.
A helmet makes this televised world the one I feel I'm really in.
I can hear my own footsteps on stereo headphones as I walk about.
Plenty, plenty weird.


Long Road to Truth About Killings in Guatemala
In November President Clinton's national security adviser, Anthony Lake, told Jennifer Harbury, an American lawyer married to a Guatemalan guerrilla, that the United States had no information that her common-law husband was alive.
That was the truth, but not the whole truth.


Casino Foes Sue to Halt Bridgeport Referendum on Gambling
A vote next week asking Bridgeport residents whether they want a casino is described by city officials as a "nonbinding public opinion survey" intended only to show state legislators and Gov.
John G. Rowland that there is strong support for a casino here.
But casino opponents sued to block the vote today, saying it is an illegal referendum that could indeed be binding, committing Bridgeport's voters to accept a casino if the General Assembly votes this year to authorize one.


Big Doses of Chemotherapy Drug Killed Patient, Hurt 2d
Two patients receiving experimental treatment for advanced breast cancer at one of the country's most prestigious cancer hospitals were given massive overdoses of two chemotherapy drugs.
One patient died, and the other suffered permanent heart damage.
The incidents occurred at Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston, a Harvard teaching hospital, late last fall.
Officials at the hospital said they were at a loss to explain how such a serious medical error, which apparently resulted from a mistake in an order by a doctor last November, escaped attention until a clerk picked it up in a routine review of data last month.


Art in Review
Jane Freilicher
Fischbach Gallery  24 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through April 1
Art and life blend in Jane Freilicher's lovely show of recent paintings, which include motifs she first used 40 years ago: luminous still lifes and Watteau's commedia dell'arte character Mezzetin, dressed in ash gray and antique rose and singing of unrequited love.





Morgan Now Seeks $1 Billion for Mexico
J.
P.
Morgan &amp; Company is now seeking to raise $1 billion in financing for Mexico to help bolster that country's banking system, New York bankers said yesterday.
The planned financing, which would have a maturity of several years, is intended to replace an earlier $3 billion short-term bank loan, proposed in January but never brought to fruition.


Pfizer and Myco Agree to Develop Fungus Drugs
Pfizer Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to collaborate with Myco Pharmaceuticals Inc., a three-year-old privately held biotechnology company based in Cambridge, Mass., in the development of antifungal drugs.
The agreement could be worth up to $50 million to Myco.
Under terms of the agreement, Pfizer will develop, manufacture and market any antifungal agents discovered through the collaboration.
Pfizer will provide Myco with equity investment and money for research and development totaling more than $20 million over four years.
In return, Pfizer will own slightly less than 15 percent of Myco.
In addition, Pfizer will make product-based milestone payments to Myco that could exceed $30 million, if more than one drug is developed.


Fire Rages in Chelsea
A three-alarm fire raged for more than an hour in an 11-story office building in Chelsea last night, injuring six firefighters, who were treated for exhaustion and minor smoke inhalation, fire officials said.
No other injuries were reported.


Art in Review
Jonathan Borofsky  Paula Cooper Gallery 155 Wooster Street SoHo Through April 1
This small 25-year survey of Jonathan Borofsky's work includes few drawings and so fails to do justice to his odd talent, which embraces the personal while remaining gratingly impersonal.
Nonetheless, it pays tribute to an artist whose penchant for autobiographical narrative, multimedia capriciousness and visual awkwardness may deserve more credit than it has received.
Along with artists like Sigmar Polke and Bruce Nauman, Mr.
Borofsky is a forerunner of the current strain of congenitally disjointed "slacker" art.


Help! Police! Thieves! (Help! Police Thieves!)
The striking thing about a carjacking attempt against President Ernesto Zedillo's eldest son the other day was not that it took place in an affluent Mexico City neighborhood, that it happened in broad daylight or that a state police commander was sitting a few feet away.
The part that had Mexicans shaking their heads today was that the assailants themselves were state policemen, Government officials confirmed, and the commander across the street was running the operation.
The officers apparently had no idea who their victim was.


Where the Everyday Is a Scarcity
For nearly a century, most residents of this tumbledown mountain hamlet 80 miles east of Charleston have been drawing their drinking water from a common well on a hillside just above the town's 70 houses.
Three years ago, state officials found that the water was contaminated with pollutants, and issued an order to boil it before drinking.


Treasuries Edge Higher in a Light Up-and-Down Session
Prices of Treasury securities edged up in light trading yesterday, following the dollar up and down through most of the session but holding their own at the end while the dollar sank against the yen.
The price of the 30-year bond rose 2/32 , to 1026/32 for a yield of 7.44 percent, down from 7.45 percent on Wednesday.
The rates on shorter-maturity bills were also a bit lower.


World News Briefs; Iran Denies Comment On Chemical Arms
Iran today rejected assertions by the United States that it had deployed chemical weapons at the mouth of the Persian Gulf, but added that it would take "any measure" to build its defense readiness.
In a statement underlining the long recriminations between Teheran and Washington, the Iranian Foreign Ministry spokesman, Morteza Sarmadi, accused Defense Secretary William J. Perry of "acting like a middleman for weapons manufacturing cartels" and creating a climate of fear and instability.


Editorial Notebook; The Colin Ferguson Trial
Colin Ferguson spent two days in a Long Island courtroom this week listening to a lot of people talk about him.
Sometimes he tilted his head.
Sometimes he raised his eyebrows.
But Colin Ferguson's face was, as ever, unreadable.
So is Colin Ferguson.
We know that on Dec. 7, 1993, Mr.
Ferguson killed six people on a Long Island Rail Road train and would have killed more had not two of his fellow passengers disarmed him.
We know that he regards himself as akin to John the Baptist because he said so in a long, rambling speech before a judge sentenced him to 200 years in prison.
We know, too, that he is armored in self-righteousness.
The judge's words for him -- "selfish," "self-centered," "a coward" -- bounced off him as harmlessly as a victim's shouted "animal" had the day before.


Ames Department Stores (AMES,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


National Data Corp.(NDC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Wyman-Gordon Co.(WYMN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 4


Diner's Journal
Tuscan Regional Cooking
Savore opened on Monday.
The paint's hardly dry, the liquor license has yet to arrive (the restaurant expects to be able to serve wine any day now), and half the waiters don't speak English.
Still, it is instantly clear that this spare, attractive restaurant is not just another copy of every other trattoria in New York City.
Look at the menu.
The appetizers include sauteed monkfish with artichoke heart, and corn mousse (read polenta) with wild boar sauce.
Among the pastas are hand-cut spaghetti, each strand separate, strong and resilient.
The feather-light pappardelle should make any Tuscan proud, especially when tossed with a fine wild boar ragu.
And tagliolini, gentle little squiggles of pasta, have been showered with lemon juice and butter.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.06
5.97
3.49
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.68
5.70
3.43
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.83
5.84
3.77
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.18
7.19
6.54
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.44
7.45
6.95
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.33
8.34
7.79
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.38
6.37
6.03
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 8


Lawmakers Pledging to Resign
Three New Jersey Representatives have resigned.
Or at least they have promised to, after serving no more than 12 years in the Capitol here.


Sabatini Squanders Lead During a Loss in Semifinals
The sun was merciless today and so was the slow disintegration of Gabriela Sabatini's poise in a semifinal of the Lipton Championships to which she had staked what seemed an unshakable claim.
The fifth-seeded Sabatini, an Argentine who has made this pristine island her second home, self-destructed on a tactical infrastructure overrun by 18 double faults and 69 unforced errors.
Sabatini tripped herself up despite the fact that her underdog opponent, Kimiko Date of Japan, was grimacing through their semifinal with a serving shoulder so tender that she clutched it after almost every point.
No matter.
Sabatini, with perspiration spilling across her face like sequins and double faults spilling from her racquet like so many lost hopes, suffered a humiliating 1-6, 7-6 (7-2), 7-6 (7-4) defeat to the seventh-seeded Date.


Measurex Corp.(MX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 5


COMPANY BRIEFS
CARSON PIRIE SCOTT &amp; CO., Milwaukee, which is seeking to buy the Midwestern department store owner Younkers Inc., said it had begun mailing proxy materials to Younkers' shareholders in a bid to get three outsiders elected to its board.
CORPORATE EXPRESS INC., Broomfield, Colo., a supplier of office products to large corporations, said it had begun a secondary public offering of 3.9 million common shares at $25 each.


Politically Correct Pals
Great figures of American folklore are cut down to size in "Tall Tale: The Unbelievable Adventures of Pecos Bill," in which a plucky boy finds himself with Pecos Bill, John Henry and Paul Bunyan for traveling companions.
Their exploits are earnest and desultory enough to suggest either that heroism isn't what it used to be or that children brought up on Indiana Jones-type movie flash aren't easily wowed by a woodsman with a blue ox.
It doesn't help that Paul Bunyan (Oliver Platt) has become ecologically correct. ("In my day, we didn't kill the land. We just borrowed from it.") Or that he's hidden behind enough scraggly hair to suggest Sasquatch, not a legendary logger.
Or even that he and the film's other mythic figures are so blandly affable when they meet Daniel Hackett (Nick Stahl), a farm boy whose father (Stephen Lang) is being menaced by stock heavies (led by Scott Glenn).
These villains are boringly evil capitalists who want to force Daniel and his parents off their land.


Core Industries(CRI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Centers In Middle Of Strategy
This is supposed to be the age of transition offense, pressure defense and the 3-point shot, a time when the measure of a national championship contender rests heavily on the ability of a team's backcourt.
That's not the case in the East Regional of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.
Three of the four teams that have reached this portion of the Sweet 16 possess centers that can dominate a game both offensively and defensively.
Tim Duncan of Wake Forest, Bryant (Big Country) Reeves of Oklahoma State, and Marcus Camby of Massachusetts have played major roles in their teams' progressing to Byrne Meadowlands Arena, where along with Tulsa they'll duel for one berth to next weekend's Final Four.


Alwin M. Pappenheimer Jr., 86; Shed Light on Bacterial Toxins
Alwin Max Pappenheimer Jr., a biochemist and immunologist at Harvard University who helped to unlock the secrets of bacterial toxins, died on Tuesday at Mount Auburn Hospital in Cambridge, Mass.
A longtime resident of Cambridge, he was 86 and for the last several years had lived in Watertown, Mass.
The cause was a stroke, his family said.


Parkinson's Patients Hope and Despair
To the Editor:
During the past two weeks there has been a surge of media attention on Parkinson's disease and on a surgical procedure known as pallidotomy.
Two reports have attracted the widest audiences: a segment of ABC's "Prime Time Live" and your March 16 front-page article.


PRICE COSTCO INC. (PCCW,NNM)
Price Costco Inc., the big retailer based in Kirkland, Wash., said yesterday that it lost $18.6 million, or 6 cents a share, in the fiscal second quarter, in contrast to net income of $62.3 million, or 28 cents, in the corresponding period a year earlier.
The continuing operations of the company in the second quarter, however, were profitable, showing an increase of 8.5 percent from a year earlier, reflecting an improved gross profit margin and lower operating expenses.


Shameful C.I.A. Secrets
In 1990 Michael DeVine, an American who ran an inn in the Guatemalan rain forest, was mysteriously abducted and killed.
In 1992 Efrain Bamaca Velasquez, a member of a guerrilla movement fighting the Guatemalan Government, was taken captive after a firefight and disappeared.
His American wife, Jennifer Harbury, received word that he had been seen alive in a secret military prison and began trying to find out what happened to him.
Now, it turns out, both were killed at the direction of a paid agent of the Central Intelligence Agency.
Adding to the shame of these events for America is the fact that the man implicated in the killings was a Guatemalan colonel trained by the U.S.
Army.
Ms.
Harbury was given contrary reports of her husband's death.
In frustration she staged a hunger strike in Guatemala City that finally embarrassed both Guatemalan and U.S. authorities into promises that they would pursue the case more energetically.
But Ms.
Harbury never found out what happened to her husband until Wednesday, when she was told by Representative Robert Torricelli.


Four A's Names Award Finalists
The American Association of Advertising Agencies, known as the Four A's, has named 21 finalists in two categories for its annual A+ Creative Awards competition.
The winners will be announced on April 28 during the annual meeting of the Four A's in Orlando, Fla.
Among agencies with billings of more than $30 million, 15 finalists were selected in four regions.
In the eastern region, they were Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas in New York; Angotti, Thomas, Hedge in New York; Cliff Freeman &amp; Partners in New York; the Martin Agency in Richmond; Mullen Advertising in Wenham, Mass., and J. Walter Thompson New York.
In the central region, they were Bozell Detroit in Southfield, Mich.; Carmichael Lynch in Minneapolis; Fallon McElligott in Minneapolis, and Martin/Williams Advertising in Minneapolis.


The Top Scorer for Kansas Is on the Comeback Trail
All season, they sit in their father's den and watch their father's son on their father's television set.
If the Haase family did not have a little brother, Jerod, and did not have Kansas basketball via satellite, the mourning would linger day and night.
But these telecasts to South Lake Tahoe, Calif. -- and specifically, this weekend's Midwest Regional -- serve as Jerod Haase's upbeat letters home.
One of his floor burns is worth a thousand words.
Two Februaries ago, he was a University of California freshman, until one horrifying weekend made him him feel like a 10th-year senior.
In a span of 12 hours, he lost a game at the buzzer and then awoke to hear that his father, Gary, had died from a freakish foot infection.
Jerod Haase needed out, and he needed out fast, and, this winter and spring he has risen again as a Kansas transfer.


On My Mind; How to Trade With Iran
"I, William J. Clinton, President of the United States of America, find that the actions and policies of the Government of Iran constitute an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy and economy of the United States, and hereby declare a national emergency to deal with that threat."
Clear and powerful, every word of the Presidential preamble to Executive Order 12957, signed March 15.
But it turns out that the steps actually ordered by the President after that fine lead are so limited that the executive order makes only one thing clear.
The U.S. still is not willing to stop the flow of billions of American dollars that make Iran threatening.


Cygne Designs Inc.(CYDS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Fencing Off the Women's Conference
The United Nations Secretariat is tarnishing a forthcoming conference on women's issues by denying credentials to a slew of non-governmental organizations, possibly more than 200, without explaining why.
The action has bred suspicion that the Secretariat is responding to political pressures from the conference's Chinese hosts or such powerful participants as the Vatican.
In several instances, the denials resulted from direct pressure.
The Chinese, who were eager to have Beijing as the conference site, pledged that the forum would be open to all relevant non-governmental as well as governmental groups.
However, they asked, and got, the U.N. to deny credentials to women's organizations from Taiwan and Tibet, their political adversaries.
The Vatican does not want to hear from Catholics critical of the church's views on family life and abortion.
It tried to have the U.N. deny credentials to Catholics for a Free Choice and its sister groups in Mexico, Brazil and Uruguay, but were repulsed after an outcry.


David Martin, 80; Journalist Focused On Foreign Policy
David Martin, a former foreign policy analyst for Senator Thomas J. Dodd of Connecticut, died on March 16 at Arlington Hospital in Virginia.
He was 80 and lived in Arlington.
The cause was Parkinson's disease, his son, Joe Martin, said.


Repairs on 4 Train Routes
Parts of four subway lines in lower Manhattan and Brooklyn will be shut down from tonight until early Monday morning so that aging switches can be replaced and tracks repaired.
The No. 2 and 3 trains will not run from 34th Street in Manhattan to Atlantic Avenue in Brooklyn, and the No. 1 and 9 trains will not operate from 34th Street to South Ferry.


Dow Rises to Another Record, but Broader Market Drifts
While the Dow Jones industrial average and Nasdaq indexes hit record highs yesterday, the overall stock market appeared to drift in advance of today's report on durable goods orders.
After rising as much as 12 points and falling as much as 15 points, the Dow finished the day up 4.84 points at 4,087.83.
The broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index rose 0.28 point, to 495.95, while the smaller-company Nasdaq composite index rose 2.29 points, to a record 811.39.


California Governor Forms Panel to Explore '96 Presidential Race
Gov.
Pete Wilson edged closer today to the 1996 Presidential race, announcing the formation of an "exploratory" campaign committee.
"We've brought fundamental change to California and now we have the responsibility to bring it to the nation," the 61-year-old, two-term Republican said, sounding almost as though he had already decided to enter next year's contest.


Computer Aids in an Indictment
It took 17 years to find him, but now Curtis Brown has been indicted for his part in the 1978 murder of a 60-year-old Manchester woman.
Two men have already been convicted in the death of Harriet Atkinson, who was beaten and strangled by robbers who got away with a few hundred dollars.


Baseball Moms, Too
To the Editor:
I read "Dads and Sons Are Cheated" (Op-Ed, March 21) with a combination of empathy and dismay.
Tom Clancy's heartfelt remembrance of his father was charming; his description of baseball fans as "dads and sons" -- and your emphasis of this category -- was not.


Head of Detroit White Supremacist Group Faces Trial in Canada
The leader and founder of a white supremacist music and publishing network based in Detroit is scheduled to go on trial in Ottawa soon, charged with aggravated assault in a 1993 melee between white-power supporters and anti-racist demonstrators.
The supremacist, George Burdi, 24, whose company, Resistance Inc., markets white separatism in records, videos and publications, is charged in the beating of Alicia Reckzin, also 24, after a white-power rock concert a few blocks from Parliament Hill in Ottawa.


Attorney General to Shake Up Organized Crime Task Force
Calling for less analysis of the Mafia and more prosecutions, New York State's new Attorney General said yesterday that he was remodeling the powerful state agency that investigates organized crime.
In outlining his plans for the agency, the State Organized Crime Task Force, Attorney General Dennis C. Vacco sharply rebuked Ronald Goldstock, who headed the unit for 13 years until his resignation in December.
Mr.
Vacco, a Republican who took office in January, said that under Mr.
Goldstock's leadership the agency "wandered from its jurisdiction, evolving into a very autonomous and very unaccountable unit and an ineffective think tank."


Rison Receives a Rich Deal
ANDRE RISON has committed himself to the Cleveland Browns, striking a $17 million, five-year deal that makes him the highest-paid receiver in National Football League history, The Atlanta Journal-Constitution reported yesterday.
The newspaper said Rison agreed Wednesday night to a contract paying a signing bonus of $5 million and base salaries of $578,000 in 1995, $2 million in 1996, $2.1 million in 1997, $3.7 million in 1998 and $3.7 million in 1999.
"I'm going to an organization that's treating me with respect," Rison said.


Trade Won't Make Cuba More Democratic; Is Embargo Justified?
To the Editor:
Having much admired A. M. Rosenthal's recent articles on Mexico, I was taken aback by the vehemence of his March 17 column on Cuba.


Thomas Davis, 67, Doctor and Director Of Drug Company
Thomas G. Davis, the former medical director of the SmithKline Beckman Corporation, died on Saturday at his home in Radnor, Pa.
He was 67.
The cause was acute leukemia, said his wife, Nancy.


Climbing The Ladder, Song by Song
CALL it gospel or just good news: "How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying" is as fast, funny and glitzy as it ever was.
Nearly 34 years after its premiere at the 46th Street Theater, the Frank Loesser-Abe Burrows chef-d'oeuvre is back at the same house (since renamed the Richard Rodgers), where the pristine revival opened last night.
Times have since coarsened, public morals have become looser and political attitudes have been corrected.
Yet the musical's skeptical wit and cheerfully amoral heart remain forever young.
You might almost suspect that this 1961 fable of blind business ambition had been ahead of its time.
Not really.


INSIDE
Error Kills Cancer Patient
An overdose of a chemotherpy drug killed one patient and debilitated another, and has raised questions about procedures at a prestigious Boston cancer center.
Page A18.
Wisconsin Posts Big Loss
The State of Wisconsin Investment Board lost $95 million by using complex financial derivatives to speculate on currencies.
Page D1.
Hazards at Harlem Building
A housing inspector had reported a crack in a wall of the apartment building that collapsed on Tuesday, a defect experts say could have signaled structural problems.
Page B1.
Crackdown on Child Support
The House voted to require states to suspend the driver's and professional licenses of people who fail to pay child support.
Page A22.


Students Leave Classes to Rally Against Budget
Thousands of university and high school students, accompanied by professors and teachers, walked out of their classrooms yesterday to protest proposed budget cuts to education, drawing instant rebuke from Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Gov.
George E. Pataki.
At a rally in front of City Hall, the protest turned into a skirmish when police officers in riot gear tried to keep demonstrators, mostly students, from marching down Broadway.
Some officers sprayed pepper gas at the protesters; some protesters threw black paint at the officers.
Sixty people, mostly students, were arrested, and 16, including 11 police officers, were injured.
All of the injuries were minor, the police said.


Harper Steals One for Knicks After They Lose Late Lead
It took a sensational play by Derek Harper to seal a terrific victory for the Knicks.
With 24 seconds to play and New York trailing by 2 points, Mahmoud Abdul-Rauf was set to finish off the Knicks with a 15-foot jumper from the foul line.
Instead, Harper made the play of the game.


Inspector Reported Crack in Wall of Harlem Building Last Year
Last October, a city housing inspector found and reported a crack in a wall of the Harlem apartment building that partly collapsed on Tuesday, a defect that private experts say could have been a sign of structural problems.
But word of the crack never reached the city agency that is responsible for insuring buildings' structural integrity.
The city's Department of Housing Preservation and Development released the inspector's report yesterday, along with scores of others that read like a catalogue of decay and hazardous conditions.
At the same time, lawyers for the department were in housing court arguing for large fines and a jail sentence for the building's owner, Marcus Lehman, and his former partner, Morris Wolfson.


Ex-Spectrum President Among 10 Indicted
Another bizarre chapter ended yesterday in the saga of Spectrum Information Technologies Inc., as a Federal grand jury in Brooklyn indicted the former president of the troubled company and nine of his business associates.
The wife, son-in-law, and nephew of Peter T. Caserta, 55, former chief executive of Spectrum, were among those named in the indictment, as was James Paterek, who runs Spectrum Global Services Inc., a subsidiary of Spectrum, which is based in Manhasset, L.I.


Trial of 3 on Bilking United Way Is Expected to Go to Jury Today
"A trust is a trust," said Randy I. Bellows, the assistant United States Attorney prosecuting the case against William Aramony, the former president of United Way of America, and two other former executives of the charity.
"These men each made choices, and they chose to defraud this precious charity of its money and its trust."
The question of whether Mr.
Aramony and his former colleagues abused their responsibilities in working with one of the United States' best-known charities has focused widespread attention on the case.
The jury is expected to begin deliberations on Friday on the charges of fraud, conspiracy and tax evasion.


Cole National Corp.(CNJ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Sent Felix Colon, infielder, to the Detroit Tigers to complete an earlier trade.
Released Tom Cane, pitcher.
Called up Glenn Carter and Chuck Malloy, pitchers, from their minor-league camp.
Football National Football League  ARIZONA CARDINALS -- Promoted John Shean, broadcast sales director, to vice president in charge of sales; Steve Walsh, ticket manager, to business manager; and Steve Bomar, assistant ticket manager, to ticket manager.
DETROIT LIONS -- Re-signed Tracy Hayworth, linebacker.
Signed James Wilson, defensive lineman.
SEATTLE SEAHAWKS -- Signed Jim Sweeney, center.
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Signed Joel Crisman, guard, and Bobby Joe Edmonds, running back.


Court Upholds Stopping of Cars
A state appeals court, in upholding the conviction of a drunken driver yesterday, also ruled that New Jersey's system of stopping cars at random for safety inspections is constitutional.
The court ruling upholds the Division of Motor Vehicles' program of pulling over more than 40,000 cars a year for random inspections that check many of the same items as in required annual inspections.


It's bad news for marketers of spray-on hair, as the 'O. J. Factor' takes a toll on infomercial producers.
THE O. J. Simpson trial is turning into a trial of sorts for some advertisers.
Producers of infomercials say sales are sagging as viewers are apparently forsaking many of their program-length pitches to watch the trial coverage weekday mornings and afternoons on various broadcast and cable television networks as well as on local stations.
Estimates of average sales declines range from 10 to 40 percent -- and occasionally even 50 to 60 percent.


Corrections
An article on Monday about a $1 billion fund-raising drive at New York University referred incorrectly to William R. Salomon, who was instrumental in the effort.
He is the honorary chairman of Salomon Brothers Inc.; the founders were his father, Percy, and his uncles, Arthur and Herbert.


ADOBE SYSTEMS INC. (ADBE,NNM)
Adobe Systems Inc. said yesterday that its first-quarter earnings jumped nearly 80 percent on higher software sales and licensing revenue, beating Wall Street estimates.
The provider of electronic publishing software, based in Mountain View, Calif., posted net income of almost $34.4 million, or 54 cents a share, compared with $19.1 million, or 31 cents, a year earlier.
Analysts had expected earnings of 38 cents a share, according to mean estimates calculated by Zacks Investment Research and IBES International.


Amber Light on Nuclear Plants
The Salem I and II nuclear reactors here have been plagued by equipment failure and human error.
But the trouble is not bad enough to shut the plants down nor is the public in danger, Federal officials say.


Watsco Inc.(WSO.B,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Son's Perpetual Shadow Boxing To Share His Father's Limelight
And now for something completely different: "Funny Bones," a winningly eccentric flight of fancy from Peter Chelsom, director of the captivating "Hear My Song." Unquestionably Mr.
Chelsom is an odd bird, but he brings a fabulist's magic to tales no one else could tell.
This film's title refers to the natural gift of a comic sensibility, a talent that money can't buy.
In his quirky way, Mr.
Chelsom has funny bones for sure.
"Funny Bones" is such a peculiar film that it is best watched in a trusting state, with the certainty that this many-stranded story is meandering toward a moment of true clarity. (The screenplay, which Mr. Chelsom wrote with Peter Flannery, has the perfect last line.) En route to its destination, it delivers a wealth of odd pleasures, from Blackpool vaudevillians who are captured so sweetly to a side-splitting slapstick routine that takes place in a morgue.
The dead don't wake up during this episode, but it's close.


Blood and Punk Royalty to Grunge Royalty
Anyone curious about what young artists are up to these days should venture into Gavin Brown's Enterprise, a small, hole-in-the-wall gallery on Broome Street, just beyond SoHo's western fringe.
The gallery usually mounts a single exhibition in its tiny storefront space, but this month it has temporarily expanded, renting an equally cramped basement storefront across the street, to make two simultaneous introductions.
In the gallery proper are Elizabeth Peyton's small votive paintings of Kurt Cobain, the leader of the rock band Nirvana who, hemmed in by fame and drugs, killed himself last April.
Across the street are two mannequin sculptures with shockingly rearranged or multiplied body parts, by Dinos and Jake Chapman, English brothers who started working together three years ago.


More Chemicals Found Near Cult Site
The police search of a religious sect's compound on Thursday found several more tons of chemicals that can be used to make nerve gas, and the immensity of the stockpile added to public concern about the dangers of another attack like the one Monday on the Tokyo subway system.
The police search, which began on Wednesday and continued today for a third day, took a surprising turn when the authorities found about 500 metal drums of a key nerve gas ingredient stored in a warehouse.
The warehouse, in Kofu, a prefectural capital not far from the village where the sect has a training center, was used by the religious group, Japanese news reports say.


Charter Power Systems Inc.(CHP,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Accounts
*
Frito-Lay Inc., Plano, Tex., to BBDO New York to introduce Doritos Taco Supreme Tortilla Chips, the first co-branded product from Frito-Lay and the Taco Bell fast-food chain, which like Frito-Lay is owned by Pepsico Inc.
BBDO handles other Frito-Lay and Pepsico brands like Lay's potato chips and Pepsi-Cola.
The billings were not disclosed.


Super Food Services Inc.(SFS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 11


METRO DIGEST
CITY HOSPITALS CHAIRMAN RESIGNS
The chairman of New York City's Health and Hospitals Corporation resigned unexpectedly, saying he could not support the deep Medicaid cuts that Mayor Giuliani and Governor Pataki were seeking.
The chairman, Luis A. Miranda Jr., resigned minutes before the agency's directors were to vote on a resolution condemning the cuts, which would effectively reduce the agency's budget about 30 percent.
A1.
STUDENTS PROTEST EDUCATION CUTS
Thousands of university and high school students, accompanied by professors and teachers, left their classrooms to protest proposed budget cuts to education, drawing instant rebuke from both Mayor Giuliani and Governor Pataki.
The students rallied in front of City Hall, where the protest turned into a skirmish with police officers in riot gear when the students tried to march down Broadway.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY INDICTED OFFICER FACES NEW CHARGES
A Bronx police officer indicted in the death of a Florida man is facing new police administrative charges after the Civilian Complaint Review Board found evidence that he slapped and choked a 16-year-old boy for joy-riding in a go-cart 18 months ago.
B3.
SUBWAY RIDERS SPRAYED WITH SUBSTANCE
Nine riders on a downtown No. 1 train, including two children, were taken to area hospitals with minor injuries after someone sprayed a noxious substance as the train entered the Cathedral Parkway Station at 110th Street, said Capt.
Robert Nocera, a spokesman for the transit police.
B3.
CONSTRUCTION UNION TO BE MONITORED
The union local that for decades has given the Mafia a stranglehold over construction projects in New York City and on Long Island is to be monitored by Federal officers with broad new powers, according to a court-approved agreement.
B4.
REGION NEWARK TRIAL NEARS THE END
The trial of two prominent Newark politicians neared the end with closing arguments by prosecutors that reiterated the central allegations in their case: that the defendants accepted tens of thousands of dollars in bribes from local business officials, engaging in the kind of brazen deal making that prosecutors contend is all too common in this city.
B5.
SUIT SEEKS TO BLOCK CASINO VOTE
A vote next week asking Bridgeport residents whether they want a casino is described by city officials as a "nonbinding public opinion survey" intended only to show state legislators and Gov.
John G. Rowland that there is strong support for a casino there.
But casino opponents sued to block the vote, saying it is an illegal referendum that could indeed be binding, committing Bridgeport's voters to accept a casino if the General Assembly allows one.
B5.
L.I.R.R. KILLER TRANSFERRED TO PRISON
Colin Ferguson, shackled and surrounded by six guards, was transferred from the Nassau County jail, where he spent the last 15 months, to the state prison system, where he will spend the rest of his life.
B5.
New York's Attorney General plans to shake up the State Organized Crime Task Force. B4.
Chronicle B2
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman B3


Gay Priest, Iconoclasm And Style
In vigorously attacking the views of the Roman Catholic Church on homosexuality, Antonia Bird's "Priest" clearly courts controversy. (And has attracted it. The Catholic League yesterday denounced the film, along with Miramax, its distributor, and Walt Disney Pictures, Miramax's parent company.) But its greatest iconoclasm is in the area of style, since Ms.
Bird gives her film an entertainment value notably at odds with its subject matter.
While it examines the moral questions raised by church policy, "Priest" works best in a near-soap-opera realm.
It frankly depicts a gay cleric whose parishioners would spurn him if they knew of his secret life.
A film about a priest wouldn't ordinarily be the best place to find an impassioned romance.
But "Priest" is sincere and frank in depicting an affair between the Rev.
Greg Pilkington (Linus Roache) and Graham (Robert Carlyle), whom he meets in a gay bar.
Father Greg has gone out cruising in mufti, and he thinks he can engage in this tryst without revealing his identity to his lover.
But as he leaves Graham's apartment, Graham asks him pointedly if he is a Catholic.
"It takes one to know one," Graham says.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Senate Moves to Halt Pornography Via Computers The Senate Commerce Committee approved a proposal that would subject people who transmit indecent or pornographic material over a computer network to fines as high as $100,000 and prison terms up to two years.
The measure, attached to legislation to overhaul telecommunications laws, is intended to stop the transmission of sexually explicit images over on-line computer services and the Internet.
Civil rights groups say the measure would create an enormous intrusion on privacy and free speech.
A1.
The overall telecommunications bill was then approved by the Commerce Committee on a 17-to-2 vote, after Republicans retreated from their plan to eliminate all regulation of cable television prices.
They agreed to retain some restraints on prices charged for premium cable packages.
D7.
Dollar Continues to Fall  The dollar continued its slide against the Japanese yen, slipping to 88.15 yen in another low in New York trading.
The decline prompted the Bank of Japan to intervene.
D15.
Spectrum's Ex-President Indicted  Peter T. Caserta, the former president of Spectrum Information Technologies, and nine associates were indicted on fraud charges.
The Government said 300 companies in 23 states were bilked of $6 million.
D5.
Sandoz Plans to Sell Chemical Unit  Sandoz plans to put its chemical business up for sale to focus on its food and pharmaceutical operations.
Analysts said the unit could bring Sandoz about $2.6 billion.
The company also reported that its earnings rose 2 percent, to $1.5 billion, last year.
D7.
Morgan Seeks Funds for Mexico  J. P. Morgan is now seeking to raise $1 billion in financing for Mexico to help bolster its banking system, New York bankers said, scaling back from a $3 billion loan that had been proposed in January.
D7.
Morgan announced a reorganization that it said would bring to prominence its relationships with customers.
Still, analysts remain wary of the investment bank's stock.
Market Place.
D8.
I.B.M.
May Not Wait for OS/2  I.B.M. executives say the company has decided to introduce its new line of PowerPC-based computers this spring without the OS/2 operating system, which may be delayed until early next year.
D3.
Simpson Trial Drains Infomercials  Sales from infomercials are sagging as viewers forsake the program-length commercials to watch the O.J.
Simpson trial.
Estimates of the average decline in sales range from 10 to 50 percent.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.
D4.
Pfizer Teams With Biotech Company  Pfizer has agreed to collaborate with Myco Pharmaceuticals, a privately held biotechnology company, in the development of antifungal drugs.
Fungal infections are becoming a major health problem.
D5.
Big Three Sign Pact With Utility  Michigan regulators approved a plan under which Detroit Edison will become the sole supplier of power to 54 Big Three auto plants for 10 years.
In return for not dealing with other utilities, as businesses have proposed, the auto companies will get substantial savings on their electric rates.
D3.
Phillips Settlements Challenged  Settlements for several victims of a 1989 explosion at a Phillips Petroleum plant in Houston are being challenged, a move that could expose Phillips to hundreds of millions of dollars in liability.
B6.
Unsolicited Fax Law Upheld  A Federal appeals court has upheld a law banning unsolicited advertisements by fax.
B6 New Pizza for Crust Eaters  Pizza Hut will begin selling a pizza with a mozzarella-stuffed crust on Sunday.
A $45 million advertising campaign will start April 1 during the N.C.A.A. basketball tournament's Final Four weekend.
D3.


Art in Review
Vik Muniz
Wooster Gardens  252 Lafayette Street  SoHo  Through April 1
The fuzzy border between photography and drawing continues to attract the attention of Vik Muniz, a Brazilian artist who lives in New York.
For three works here, Mr.
Muniz constructed elaborate landscapes out of tangles of string and photographed them; other images, featuring wire renderings of a bird cage, water spilling from a faucet and a cluster of daisies in a jar, recall Alexander Calder's wire drawings.


Art in Review
Lazar Markovich Khidekel
Leonard Hutton Galleries  41 East 57th Street  Manhattan  Through March 31
This show of a hitherto unknown Suprematist brings back all the poignant paradoxes of the Russian avant-garde: utilitarian ideals that proved hopelessly utopian; freedom that bred conformity; revolutionary art that was deemed counter-revolutionary.
Born in 1904, Lazar Markovich Khidekel met Kasimir Malevich in 1919 and was immediately converted to the new gospel of Suprematism.
While an active collaborator in groups like Unovis (Affirmers of the New Art) and Ginkhuk (State Institute of Artistic Culture) -- the Russian avant-garde loved inscrutable acronyms -- Khidekel also had the good sense to get a degree in architecture, and so was able to support himself in the miserable decades after the suppression of the avant-garde.


Drive, They Said, And Drive They Did
There is a scene at the center of "New Jersey Drive" that captures everything this fast, thoughtful street drama tries to do: a group of black teen-agers in Newark steal a police car from the cop's own driveway and go on a joy ride.
Suddenly, the audience is rooting for a bunch of car thieves, young men clearly driving off to destruction.
Yet the moment is gleeful.
This white cop is corrupt and physically brutal; he deserved it.
And the scene takes a comic turn, as the thieves pull over a carload of geeky white guys and discover what it's like to have power.
Midget, the tough leader of the thieves, gets on the speaker and in a dead-on white-bread accent scares the preppy types to death.
They put their hands up, Midget warns that they have the right to remain stupid, and races on.
"New Jersey Drive" is the ambitious second feature by Nick Gomez, whose 1992, tiny-budget "Laws of Gravity" positioned him as a hot new director.
But while his new film has all the visual flair and quick pace you might expect, nothing else in the script is as effective or unexpected as that complicated central scene.


CHRONICLE
WALTER WAGER says if he had known what would happen on the Tokyo subway on Monday, he would never have written his suspense novel "Otto's Boy" back in 1985.
The plot of that work?
A package containing nerve gas is left on a New York subway car and kills more than 100 people.
The book was later published in Japan and sold "a couple of hundred thousand copies," he said.
"It's very disturbing for a writer when someone seems to be emulating the actions in one of his books," Mr.
Wager said.


Restaurants
You pretty much know what sort of food to expect from an island that calls its fanciest resort "Fox's Cove." And at Cala di Volpe, which was named for the Sardinian resort, that is exactly what you get: big, rough country cooking.
It is quite surprising to discover that the people parked in front of these enormous platters of food are not the hip and the hungry who crowd the downtown galleries but staid, elegantly attired residents of other zip codes.
They tend to complain about the size of the tables (too small), the brightly lighted and unattractive open kitchen and the size of the portions (too large).
Cala di Volpe requires a casual attitude and a healthy appetite.


Turks Plan to Keep 35,000 Troops in Iraq
The 35,000 Turkish troops that now occupy the border area of northern Iraq will not be withdrawn until a buffer zone is set up to insure that Kurdish rebels do not move back into the region when the army withdraws, senior officials said today.
The decision by the Turkish Government caused some consternation among Turkey's European allies.


Heilig-Meyers Co.(HMY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Yesterday in Washington
LINE-ITEM VETO -- The Senate voted 69 to 29 to give the President the power to veto specific items in spending bills.
The measure, passed in another form in the House, is a central part of the Republicans' Contract With America.
The measure could produce a major power shift in Washington and could give the Democratic White House a far more potent say over the Republican agenda.
WELFARE REFORM -- The House voted 426 to 5 to require states to adopt procedures to suspend driver's licenses and professional licenses of people who fail to pay child support that they owe.
It provided a victory for President Clinton, one of the few he has enjoyed on welfare legislation.
But Mr.
Clinton still opposes the overall bill, which would make vast changes in social welfare programs enacted over the last 60 years.


Horizon Healthcare Corp.(HHC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Senate Limits Rule Changes On Health
Considerably softening the radical changes that the House of Representatives approved last month, a Senate committee today approved relatively modest changes in how the Federal Government writes rules protecting health, safety and the environment.
The most important difference is that the version endorsed by Republicans and Democrats alike on the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee would not replace health considerations with economic calculations of costs and benefits as the main factor in setting protective standards under environmental laws.


SMUT BAN BACKED FOR COMPUTER NET
In a vote that moves the battles over pornography and free speech onto the electronic frontier, the Senate Commerce Committee approved a proposal today to ban smut in cyberspace.
The measure, attached without any debate to a sweeping proposal to overhaul the nation's communication laws, would levy fines as high as $100,000 and prison terms up to two years on anyone who transmits material that is "obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent."


Home Holdings Inc.(HHI,N) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Shabazz Case: Informer Says U.S. Paid Him
The Government informer who has said that Qubilah Bahiyah Shabazz tried to hire him to kill Louis Farrakhan left his hiding place today and said that Federal agents promised to pay him $45,000 for his help in the case.
The informer, Michael K. Fitzpatrick, said at a hearing here that he had been paid $34,000 by the Government in the last seven months and expected to be paid at least $11,000 more for secretly recording dozens of his telephone calls with Ms.
Shabazz and later testifying at her trial, if necessary.


What Feminism Has Done in Workplace
To the Editor:
The pie charts and graphs for your March 16 front-page article on affirmative action and the "glass ceiling" suggest a different reality from that pursued by the article.


Giving Lessons in Low Jinks
"Major Payne," with Damon Wayans as a tough marine reassigned to teach in a boarding school, takes about an hour and 10 minutes before it wallows in sappiness.
That's not a bad record for a formula family comedy in which the ending is clear from the start.
Though the movie is rarely more clever than its title, Mr.
Wayans gives the dark cartoonish comedy an irreverent edge.
As Benson Winifred Payne, he has a robotic walk and talk, a few gold teeth, and absolutely no sense of how to have an ordinary human conversation.
When he is told the Marines no longer need him, he says plaintively, "There's got to be somebody needs killing." He's told, "No, you've killed them all," and is sent to teach in Virginia.


Connecticut Remains At Head of the Class
For the Connecticut women's basketball team, the outcome was the same.
Only the path was different.
The Huskies, the nation's No. 1-ranked team, fell behind by 5 points to Alabama tonight with the game only 74 seconds old.
They still trailed by 5 with four minutes gone.
Then they found themselves, reeled off 20 straight points in six and a half minutes and ended the half with 12 straight points in three and a half minutes.


Signing Up to Step Down as Congressmen


What Feminism Has Done in Workplace; Welcome to the Battle
To the Editor:
Your March 16 front-page article provides needed clarity to the subject of affirmative action, which has been deliberately misrepresented as an economic sop for less qualified black men.
Though virtually ignored in the debate, white women have benefited far more than black men.


Art in Review
Lois Conner
Laurence Miller Gallery  138 Spring Street  SoHo  Through April 15
Scenes in Vietnam and Cambodia, photographed with a panoramic camera and painstakingly printed in the pale tones of the platinum process, take on an antique air in Lois Conner's elegant images.
Ms.
Conner demonstrates once again her ability to make graceful compositions with a distinctive approach.


Heavy Tread of Elephants Makes Hearts Lighter
THE night was cool and the wind was churning as the 18 elephants prepared to cross by foot into Manhattan from Queens.
It was a little before midnight and up ahead, the Empire State Building shone brightly as the mahouts and keepers slid open the animal cars on the circus train.
Without a single snort of protest, without an elephant sneer, they emerged wallowing in grace like fat chorus girls happy to be back in town.
Without anyone saying a word to them, they lined up and bowed their heads to make it easier for their handlers to put on the red bridles with the Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey insignia.


Goody's Family Clothing Inc.(GDYS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Trying to Keep Trains Rolling
More than half the people who ride trains each day between here and Philadelphia are coming to work or play in this city's casinos.
And although the casinos won't provide subsidies to keep the unprofitable line running, Nicholas Amato, head of the Casino Association of New Jersey, said his group might be interested in helping New Jersey Transit promote the 67-mile line.
New Jersey Transit is trying to figure out whether it wants to keep the line running once Amtrak stops helping out in April.


Mets to Offer Incentives To Minor League Stand-ins
The Mets' management plans to hold a meeting with the club's minor league players Friday night at which it will announce the financial incentives that will be offered to any minor leaguers who agree to play in regular-season replacement games.
The meeting will be open only to those players who have participated in, or agreed to participate in, major league spring training games.
As of tonight's game, 28 minor league players had participated in at least one game, including Mike Parker, who was considered a replacement player but signed a minor league contract.


Starrett Housing Corp.(SHO,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Montana Cuts Homosexual Acts From List of Registered Crimes
Feeling political heat from around the state and the country, the Montana Senate executed an about-face yesterday, deleting homosexual acts from a list of crimes for which convicts must be registered their entire lives.
Only a day earlier, the State Senate had added "deviate sexual conduct" -- including homosexual sodomy and fellatio -- to a bill requiring registration of violent criminals.
That unleashed furious protests from gay and lesbian organizers nationwide, coupled with threats of an economic boycott of the state.


Oneok Inc.(OKE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


The Next Big Thing in Pizza? Try 'Stuffed Crust'
What crust.
Pizza Hut had the effrontery yesterday to announce an innovation it contends will "revolutionize" the pizza-restaurant world: a pizza crust stuffed with an outer ring of mozzarella cheese.
The new product, to be called "Stuffed Crust Pizza," will be introduced this Sunday in the chain's 8,600 United States units.
A $45 million advertising campaign, created by BBDO New York, will begin April 1, during the N.C.A.A. basketball tournament's Final Four weekend.


Labor Board Slows Action in Bid to Get Owners and Players Back to Table
Acceding to an unusual request from the mediator, the National Labor Relations Board yesterday delayed its decision on whether to authorize its general counsel to seek an injunction that could send striking baseball players back to work.
The delay, perhaps until next Tuesday, when the five-member board is scheduled to decide the injunction request, virtually kills any chance of the board's gaining an injunction forcing the owners to restore salary arbitration, competitive bidding for free agents and the anti-collusion provision in free-agency rules before the start of the season.


Strawbridge &amp; Clothier (STRWA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


2 Politicians' Dealmakings Are Spotlighted in a Trial
The trial of two prominent Newark politicians neared its end today with closing arguments by the Government that reiterated the central allegations in its case: that the defendants accepted tens of thousands of dollars in bribes from local businessmen, engaging in the kind of brazen dealmaking that prosecutors contend is all too common in this city.
Jeffrey D. Smith, an assistant United States attorney, portrayed the politicians, Councilman Gary Harris and former Councilman Ralph T. Grant Jr., as greedy officials who tried to manipulate the municipal bureaucracy to insure that a towing company received lucrative contracts.
The company, which prosecutors said paid bribes to the two in 1991 and 1992, turned out to be a front for a sting operation run by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.


At Home Abroad; Divided We Stand
How do members of the Israeli Government feel about critical issues in the peace process?
It depends which ones you ask.
Ministers are extraordinarily divided -- and open about their differences.
Take the question of "separation." A vogue word here, it refers to the idea of physically separating Israelis and Palestinians, by borders and fences, to increase security.
A committee appointed by Prime Minister Rabin has recommended a plan costing upwards of $200 million.


Why We Pay for Art and TV We May Not Like
To the Editor:
Like many other readers, I am sure, I was bemused by the March 19 letter headlined "Why Should I Pay for Art I Don't Like and TV I Can't Bear?"


Accord Calls for a Monitor For a Teamster Union Local
The union local that for decades has given the Mafia a stranglehold over construction projects in New York City and Long Island is to be monitored by Federal officers with broad new powers, according to a court-approved agreement announced yesterday.
The accord calls for a full-time "corruption officer" who is authorized to remove officials and representatives of the union, Local 282 of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, if they are found to have engaged in corrupt acts, even if they have not been convicted in criminal cases.


More Than a Building Collapsed
The partial collapse of an apartment building in Harlem this week looks like a shocking case of ineptitude.
There were plenty of signs that the building was in distress, including a large crack in the wall visible from the street, gaping separations between floors and the walls to which they were supposed to be attached, and floors that sloped so badly that tenants had to prop up their furniture with cinder blocks.
Yet no effective actions were taken before the wall collapsed and dumped three people to their deaths.
The only question is who to blame.
The landlords who failed to maintain the building?
Housing inspectors who visited the building frequently on minor complaints but failed to note the structural problems?
Lack of coordination between those inspectors and the city agency responsible for structural flaws?
Rules that exempted this building from structural inspections required of taller ones?


Supercomputer Decline Topples Cray Computer
In a bitter final chapter signifying the decline of the supercomputer industry and the fortunes of its founding father, the computer pioneer Seymour Cray said today that his company, the Cray Computer Corporation, was seeking Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection after failing to raise an additional $20 million to continue operations.
For more than four decades, machines developed by Mr.
Cray -- at a series of companies including Control Data, Cray Research and Cray Computer -- have been synonymous with the ideal of blinding computing speed that is prized by weapons makers, engineers and rocket scientists.


Holding Back the Flood Waters


International Briefs; In Brief
*
BASF A.G., the German chemical company, said yesterday that it would invest 250 million marks ($176.5 million) to expand production of methanol and other products at its manufacturing headquarters.
The company's decision will raise total investment at its Ludwigshafen plant to about 650 million marks ($465 million) this year. *
Danka Business Systems P.L.C., London, which supplies and services office equipment in the United States, will buy Southern Business Group for $:67 million ($107 million) in cash, beating a higher offer by Berkeley Business Group P.L.C. that offered both cash and shares.


Gingrich Brings the Contract to New York


As H.M.O.'s Rise, New York Is Catching Up With Others
Long considered stuck in the medical dark ages with respect to managed care, New York State is fast catching up with the rest of the country, experts say, as new figures show that a quarter of the state's residents have now joined health maintenance organizations.
Experts say that the 25 percent mark -- which means that about 4.5 million New Yorkers now belong to the organizations -- is a milestone for the H.M.O. industry, signaling that more change is right around the corner.


In America; Formula For Tragedy
During the 1980's the wholesale price of infant formula in the United States grew by 150 percent.
That should not have been surprising.
The infant formula market is a classic oligopoly, dominated by three aggressive and politically savvy companies -- the Ross Products Division of Abbott Laboratories; Mead Johnson, a unit of Bristol-Myers Squibb, and Wyeth-Ayerst, a unit of American Home Products.
Tremendous amounts of infant formula are purchased from these companies for participants in the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants and Children, known as WIC, a non-entitlement Federal nutrition effort that serves nearly seven million low-income individuals.


Matt Bahr Signs for a 17th Season
The New England Patriots yesterday announced the signing of their unrestricted-free-agent kicker MATT BAHR.
Next year will be Bahr's 17th in the National Football League and third with the Patriots.
He scored a career-high 117 points in 1994.
Bahr will enter the 1995 season with 1,326 points, 12th among the N.F.L.'s career scoring leaders. (AP)


CHRONICLE
FRANCINE SHORE was, as she says, "up at bat" at a cash machine at Avenue of the Americas and 14th Street this week when she realized that the machine wasn't ready for her.
It was still asking if another transaction was wanted, and when she pushed "No," a card popped out.
No other customers were in sight, but a man acting as an unofficial doorman told her that he had seen a man jump into a cab.
She looked at the card, which was from Lloyds Bank; the name on it was RUFUS SEWELL.
By a coincidence hard to believe, Ms.
Shore, a one-time casting assistant, not only recognized the name, still somewhat obscure in this country, but knew where to find the man.
She had seen Mr.
Sewell, an Irish actor, in the movie "A Man of No Importance" and was about to see him in "Translations," the Brian Friel play now on Broadway.


Broadway Robbery
Why do tickets for a Broadway show cost $75?
Why can't an ordinary citizen buy such a ticket over the phone even when a show is playing to half-filled houses?
The answers to these questions are complex, but one thing is clear.
Attorney General Dennis Vacco can help by taking on the street's most blatant villain: the ticket scalper.
New York State law bars selling tickets for more than $5 above the face value or 10 percent, whichever is higher.
But everyone knows it happens all the time.
Scalping is no longer merely the province of individuals who buy tickets in advance and sell them for a huge profit on the sidewalk.
Ticket wholesalers buy up huge blocks of tickets and resell them at illegally high prices.


Allies Urge Ex-Yugoslav States To Accept Reduced U.N. Force
With the United Nations' peacekeeping mandate in the former Yugoslavia expiring in a week, the United States, Britain, France, Germany and Russia have jointly proposed a resolution to restructure the force there while reducing the total.
Some diplomats estimate that this would mean about 1,000 troops along Croatia's borders, compared to a few dozen men now, but that the total force in Croatia would be pared to as few as 7,000.
About 12,000 United Nations troops are now stationed throughout Croatia, though not along the border, and 3,000 support personnel work at headquarters in Zagreb.


Donation Was Not Authorized
A cable company executive generated valuable community good will in the late 1980's by diverting about $1.3 million in revenues from the Storer Cable Co. to charities such as the Monmouth County Muscular Dystrophy Association, the Boy Scouts and the American Red Cross.
Unfortunately, his bosses say they didn't authorize the philanthropy by Jeremiah J. Masin, the former manager of Storer's Eatontown operations.
Mr.
Masin, who pleaded guilty to theft charges on Jan. 31, was sentenced yesterday to three years in prison.
The county Prosecutor said that Mr.
Masin, 38, would be a likely candidate for an intensively supervised parole release after six months because he didn't keep any of the money and is already starting to make restitution to his former employer.


Richard Quarles, 83, Vinyl Resins Expert
Richard Winfield Quarles, an expert in the use of vinyl resins in coatings and adhesives and a former executive at the Union Carbide Corporation, died on March 16 at his home in Princeton, N.J.
He was 83.
The cause was cancer, according to the Kimble Funeral Home in Princeton.


Don Juan With a Goal And Oddly It Isn't Sex
A little over a year ago, shortly after a collection of comic sketches called "All in the Timing" had made him the toast of Off Broadway, the playwright David Ives discussed the virtues of theatrical brevity.
"With my plays," he said in an interview in these pages, "when the lights go down, at least the audience isn't thinking, 'Oh, God, two more hours of this.' "
Now consistency, as Emerson observed, is not necessarily a virtue.
And for his return to Primary Stages, where "Timing" opened, Mr.
Ives has provided "Don Juan in Chicago," a long work in three acts.
Unfortunately, it is likely to have audiences checking their watches before the first intermission.


THEATER
Sunny on the Outside, Cloudy on the Inside 'Miami Stories: Bellow, Malamud and Klavan' American Jewish Theater


Cavaliers Cut Down Jayhawks
Virginia brought its pep band, its guards and Junior Burrough -- and that was enough tonight.
Kemper Arena may be Kansas' home away from home, but Virginia still made more noise here.
What was once the Jayhawk Invitational is now simply the Midwest Regional final because Kansas seemed to be shooting at a moving target tonight.
It takes a mere 30 minutes to hitchhike from here to the Jayhawk campus and, after Virginia's 67-58 victory, those people thumbing a ride late this evening may have been Greg Ostertag, Raef LaFrentz and Scot Pollard.


UConn Gets the Game It Wanted
Regional final.
This is the game that took a collection of highly recruited prospects, scattered from coast to coast and beyond, and turned them into the Connecticut Huskies.
Five years ago as they sat at home, their dreams still on the other side of their television screens, the high school players watched Connecticut take Duke to overtime in a regional final with a chance to reach the Final Four.
They watched Christian Laettner's off-balance, last-second shot become a painfully abrupt end to something called the Dream Season.
But something registered, whether it was reaching a place far from home, or playing in the Big East.
When the Huskies take the court to meet U.C.L.A. in the West Regional championship game Saturday afternoon, the game those schoolboys once watched will be theirs to play.


Uplifting Victory For Knicks
Coach Pat Riley gave the Knicks today off in Los Angeles, providing them a chance to rest, regroup, and refocus after one of their most uplifting victories of the season.
Thanks to a sensational defensive play by Derek Harper in the final minute, the Knicks began their three-game road trip with an emotional boost, a 104-101 victory over the Nuggets in Denver Thursday night.
The Knicks were in deep trouble, trailing by 101-99 with 25 seconds left, and Denver had possession.
But as Mahmoud Abdul-Rauf went up for a foul-line jumper, Harper snuffed the shot, retrieved the ball at midcourt, and streaked downcourt for a layup while being fouled by Abdul-Rauf.


Senate Votes to End Minority Broadcast and Cable Tax Break
The Senate voted today to repeal a tax break aimed at helping minorities buy cable and broadcast companies, as Republicans in Congress pressed their assault on affirmative action programs.
The bill repealing the tax break would use the Government's increased tax revenue to offset the losses that would arise from allowing self-employed Americans to deduct part of their health insurance costs from their taxes.


Argentina to Issue New List Of Missing in 'Dirty War'
Bowing to pressure from human rights groups that have held raucous protests in recent days, the Argentine Government said today that it planned to release a new list with 1,000 additional names of people who disappeared during the military dictatorship's "dirty war" of repression in the 1970's.
Interior Minister Carlos Corach said the Government had based the new list on complaints filed with the military junta between 1976 and 1983 by relatives of people who disappeared in Argentina and on recent corroborating testimony from family members.


In Jericho, Pledges of U.S. Aid and a Glimpse at Arafat
As the highest-ranking United States official to call on an area governed by Palestinians, Vice President Al Gore came to town today offering $65 million in American aid and trade benefits for exporters here and in the Gaza Strip.
But bigger news for many residents was the arrival of another stranger, Yasir Arafat, who for months had communicated with his Palestinian Authority constituents in Jericho mostly by rumor.


Boy, 16, With Pellet Gun Is Killed by Officer
A 16-year-old boy who the police say was brandishing a pellet gun was shot and killed by a police officer yesterday morning in the driveway of a home in Sheepshead Bay.
The police said that the pellet gun appeared to be real and that the boy was struggling with the officer when the officer's gun went off.





Bodies Found in Pennsylvania Woods Identified as Those of Staten Island Couple
The New York City police said yesterday that two partly decomposed bodies found in the woods of northern Pennsylvania are those of a Staten Island couple who disappeared in January.
The coroner's office in Monroe County, Pa., where the bodies were found, ruled the deaths homicides and determined that both victims, Lowell and Susan Engel, had died from blunt wounds to the head, said Detective Mark Patterson, a Police Department spokesman.


It's Time to Drop the C.I.A. Caricature
To the Editor:
"Mr. Deutch Gets Cabinet Rank" (editorial, March 14) stresses the need for the President to be provided with disinterested intelligence analysis.
We agree.


Delay of Chicken Pox Vaccine Had High Cost
To the Editor:
Your March 18 front-page article states that a chicken pox vaccine will soon be available "after years of controversy and delay." The delay seems to have revolved around whether the expense of distributing the vaccine was warranted for what is generally deemed to be a common but not serious disease.


International Briefs; Porsche Sales Jump
The German sports car maker Porsche A.G. said yesterday that its car sales surged 29 percent in the first half of its current business year to 8,181 units.
The company said in an interim report that its total sales, including cars it makes for the fellow German car makers Audi and Mercedes-Benz, jumped 43 percent in the six months through Jan. 31 to 10,043 cars.
Porsche's current turnaround is attributed to stringent cost-cutting and the success of the new 911 Carrera model.
Porsche expects its car sales to expand to more than 30,000 annually from 1996 to 1997 when it introduces its new, lower-priced Boxster model. (Reuters)


Who Is a Woman I Admire?
Following are excerpts from winning essays in Barnard College's annual writing competition for 11th grade girls in New York City's public high schools.
The theme is "A Woman I Admire." First prize was awarded to Amelia H. Chamberlain of Townsend Harris High School in Queens.
Mama's Dark World
It's 10 o'clock, time to wake up Mama.
Frustration washes over me because I'm sitting on my bed, covered with books.
One by one, I push them aside.


Boeing Offers Retirement Incentives to Cut 7,000 Jobs
The Boeing Company announced yesterday a special one-time retirement-incentive program intended to reduce the number of involuntary layoffs needed to reach its goal of cutting 7,000 jobs this year.
The plan will result in a one-time charge of $350 million to $400 million in the company's second fiscal quarter.
Last month, Boeing said it would slash production rates of two jetliners, resulting in the layoff of 7,000 employees, or about 6 percent of its work force.
The cuts were greater than analysts had expected and came after two weeks in which four airlines -- the USAir Group Inc., Continental Airlines, Air France and All Nippon Airways -- said they would cancel or delay orders.


Turkish Forces Report Surrounding Rebel Kurds in Iraq
The Turkish Army has surrounded several hundred Kurdish guerrillas in two pockets in northern Iraq and plans to advance into those areas in the coming days, senior army officers said today.
Turkish fighter planes and helicopters are attacking the two pockets in the rugged mountains of Metina and Hakurk.


International Briefs; 4 U.S. Companies Quit Tokyo Market
Four big United States companies said yesterday that that they would delist their shares from the Tokyo Stock Exchange, citing the low level of interest in trading the stocks and the cost of maintaining the listings.


POP
The Call 'Bring the Noise' Is Applied, Literally  Senser Limelight


No Headline
"He knows what happened, he remembers it all and he is very distressed that he was the only one to come out of it alive." -- KARIN ABARBANEL, whose husband survived the post office shooting in New Jersey.  [ 25:2. ]


Ecuador Still Holds 7 Peruvians, Not 60
To the Editor:
Re your March 19 news article reporting that "human rights groups and the Peruvian Government estimate that over 60 Peruvians are still being detained in Ecuador" despite the cease-fire:


Winter of the Season And Drabness of Spirit
It was perpetually winter in the four solos Olga Mesa presented on Wednesday night.
The grim gray lighting by Cora suggested that a blizzard was on its way.
But what made the evening most memorable were the emotional storms in the choreography of Ms.
Mesa, a Spanish-born dancer with a brooding stage presence.
Wearing a drab coat in "Everyday's Blood," she could have been a woman trying to control her mounting fears as she walked down a deserted street.
The compulsive way she moved on and around a chair in "Sin Imagen ou Outra Coisa Qualquer" implied that she was being held captive by that article of furniture.


Malamala Re-signs With Jets
The Jets signed the only holdover starter from their offensive line when Siupeli Malamala agreed to a four-year deal yesterday.
They also agreed to a three-year contract with Anthony Prior, who will probably back up Marcus Turner (replacing James Hasty) at right cornerback.
Malamala was a "restricted" free agent and expected to get an offer from the Rams that would have included a signing bonus of more than $1.2 million.
Instead, his agent, Mike Sullivan, told the Jets to make their offer rather than have him shop around.


A Guilty Plea Is Retracted
Efren Mercado, who pleaded guilty two years ago to taking part in the murder of a fast-food outlet manager during a robbery, now says that he didn't understand what he admitted to because he is Hispanic and was confused by the judicial process.
A Superior Court judge agreed, allowing Mr.
Mercado to retract the guilty plea that earned him a 30-year prison term without possibility of parole.
Mr.
Mercado had admitted being one of the three men who robbed a Lakewood Kentucky Fried Chicken outlet of about $2,000.
The restaurant's night manager, Christopher J. Amoroso, was shot to death during the robbery.
Mr.
Mercado's case will now be sent to an Ocean County grand jury.


In SoHo, an Outcry From the Lofts; Artists Organizations to Fight Hotel in Neighborhood
To listen to neighbors, one would think the new hotel that is going up in SoHo portends a biblical scourge.
Sunlight will be obliterated.
Traffic will become even more congested as cars sputter out poisons during the endless wait at the Holland Tunnel.
The sewer system, already overtaxed, will overflow.
Tour buses will multiply, carrying with them that dread of dread, the untasteful.
Preliminary construction began this week on the 370-room SoHo Grand, the first hotel to be built in SoHo in a century.
An agreement was reached on Monday in which the developer, Hartz Mountain Industries, promised to drive piles gently so as not to rattle artworks near the site.


A Conference on Gangs Where Gangs Have a Say
WHEN Mildred marched to the podium to plead her case, two middle-age women in the packed University of Connecticut auditorium gasped in sympathy.
"She's so pretty," one whispered.
"And young," the other said.
"So young."
Mildred, 22, looked like a chic high school student, with her gray pants and vest, and white blouse, and brown hair hanging down like a model's.
In another life, she could have been homecoming queen or -- who knows? -- valedictorian.
And she could still be what she says she wants to be, a social worker, though being a single mother of two makes studies harder.


Queens School Is Evacuated After Fumes Fill Building
A cloud of noxious fumes spread through a Queens junior high school yesterday morning, causing hundreds of students, teachers and administrators to flee classrooms and more than 60 to be treated at local hospitals and released, officials said.
Six adults and 59 students were taken to hospitals to be treated for inhalation of a chemical irritant, said John Hanchar, a spokesman for the Emergency Medical Service.


Bombing Suspect Claims The U.S. Deserves Attack
Ignoring the advice of his lawyer, the man accused of engineering the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center released a diatribe yesterday saying that Palestinians had a right to attack the United States for its support of Israel.
In an eight-page statement, the man the authorities call Ramzi Ahmed Yousef said that his real name was Abdul-Basit Balochi and that he was an electronics engineer and explosives expert.
He said he came from Pakistan and had family in both Iraq and Israel.
He also said he had "friends and relatives who were killed in Palestine by the Israeli Army."


Sports of The Times; Final Four Needs to Be Expanded
IT'S too soon for North Carolina-Kentucky.
They shouldn't be playing it this evening in Birmingham.
They should be playing it next week in Seattle.
It's a Final Four game.
At the very least, they are Final Four names.
There are some schools -- I gag on that self-important word "programs" -- that just ought to be in the Final Four.
Eleven for North Carolina.
Ten for Kentucky.


Corrections
A headline yesterday about overdoses given to patients at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston characterized the drugs incorrectly in some editions.
The patients received two standard chemotherapy drugs, not experimental ones.
It was the treatment procedure that was experimental.


Kentucky-Tar Heels: 94-Foot Shootout
North Carolina has 1,625 victories, more than any other college team.
Kentucky is second with 1,616.
Kentucky has 36 appearances in the national tournament, tops in the college game.
North Carolina has 29.
Carolina has 66 tournament victories.
Kentucky has 65.
Back and forth.


METRO DIGEST
H.M.O.'S GROW IN NEW YORK STATE Long considered stuck in the medical dark ages with respect to managed care, New York State is fast catching up with the rest of the country, experts say, as new figures show that a quarter of the state's residents have now joined health maintenance organizations.
Experts say that the 25 percent mark signals that more change is around the corner.
Page 1.
QUANDARY FOR AN ALBANY DEMOCRAT Assemblyman William L. Parment drives his 1989 Chevy around the hills of his district these days trying to figure out what his voters want.
He is a Democrat who won re-election unopposed, but his constituents also voted overwhelmingly for Governor Pataki.
And therein lies his quandary: Does support for Mr.
Pataki in his district translate into support for Mr.
Pataki's deep-cutting budget?
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY  FUMES SPREAD IN QUEENS SCHOOL A cloud of noxious fumes spread through a Queens junior high school, causing hundreds of students, teachers and administrators to flee classrooms and more than 60 to be treated at hospitals and released, officials said.
Six adults and 59 students were treated for the inhalation of a chemical irritant.
Page 27.
TEEN-AGER SHOT DEAD BY OFFICER A 16-year-old boy who the police say was brandishing a pellet gun was shot and killed by a police officer in the driveway of a house in Sheepshead Bay.
The police said that the pellet gun appeared to be real and that the boy was struggling with the officer when the officer's gun went off.
Page 29.
REGION  EXPANSION OF LOCAL NEWS Cablevision, the Long Island-based cable television company, plans to bring round-the-clock local news to Fairfield County, Conn., this spring and is planning similar programming for Westchester County, northern New Jersey, the Bronx and Brooklyn.
Page 28.
CLOSING ARGUMENTS IN BRIBERY CASE Lawyers for two prominent Newark politicians accused of accepting tens of thousands of dollars in bribes denounced the prosecution's case, maintaining that the evidence against their clients was based on innuendo, hearsay and, sometimes, outright lies.
Page 28.
PAYING FOR CLEAN AIR AND WATER?
As he seeks to make New York State's environmental bureaucracy less adversarial toward business, Michael D. Zagata, the new commissioner for environmental conservation, says the state should begin telling people that if they want cleaner air and water, they must pay more of the bill.
Page 26.
A CONFERENCE ON GANGS INCLUDES GANGS A first in Hartford -- a conference on gangs where gang members had their say.
The conference, organized by the university's Institute for Violence Reduction, included police officers, social workers, sociologists, clergy and students, as well as 15 members of two gangs, Los Solidos and 20 Love, and a couple of members of The Latin Kings.
Our Towns by Evelyn Nieves, page 28.
POLICE IDENTIFY BODIES OF S.I.
COUPLE The New York City police said that two partly decomposed bodies found in the woods of northern Pennsylvania are those of a Staten Island couple who disappeared in January.
The coroner's office in Monroe County, Pa., where the bodies were found, ruled the deaths homicides and determined that both victims, Lowell and Susan Engel, had died from blunt wounds to the head.
Page 29.


Consumers Must Pay to Clean Environment, Commissioner Says
As he seeks to make New York State's environmental bureaucracy less adversarial toward business, Michael D. Zagata, the new Commissioner for Environmental Conservation, says the state should begin telling people that if they want cleaner air and water, they must pay more of the bill.
"We've got to start educating the public about the fact that some of the burden for getting the last increment that's left is going to shift from industry to the consumer," he said in an interview after his confirmation by the State Senate on Monday.
"We have not done a good job of that, and that's why I think you're seeing a revolt."
That revolt, he said, is being led by ordinary citizens who object to paying more for cleaner-burning gasoline and cleaner-running cars, for public purchases of scenic land and the cleanup of toxic waste on industrial sites.
He said that if people do not want to pay, they must understand that making industry foot the bill will hurt the economy.
"Do we want to say, 'Industry, you're going to have to clean up even though it's a 200-to-1 higher cost,' and run the risk of driving industry out of the state?" he asked.
In his quest to balance economic interests with environmental ones, Mr.
Zagata reflects the dual -- critics would say contradictory -- mission of Gov.
George E. Pataki.
The Governor has won plaudits from environmentalists, but also campaigned last year to reduce regulation, often citing the Department of Environmental Conservation as a prime example of burdensome bureaucracy.
Mr.
Pataki now wants Mr.
Zagata to satisfy both sides: be less onerous to industry without being less vigilant about pollution.
Without offering details, Mr.
Zagata said he envisioned a variety of policies to reverse his agency's reputation for punishing companies rather than working with them to solve environmental problems.
He said he would establish programs to educate companies about regulations so arcane that "the way a piece of paper is filed" can be a violation.
He would require inspectors to perform their work in fewer visits to avoid "interrupting production." He would speed issuance of pollution and building permits.
And he would give companies more opportunities to correct pollution problems before the state takes enforcement action.
To do that, he would have inspectors perform "environmental audits" that inform companies about possible pollution violations.
Six months later, another team of inspectors would review whether the company had taken steps to reverse those problems.
If steps were taken, no fines or penalties would be levied.
"For the last several years, the appearance has been that our mission has been enforcement rather than compliance," he said.
But Mr.
Zagata said he did not want the agency to be all carrots and no sticks.
"Enforcement is definitely a tool in my bag of tricks," he told a State Senate committee on Monday.
Mr.
Zagata cites economic issues in suggesting that he might change the department's direction on other matters.
He questioned whether the state should continue plans to centralize its auto-inspection system and to require that 2 percent of all new cars offered for sale by 1998 be electric-powered.
He voiced concerns about whether the state should buy more land in the Adirondacks, saying he did not want to hurt local towns by reducing their tax bases.
And he said that any plan to protect New York City's watershed must not harm the economies of watershed towns, criticizing city officials for "walking away from the table" during negotiations with those towns.
Mr.
Zagata's comments have already infuriated some environmentalists.
Lee Wasserman, executive director of Environmental Advocates, a nonprofit group, said Mr.
Zagata's policies mean polluters "will get one free bite at the apple." Assemblyman Richard L. Brodsky, chairman of the Assembly Environmental Committee, attacked Mr.
Zagata for allowing Mr.
Pataki to make budget cuts that he said would gut the agency's enforcement abilities.
Mr.
Zagata, 52, is a native New Yorker who speaks with a Texas twang developed during 14 years working as an environmental manager in Houston for oil and natural gas companies.
There, he pioneered a concept known as mitigation banking, which allows companies to earn permits for building on protected wetlands by first expanding existing wetlands.
He said he planned a similar policy for New York State, starting with state highway projects.
In 1994, he lost his job as vice president of environmental affairs for Transco Energy during a corporate downsizing, and was hired by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to be the Environmental Conservation Department's liaison to business.
He holds a doctorate in wildlife ecology, has worked as a lobbyist for the National Audubon Society and has taught wildlife resources at the University of Maine.
Born in the tiny rural town of West Davenport, Mr.
Zagata is an outdoorsman whose office walls are hung with photographs of him hunting and fishing.
Though he is only 5 feet 8 inches tall, he is a former football tackle who clearly takes some pride in his toughness.
He recalls, for instance, being rapped on the knuckles by his parochial-school teachers whenever he wrote left-handed.
Today, Mr.
Zagata remains a proud and unrepentant southpaw with a pen.
"Every time they hit me, I'd go home and practice with my left hand," he recalled with a smile.


Man Loses Seat Belt Lawsuit
A Hazlet man severely injured when he lost control of his Jeep claimed in a lawsuit that manufacturers should have given him better warning to wear his seat belt.
A jury disagreed, finding that 24-year-old Timothy P. Sharpe was exclusively at fault for not being buckled up when the Jeep he had customized with a convertible top and soft doors struck a guard rail on the Garden State Parkway in July 1988.
Mr.
Sharpe was thrown 70 feet across the highway and required surgery that left one leg three inches shorter than the other.


Eugene V. Panagopulos, Shipowner, 78
Eugene V. Panagopulos, a former shipowner and naval architect, died on March 17 at a nursing home in Montreal.
A former resident of Larchmont, N.Y., and Athens, he was 78.
The cause was a stroke, his family said.


Balancing the Traditional and the Contemporary
The newest edition of the Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus is as good an example as any of a show business institution that has flourished by finding a comfortable balance between the traditional and the contemporary.
The self-proclaimed "Greatest Show on Earth" wouldn't live up to its legend if it didn't have daring young acrobats on flying trapezes, animals being tamed and an opening procession that features frolicking clowns, performers on stilts and spangled women smiling and waving from the backs of parading elephants.
But the circus, which opened its 125th edition at Madison Square Garden on Thursday, also has a section called "Groovin' in the Urban Jungle," which includes hip-hop dancers shod in garbage cans clanging out beats in the style of the Off Broadway revue "Stomp." In one of the show's more spectacular lighting effects, disco balls rotating in opposite directions shower sparks across the arena.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Risk-Taker Who Plays Paganini on the Viola  Nokuthula Ngwenyama, violist 92d Street Y


Parker Keeps U.S.C. Job Despite 7-21 Mark
CHARLIE PARKER, the interim Southern California basketball coach, got the job on a permanent basis yesterday, under a contract described only as multiyear.
Parker, an assistant to GEORGE RAVELING for six years, became interim coach when Raveling retired two days before the start of the 1994-95 season.
Parker then suffered through a 7-21 season that included 14 consecutive losses to end the season.
Athletic Director MIKE GARRETT announced the hiring of Parker, after a six-month search for a successor to Raveling, who suffered serious injuries in a car accident on Sept. 25, leading to his retirement. (AP)


CHRONICLE
The day may come when PRINCE CHARLES will open his mouth and say something nonflammable, but it hasn't yet arrived.
The Prince spoke on Thursday at the opening of a British Council campaign to preserve the worldwide dominance of the English language and, by The Times of London report, said that American English was "very corrupting."
Elaborating on his view of American influence, he continued: "People tend to invent all sorts of nouns and verbs and make words that shouldn't be. I think we have to be a bit careful; otherwise the whole thing can get rather a mess.


No Dearth of Bombers
While most of Congress is looking for ways to shrink the budget deficit, some members have uncovered a bomber gap and prefer to close that instead.
They want to build as many as 40 more B-2 stealth bombers -- at over $1 billion a plane -- bringing the total number of B-2's to 60.
The Pentagon is right to halt production after 20 B-2's.
It has an unlikely ally in Senator John McCain, a combat pilot in Vietnam, who is trying to stop this bomber raid on the treasury.


Kerrigan Engaged to Her Manager
The figure skating star NANCY KERRIGAN is engaged to be married to her manager, JERRY SOLOMON, her spokesman announced in Los Angeles yesterday.
In a brief statement, the spokesman, MICHAEL LEVINE, said, "Nancy has known Jerry for a long time and they have developed a close and trusting relationship that is so important for their life together."
Kerrigan made world headlines in January 1994, when a man hired by the husband of her rival, TONYA HARDING, clubbed her knee, forcing her out of the United States national championships.
Kerrigan subsequently competed in the Winter Olympics in Lillehammer, Norway, and won the silver medal. (Reuters)


Americans Held by Iraq Are in Good Health
Polish diplomats have visited two Americans held in Iraq and found them in good health, the White House said today as it renewed its call on Baghdad to release the men as a humanitarian gesture.
The two men have been imprisoned since they were arrested last week for crossing into Iraq from Kuwait.
While expressing relief that Iraq had allowed access to them, the White House warned that Baghdad could serve no purpose in holding the men longer.


International Business; Mexico's Recovery Plan Shows Signs It Is Working
Two weeks after it was introduced, Mexico's tough new recovery plan is showing the first signs that it may be working: The foundering peso has started to stabilize while the economy is being squeezed even more tightly.
The peso rebounded strongly today for the second consecutive day, ending at 6.815 pesos to the dollar from 6.9 pesos on Thursday.
The gains in the peso are seen as a positive response to several moves taken by the Mexican central bank to control the currency's recent volatility.


British-American Strains
When Prime Minister John Major of Britain refuses for days to take a call from President Clinton, divisions between Washington and London are getting serious.
On Northern Ireland, on Bosnia, on banning nuclear tests, to name just a few, the disagreements have become sharp and noisy.
Does this mean the "special relationship" is over?
Clearly there is still residual affection between London and Washington, born of a common language and a camaraderie that dates from World War II.
But the end of the cold war has changed what was once a fairly simple equation, much as it has altered America's relationship with the rest of its allies.
The disappearance of a powerful common threat, the Soviet Union, has allowed narrower disputes to emerge and given them greater weight.


INSIDE
Argentina's 'Dirty War'
The Argentine Government said that it planned to release a list with 1,000 additional people who disappeared during the military dictatorship's repression of the 1970's.
Page 4.
Stocks Rally to Record High
Stocks surged to another record, helped in part by a report on factory orders for costly goods indicating the economy was slowing.
Page 37.


Largess From the Casinos
Businesses run by women and minorities won a much bigger share of the money spent by the 12 casinos here last year.
Under state regulations, casinos are supposed to channel at least 15 percent of their purchasing dollars to minority-owned businesses -- a requirement that only four casinos met in 1993.
Last year, under pressure from the Casino Control Commission, all casinos complied.
Spending with minority businesses soared 127 percent, from $42.5 million to $96.5 million, out of total outlays of $868 million.


Company Seeks to Cure Headache for Drugstores
For all their ability to dispense pain-killers and wonder drugs, pharmacists have not been able to write a prescription for one of their own worst ailments: chronic late and incomplete payments from insurers and other medical middlemen.
But now the Pharmacy Fund, a new company based in New York, thinks it has a cure.
It buys bills from the previous day's prescription sales at a slight discount, paying the pharmacist immediately and eliminating weeks of cash flow delays for drugstores.
The Pharmacy Fund then collects from the health plans.


Texarkana Journal; Twice as Difficult to Be Twice as Nice
The only post office in the nation that straddles a state line is evenly split between the cities of Texarkana.
Its base is made of Texas pink granite and its walls of Arkansas limestone.
The Chamber of Commerce logo features a hugging Razorback and Longhorn, and the tourism motto is, "Texarkana: Twice as Nice."
But there is a problem these days in these twin cities, which take their names from the two states they join, as well as nearby Louisiana, and which are divided through most of the downtown section by a yellow stripe down the middle of State Line Avenue.
The two Texarkanas may be joined at the hip, but the people who run them are barely speaking to each other.


Optimist On Love And All Its Rigors
Vince Gill has the pure tenor voice of a bluegrass choirboy and an aw-shucks smile to match.
When he sings, he's never an outlaw or a rebel; it's his guitar playing that cuts loose, zooming and snaking in flawless curlicues.
In current country music, he's the Grammy-winning virtuoso next door.
His fans bring him golf balls.
Mr.
Gill's sold-out concert at the Paramount on Tuesday night suggested the annals of a serial monogamist; his songs promise endless love, try to patch up lovers' quarrels or pine over an ex.
His characters are fond of honky-tonks, but less for the chance of an illicit rendezvous than for the music.
In "One More Last Chance," the singer comes home late and insists, "We're just some good ol' boys a-makin' noise/I ain't running 'round on you."


Easy Is Getting Harder At Players Tournament
Another hard wind blew across the Players Championship today, this time roaring in from the opposite direction.
But when it gets like this on Florida's northeast coast, it doesn't really matter whether it comes from the west, as it did Thursday, or the east, as it did today.
Because one thing did not change: the scores of the best field of the year once again headed north.
Six under par led the $3 million tournament after one round.
Five under par led after the second.
It was the first time this year that the leading total was higher after two days, but at least the identity of the leaders was the same.


A Bottleneck in the Parking Lot
Expect commuter snarls, and snarling, when a $34 million project to build two new parking decks is scheduled to start Monday at the Metropark lot.
The job will close nearly half of the current 1,800 parking spaces -- with the remaining spaces reserved for holders of monthly permits and those with disability plates.
Monthly permit holders who find the lot full will be directed along with daily users to three satellite lots in Edison, where shuttle buses will leave for the train station.
The renovation is set for completion in December 1996.


Family Tries to Cope With Death Of Subway Aide Who Found Poison
Darkness was sweeping across the sky as Tomohiro Hishinuma stood on his mother's porch in this Tokyo suburb.
For a brief moment he looked down the street as if expecting someone -- and then he caught himself.
"It all occurred so suddenly that it's hard to comprehend what really happened," said Mr.
Hishinuma, a 21-year-old subway worker in jeans and a dark shirt.
"I still feel as though he'll be coming home in a couple of hours."


Veterans and Rookies In the Same Lineup
The Second Avenue Dance Company keeps changing.
The group, directed by Kay Cummings and Cherylyn Lavagnino, is made up of students in their final year at the Tisch School of the Arts at New York University.
Its personnel can never be the same.
Nevertheless, year after year, its programs maintain a high standard.
The troupe was as admirable as ever on Thursday night at the university's Fifth Floor Theater, where it performed works by students and professional choreographers.


G.O.P. BLOC SEEKS DELAY IN TAX CUTS
Agitation over the Republicans' promised tax cuts broadened today as about three dozen moderate party members in the House, joined by 23 Democrats who have consistently voted with the majority, demanded that the cuts be delayed until it was clear how they would be paid for.
Earlier this week, 102 House Republicans broke ranks with the leadership by urging that the proposed $500 per-child tax credit for families be scaled back.
The move was partly in response to Democratic claims that the tax credit favors the rich.


To Help Needy Students, Tie SUNY Tuition to Family Income
To the Editor:
Quality higher education should remain affordable to the "ambitious but needy," as "Destructive Tuition Hikes" (editorial, March 17) argues.
But you make a serious error about the effects of State University of New York tuition hikes.


Cowboys Bounce Deacons
It had been a wonderful ride for Wake Forest.
Twelve straight victories, an Atlantic Coast Conference tournament championship, a top seed in the East Regional.
But the string of good fortune quickly changed in the final eight seconds of the Demon Deacons' regional semifinal against Oklahoma State tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Needing a 3-pointer to tie the game and send it into overtime, Wake Forest had the ball in the right hands, those of its star guard, Randolph Childress, one of the best in the nation at making last-shot 3-pointers.
But this time Childress lost control of his dribble and eventually the ball, helping Oklahoma State earn a 71-66 victory and advance to Sunday's final against Massachusetts, which was a decisive 76-51 winner last night over Tulsa.


William M. Perry Jr., Fashion Executive, 69
William M. Perry Jr., who headed several fashion companies during a career of more than 40 years, died last Saturday at Valley Hospital in Ridgewood, N.J.
He was 69 and lived in Ridgewood.
The cause was an aneurysm, said a son, Timothy W. Perry of Ridgewood.


Religion Journal; A Tale of Moral Courage Finds Its Voice in Opera
While Susan Fox was growing up in the Midwest, her sense of the Holocaust was only historical: accounts by scholars and survivors whose books she devoured.
It became personal when Ms.
Fox married Stephen Orenstein, who as a child was sent by his mother from Paris to the safety of a small French village for most of the war.


Upstate, Democrats Face Budget Quandary
Assemblyman William L. Parment drives his 1989 Chevy, a harmonica on the dashboard and 121,600 miles on the odometer, around the hills of his district these days trying to figure out what his voters want.
He is a Democrat who won re-election unopposed, but his constituents also voted overwhelmingly for the new Republican Governor, George E. Pataki.
And therein lies his quandary: Does support for Mr.
Pataki in his district translate into support for Mr.
Pataki's deep-cutting budget?


Transactions
Baseball  National League LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Traded John Fritz, pitcher, to the Milwaukee Brewers for future considerations.
Mid America League ANDERSON LAWMEN -- Named Dan Beauchamp general manager.
LAFAYETTE LEOPARDS -- Signed Gary Swank, pitcher.
Western Baseball League PALM SPRINGS SUNS -- Signed Euclides Rojas, pitcher.
Basketball  National Basketball Association INDIANA PACERS -- Signed Greg Kite, center, to a 10-day contract.
PHILADELPHIA 76ERS -- Signed Alaa Abdelnaby, forward-center, to a 10-day contract.
Placed Willie Burton, guard-forward, on the injured list.
Football  National Football League CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Signed Andre Rison, wide receiver, to a five-year contract.
DENVER BRONCOS -- Named Rick Dennison offensive assistant coach.
DETROIT LIONS -- Re-signed Scott Kowalkowski, linebacker.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Signed Matt Bahr, kicker; Andre Bowden, linebacker; Elbert Ellis, wide receiver; Paul Francisco, tight end; Todd Rucci, guard; Bruce Walker, defensive tackle; and Larry Whigham, defensive back.
NEW YORK JETS -- Agreed to terms with Siupeli Malamala, offensive tackle, on a four-year contract and Anthony Prior, safety, on a three-year contract.
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Signed Kenneth Gant, safety, to a three-year contract.
Canadian Football League HAMILTON TIGER-CATS -- Re-signed Darrell Harle and Dale Sanderson, centers, and Dave Richardson, tackle.
Signed Doug Davies, guard.


International Briefs; Sprint's China Accord
The Sprint Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to help the China United Telecommunications Corporation, the country's second telecommunications carrier, develop a national communications network.
Financial terms of the memorandum of understanding were not disclosed.
China United is a state-owned consortium of several Chinese Government ministries that provides local and long-distance telephone, wireless, voice, data and video services throughout China. (Reuters)


To Help Needy Students, Tie SUNY Tuition to Family Income; Public vs. Private
To the Editor:
In "Penalizing Students" (Op-Ed, March 21), Leon Botstein, president of Bard College, suggests that "the public directly foots the whole bill for the state university system" and that "state universities need to experience the financial discipline" of private colleges and universities.


When City Hall's Bells Tolled for WNYC
To the Editor:
As New York City prepares to sell its WNYC radio stations (news article, March 16), I'd like to put on record, and simultaneously confirm, my memory of WNYC's time and location announcements of 40 years ago, which were deeply affecting, at least for me.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BAYBANKS INC., Boston, will acquire Cornerstone Financial Corp., Derry, N.H., for $8.80 a share in cash, or about $18.5 million.


Making Derivatives Pay: Take Apart, Sell Pieces
When Salomon Brothers announced yesterday that it wanted to buy up to $8.1 billion in unwanted and complex derivatives, it might have seemed to Main Street as sensible as offering to buy up spent uranium rods from nuclear reactors.
After all, there seems to be no end to the stories of investors who have lost money from complex bets made with derivatives.
Just Thursday, the State of Wisconsin said these newfangled financial instruments cost it $95 million.


Yesterday in Washington
TAX CUTS -- Agitation over the Republicans' promised tax cuts broadened as dozens of moderate House Republicans, joined by 23 Democrats who have consistently voted with the majority, demanded that the cuts be delayed until it was clear how they would be paid for.
Earlier in the week, 102 Republicans in the House broke ranks with the leadership on the proposed $500 tax credit for families with children.
The combined developments suggest trouble for Speaker Newt Gingrich.
SPENDING CUTS -- The Senate Appropriations Committee slashed $13 billion from hundreds of Federal programs as a way to reduce the budget deficit and pay for disaster aid to California.
The measure cleared the committee by unanimous consent after Democrats agreed to hold their amendments, and their rancor, for the Senate floor.
WELFARE REFORM -- The House approved one of the most important items on the Republican agenda, a measure to undo six decades of Federal social-welfare legislation.
The vote, almost entirely on party lines, was 234 to 199.
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION -- The Senate voted to repeal a communications tax break intended to bolster minority ownership of cable and broadcast companies.
The repeal, passed on a voice vote, is a blow to the entertainment giant Viacom Inc.
The company's plan to use the 17-year-old tax break to defer nearly $500 million in Federal taxes on the sale of its cable systems propelled the provision into the spotlight.
On another issue, Deval Patrick, Assistant Attorney General for civil rights, told a House panel: "This Administration is committed to the goal of expanding opportunity for all Americans in education, employment and the economy generally. There will be no retreat from that commitment." The White House is reviewing affirmative action plans.


Indicted on Threat Charges
A woman who books rock bands has been indicted on Federal charges that she threatened a singer who refused to use her services.
Prosecutors say Kathleen Tobin made late-night calls to William B. Cirignano of the rock band Monroe, saying: "Look over your shoulder, careful when you open your mailbox, careful when you open your door."


Are 'Cuts' Really Cuts? That Depends
If the just-concluded House debate over welfare spending underscores anything, it is that Republicans and Democrats do not differ merely over ideology.
They also use different accountants.
The result was a baffling skirmish in which Democrats, wielding their numbers, accused Republicans of slashing aid to hungry children and pregnant women, and Republicans, wielding their own numbers, claimed to be increasing aid to the same groups.
Even more confusing, both arguments were accurate.


Watching for Forest Fires
From his 50-square-foot watchtower aerie high above the sprawling Pine Barrens forest of east-central New Jersey, Sean Morgart knows that the dry, mild winter means a hectic spring.
Mr.
Morgart is one of 21 state fire observers watching for smoke in New Jersey's 3 million acres of forest.
This year, there have already been 54 forest fires.
"Normally, we would have half that," said Michael Hennessey, one of the state's three division fire wardens.
JOE SHARKEY


F.A.A., in Rare Move, Proposes Revoking Airline's Certification
A small Miami-based airline that was shut down on March 17 had been flying for years without carrying out urgent safety directives issued by the Federal Aviation Administration, the agency said yesterday, and officials have proposed revoking the line's operating certificate.
The carrier, Arrow Air, flew 18 jets, mostly on cargo flights but with some charter and scheduled passenger service.
William J. White, the aviation agency's deputy director of flight standards, said last night that the airline was "the worst I've seen since 1979," when he joined the agency.


Securities Firms Seeking to Turn Derivatives Debacle Into Profits
Wall Street is setting out to try to profit on the widespread fear of the complex financial instruments known as derivatives.
After creating the derivatives that have resulted in spectacular losses for investors ranging from Orange County, Calif., to Gibson Greetings of Cincinnati, Wall Street is trying to increase profits by recycling these much maligned instruments for making side bets on stocks, bonds, currencies and interest rates.
Several firms, including those who sold the derivatives in the first place, now want to buy back the hybrid securities at low prices, clean them up and sell them again.


Devils Look Past .500 and Blink
A winning record continues to elude these groping Devils.
Tonight they had their sixth chance this season to pull their helmets above .500.
For the sixth time, they failed, giving them an ignoble 0-5-1 mark in such games.
The Devils' latest attempt and their modest two-game winning streak both ended in a 5-2 loss to the Pittsburgh Penguins before 17,181 in the sold-out Civic Arena.
They still haven't won three in a row in 1995.
This from the team that compiled the second-most victories and points in the National Hockey League last season.


In Furor Over Killings, President Warns of Shake-Up in the C.I.A.
One official at the Central Intelligence Agency has been removed from his post and President Clinton has warned that others may follow in the furor raised by the agency's employment of a Guatemalan colonel linked to two killings, , Government officials said today.
President Clinton's press secretary, Michael D. McCurry, said Mr.
Clinton would order the dismissal of anyone at the intelligence agency who deliberately withheld information about the killings of an American innkeeper and a leftist guerrilla who was the husband of an American lawyer.
He said Mr.
Clinton was among those not satisfied with the agency's answers so far.


HOUSE BACKS BILL UNDOING DECADES OF WELFARE POLICY
The House of Representatives today approved one of the most important items on the Republican legislative agenda, a bill to undo six decades of social welfare policy and to give the states control of Federal programs serving more than 40 million Americans.
The vote, mainly along party lines, was 234 to 199.
House Republican leaders lost only 5 Republican votes and picked up support from 9 Democrats.
The measure goes now to the Senate, where lawmakers of both parties have vowed to alter some of its more stringent provisions, including one that would deny aid to many legal immigrants and another that would deny cash assistance to families headed by unmarried women under the age of 18.


Plying Some Tricks of the Trade
A few tunes into his second set at the Village Vanguard on Tuesday night, Joshua Redman performed "Count Me Out," a tricky composition that used odd meters and a precise arrangement.
Mr.
Redman, the hottest of jazz's hot young saxophonists, produced his best improvisation of the set, a brazenly imaginative solo that rattled around from register to register, set up contrasts, and seemed strikingly open to the idea that all sound could be incorporated into a swinging context.
That sort of improvising is why Mr.
Redman's reputation is as exalted as it is: at times he fulfills his promise.
Much of the rest of the set, however, seemed stillborn.
Mr.
Redman is breaking in a new band -- Peter Martin on piano, Chris Thomas on bass and Brian Blade on drums -- that hasn't yet picked up a personality.
The musicians never went beyond the functional, and formally there wasn't much sense of play.
Even the normally buoyant and inspired Mr.
Redman seemed merely enthusiastic.
His improvisations, even on a bad night, are graceful, loping with occasional crashes into a lower register blues phrase.
He has been cultivating his upper register, and on most solos on Tuesday he found himself in the zone beyond the natural range of the instrument, drawing lines that seemed less precise or reliant on a specific pitch.
They seemed metaphorical.


Agassi Has Another Shot at Sampras
Asleep and adrift in the first set, Pete Sampras, the defending champion of the Lipton Championships, finally punched in for work at the stadium tonight, and his better-late-than-never attitude proved sufficient for a 4-6, 6-0, 6-1 semifinal victory over Jonas Bjorkman.
The victory kept Sampras on what is fast becoming the circuit's favorite collision course.
In Sunday's final, he will face Andre Agassi, who is chasing him for his No. 1 ranking.
Should Sampras win that confrontation, he would be the first man to capture three titles here.
Should Agassi prevail, he would avenge last year's loss to Sampras in the final and inch closer to the top spot on the computer.


International Briefs; Electrolux Cancels The Sale of a Unit
Electrolux A.B., the Swedish household-appliance maker, said yesterday that it would cancel the planned sale of its aluminum unit, Graenges A.B., because it could not get the price it sought.
The company cited a fall in the stock market for the change in plans.


Filipino Migrant Workers Find a Harsh World
To the Editor:
On March 17 Flor Contemplacion, a Filipino maid from Laguna, was hanged in Singapore on murder charges despite evidence from witnesses who claim she was innocent (news articles, March 17 and 18).
Her execution has become the rallying point of nationalistic rhetoric on the violent treatment of Filipino women migrant workers in Singapore, Malaysia, Japan, Hong Kong, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Spain, Britain -- in short, all over the world.


Allies Urge Ex-Yugoslav States To Accept Reduced U.N. Force; Bosnian Army Claims a Victory
The Bosnian Army, pursuing offensives that have rekindled the Bosnian war, said today that it had captured an important Serbian communications tower near the central Bosnian town of Travnik.
The Muslim-led Government of President Alija Izetbegovic also appeared to be seeking to weaken the hold of the Bosnian Serb leader, Radovan Karadzic.


CHRONICLE
Some years ago, a young lawyer who had just joined the faculty of a law school was introduced to a judge as a new "lady law professor" who would teach criminal law and run a legal aid clinic.
As she now recalls the moment, the judge, a man, looked at her and said, "I don't have any use for either lady law professors or legal aid clinics."
Well, she thought, "I'm certainly getting off on the right foot here."


Filipino Migrant Workers Find a Harsh World; Singapore Works
To the Editor:
As a businessman who often visits Singapore, I object to your "attitude" toward the country, most recently exemplified in "A Hanging in Singapore" (editorial, March 21).


Robert Beauchamp; Painter Was 72
Robert Beauchamp, a figurative painter known for a colorful, expressionistic style, died on Wednesday at his home in New York.
He was 72 and also had a home in Wellfleet, Mass.
The cause was prostate cancer, said Howard Scott, his dealer.


Defense Attacks Credibility of Witnesses in Newark Bribery Case
Lawyers for two prominent Newark politicians accused of accepting tens of thousands of dollars in bribes denounced the prosecution's case today, maintaining that the evidence against their clients was based on innuendo, hearsay and, sometimes, outright lies.
In closing arguments in the five-week trial in Federal District Court here, the defense lawyers repeatedly attacked the credibility of two of the prosecution's central witnesses, both of whom pleaded guilty and testified for the Government after being ensnared in a scheme to seek municipal towing contracts.


Coffee With a Hint of Magnolia


Corrections
An article on March 17 about the shredding of records at rape crisis centers in Canada, to protect the privacy of patients, misstated the location of Winnipeg.
It is in Manitoba, not Ontario.


Gore Takes Aid Proposal to Jericho


Overtime Is No Obstacle To Arkansas
Arkansas is not happy unless it is miserable.
The Razorbacks overcame a 12-point deficit late in regulation of their Midwest Regional semifinal against Memphis tonight and forced overtime, which is apparently when the defending national champions are most comfortable.
Then Scotty Thurman's rainbow 3-pointer broke an 85-85 tie and built the momentum the Razorbacks needed for a 96-91 victory that had Thurman wagging a finger toward press row.


Orlando Rains On Jordan's Homecoming
Michael Jordan made his comeback. The Orlando Magic made a statement.
The team with the best record in the National Basketball Association spoiled Jordan's raucous return to Chicago tonight, spurting in the fourth quarter to a 106-99 victory at the United Center.


Corrections
Because of a production error, credits were omitted yesterday for pictures of the four men killed in the Montclair, N.J., post office robbery.
The pictures of Stanley Scott Walensky, Robert Leslie and George Lomago were from The Montclair Times.
The picture of Ernest Spruill was from The Associated Press.


Labor Board and Senate Are Busier Than the 2 Sides
With the future of labor talks as up in the air as Bill Usery Jr. was yesterday on a flight home, Washington is again becoming the place where the hottest baseball action can be found.
The next steps are expected to be taken Monday in the National Labor Relations Board office and on the Senate floor.
On the Senate floor yesterday, Senator Patrick Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, suggested that Bud Selig, the acting commissioner, was either "grossly mistaken" or was "not telling the truth" last month in his appearance before the antitrust subcommittee of the Senate Judiciary Committee.


Fred Wolkenfeld, N.Y.U. Professor, 56
Dr.
Fred Wolkenfeld, who was a clinical professor in New York University's postdoctoral program in psychotherapy and psychoanalysis, died on March 10 in his Manhattan home.
He was 56.
The cause was a heart attack, said his wife, Dr. Jo Lang Wolkenfeld.


The Troublesome Shabazz Case
Testimony in a Federal court in Minnesota has raised disturbing questions about possible Government misbehavior in gathering evidence through a paid informer.
The case involves Qubilah Shabazz, the daughter of Malcolm X, who is accused of plotting the murder of Louis Farrakhan, the leader of the Nation of Islam.
It is premature to judge either the guilt or innocence of Ms.
Shabazz or the propriety of the informer's conduct.
But the Government's behavior requires a full accounting by the Justice Department in Washington.
Ms.
Shabazz, who saw her father gunned down 30 years ago when she was 4 years old, has acknowledged murderous thoughts about Mr.
Farrakhan, whom she accuses of involvement in the killing.
But she denies trying to hire Michael Fitzpatrick, a high school classmate turned F.B.I. informant.


Bonds Rally on Stronger Dollar and New Economic Data
A stronger dollar and further signs that economic growth is slowing combined yesterday to fuel a strong market rally and help drive the long bond's yield down to its lowest level in a week.
The price of the 30-year bond gained a full point, to 103 6/32 , for a yield of 7.36 percent, down from 7.44 percent on Thursday.
Investors gained about $10 per $1,000 invested in bonds.
Shorter-maturity bill rates also improved, rising about four basis points, or hundredths of a percentage point.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Exploring the Interaction Of a Teacher and a Pupil  Anton Kuerti, pianist Miller Theater


Two Old-Time Masters on One Bill
There are so few surviving masters from the be-bop and swing eras that the Blue Note's double bill of the trombonist Al Grey and the saxophonist James Moody is a blessed event.
Though Mr.
Grey and Mr.
Moody represent different eras and radically different sensibilities, what they have in common is authority and wit.
They also share the ability to bring an audience into their inventions, to show them exactly what their improvisations are for and what they mean.
Mr.
Grey, who is 69, shared the front line of his band with the trumpeter Harry (Sweets) Edison and the saxophonist Jerome Richardson on Tuesday night, and together they performed five blues compositions and a few standards.
Their swing language, precise and edited, almost surreally exact in improvisation, is so laden with blues ideas that even the standards ended up being blues.
Mr.
Edison's version of "Lover Man," filled with bent blues notes and sharply articulated riffs, was a reminder of how rich the swing vocabulary was and how much has been lost conceptually.


Ladenburg Tells Its Employees That a Buyer Is in the Wings
Bennett S. LeBow, the financier, is looking to buy at least a controlling interest in Ladenburg, Thalmann &amp; Company, a small investment banking firm owned by its employees, people at the firm said yesterday.
In a series of meetings, Howard L. Blum Jr., chairman and chief executive of Ladenburg, told employees yesterday that Mr.
LeBow had made a serious offer to buy at least a majority stake in the firm, although he did not say at what price.
Mr.
Blum told the employees that he expected the deal to be concluded next week, pending the resolution of some issues related to contingent liabilities.


Gingrich in New York, With an Olive Branch
Newt Gingrich, the Speaker of the House who has often aimed conservative barbs at New York City over the years, paid a visit behind enemy lines yesterday and played it prudent.
Addressing some 1,400 prominent New Yorkers, including former Mayors John V. Lindsay, Abraham Beame and David N. Dinkins, at a breakfast meeting of the Association for a Better New York, Mr.
Gingrich called New York "the greatest city in the country" and "the crown jewel of America."


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE HOCKEY  Three Eastern Teams Lose  Three of the five Eastern teams were eliminated last night in the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division I hockey tournament.
At the Centrum in Worcester, Mass., Clarkson lost to fast-skating Lake Superior State, 5-4, after Denver routed New Hampshire, 9-2, in East Regional contests.
At Madison, Wis., in the West Regional, Minnesota shut out Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 3-0.
Boston University and Maine, the remaining Eastern teams, skate in Worcester tonight, the Terriers against Lake Superior and the Black Bears against Denver.
YACHT RACING  Conner Catches Mighty Mary  Speed and tactics had equal footing in America's Cup racing yesterday as the newly styled Mighty Mary and the seasoned Stars &amp; Stripes fought to the last mile, where Dennis Conner's team came from behind to finish eight seconds in front of Mighty Mary.
Winds on the defenders' course off San Diego started out at a brisk 15 knots, then subsided to a less rocky 9 knots.
But big seas left over from a storm Thursday buffeted both boats as they struggled for an advantage in the semifinal series.
HIGH SCHOOL BASKETBALL  Lincoln Reaches State Final  Gerard Hawkins scored 25 points and Abraham Lincoln of Brooklyn shut down the defending champion, La Salle of Niagara Falls (26-1), in the fourth quarter yesterday to win, 61-44, in the Class A semifinals of the New York State Federation boys tournament in Glens Falls.
A 26-4 run by Lincoln (25-3) early in the final period opened a tight game and gave the Railsplitters a 59-37 lead.
The triumph set up a state championship game tonight between the two best schools in New York City, Lincoln, the P.S.A.L. champion, and Christ the King of Queens, the C.H.S.A.A. champion, which was a 66-59 winner over Long Island Lutheran in yesterday's other Class A semifinal.
Lamar Odum had 16 points and Eric Barclay 15 to lead Christ the King (23-2).
Another all-New York City final was certified after Jarrett Lockhart scored 22 points and had 9 rebounds as Mount St.
Michael of the Bronx (27-1) held off a rally by Poughkeepsie (23-4) for a 73-63 victory in the Class B semifinal.
Mount St.
Michael will meet Francis Lewis of Queens in the final at 7 tonight. (AP)


Wall Crack Was Prelude To Disaster
City housing officials acknowledged for the first time yesterday that a crack detected by a housing inspector last fall indicated structural problems in a Harlem building that collapsed on Tuesday, and should have prompted further inspections.
The officials said the housing inspector failed to recognize the seriousness of the problem.
If he had reported the crack to the city's Buildings Department, as he should have, an engineer would have been sent to determine whether the building was safe.


Dear Friend . . .
Following are excerpts of a letter from Gov.
George E. Pataki that was sent to voters in Assemblyman William L. Parment's district and in other upstate districts also represented by Democrats.
Dear Friend,
Thank you for your support last November.
With our successful campaign for governor, you sent a strong message to the entire nation that New York was ready for change.


Stock Prices Surge to Yet Another High
After essentially drifting for five sessions, the stock market vaulted to record levels yesterday, with the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index finishing above 500 for the first time in history.
Bond prices rose, too, helped by a stronger dollar overseas.
Stock prices were lifted, in part, because of a new Government report on factory orders for costly machinery and consumer goods, a key measure of economic strength.
The report that durable goods orders had slipped eight-tenths of 1 percent in February appeared to indicate that the economy was slowing, exactly as traders had hoped.


Jerry Lester, Early TV Host And Comedian, Is Dead at 85
Jerry Lester, an ebullient comedian and former song-and-dance man who became the host of the first successful late-night network television talk and variety show, died on Thursday in a Miami nursing home.
He was 85.
His wife, Alice, said the cause was complications of Alzheimer's disease.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Thursday with an article about a new low-sugar cola announced by the Pepsi-Cola Company carried an erroneous scale.
The sales figures shown were in billions of cases, not millions.


Norman Schwartz, Record Producer, 67
Norman Schwartz, a concert manager and record producer, died on Tuesday at Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 67 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was prostate cancer, said his wife, Suzanne Crosby.


International Briefs; A French Bailout
The French Government will bail out Groupe des Assurances with a rescue package worth 2 billion francs, or $400 million, the company said yesterday.
Under the plan, Government shares in Elf Aquitaine, the French oil giant, worth 2 billion francs will be transferred to the insurance company to bolster its balance sheet, the company said.
The move follows an infusion of $200 million into Groupe des Assurances late last year and is the latest in a series of rescues by by the French Government as it prepares state-owned companies for sale. (Reuters)


International Briefs; B.A.T. Blocks ITC Power Project
Intent on ousting the chairman of the Indian tobacco company ITC Ltd., B.A.T.
Industries P.L.C. blocked a resolution that would have allowed the company to enter the power business.
At a chaotic special general meeting, B.A.T used its 31.6 percent stake in ITC to vote against a resolution on raising funds for a power project.
The resolution, which was put to a formal ballot, needed 75 percent support to pass.


Tyson to Be Released Today
After three years in prison, Mike Tyson was scheduled to be released from the Indiana Youth Center sometime after 6 o'clock Saturday morning.
Tyson, the 28-year-old former heavyweight champion, was expected to go to his home in Southington, Ohio, where he owns a 60-acre estate.
The prison, located in Plainfield, some 20 miles from here, has been Tyson's home since he was convicted in February 1992 of raping Desiree Washington, a contestant in the Miss Black America beauty contest, in 1991.


Raphael Simches, Special Educator, 74
Raphael Simches, a former president of the Council for Exceptional Children, died on March 13 at his home in Anna Maria, Fla.
He was 74.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  KILLINGS FORCE C.I.A. SHAKE-UP
A C.I.A. official has been reassigned in the furor over the agency's employment of a Guatemalan colonel linked to the deaths of an American innkeeper and a guerrilla. 1  AL GORE VISITS JERICHO
Bearing $65 million in American aid, Vice President Al Gore visited Jericho today.
He was accompanied by Yasir Arafat, who had not seen the Palestinian town since July. 2  REPORT ON CAPTIVES IN IRAQ
Polish diplomats have visited two Americans held in Iraq and found them in good health, the White House said as it renewed its call on Baghdad to release the men. 2  KURDISH REBELS SURROUNDED
The Turkish Army has encircled Kurdish guerrillas in two pockets in northern Iraq and plans to advance into those areas in the coming days, army officers said. 3  ARGENTINA TELLS OF KILLINGS
Argentina plans to release a new list of 1,000 more people who disappeared during the military dictatorship's "dirty war" of repression during the 1970's. 4  JAPAN PROBES OCEAN DEPTHS
An unmanned Japanese submersible craft has reached the floor of the deepest part of the world's oceans and discovered fish living there, researchrs said. 4  Japanese family remembers a man who died helping others 5  Montreal Journal: Quebec's Anglos talk of a separation. 4  National 6-9  HOUSE PASSES WELFARE BILL
On a vote that closely followed party lines, the House approved a key element of the Republican agenda: a bill to undo six decades of social-welfare legislation and give states control of poverty programs.1  BEWARE OF THE NUMBERS!
The venomous debate over welfare spending conceals a cautionary lesson for future Congressional budget feuds: Where you end up depends on where you begin.  8  NEW SMALL-PLANE STANDARDS
The Government proposed tougher rules for small commuter planes that would bringing them closer to the standards for planes operated by the major airlines.  1  THREAT TO REPUBLICAN AGENDA
A coalition of moderate Republicans and conservative Democrats said they would oppose the Republican tax cut plan without guarantees of spending cuts.  1  DERIVATIVES IN COMEBACK
Salomon Brothers made an offer to buy up to $8.1 billion of derivative securities, clearly deciding that the worst is over for derivatives.
Other big securities firms quickly followed Salomon's lead.  1  JOINED AT THE HIP AND FEUDING
The two Texarkanas cuddle at the Texas-Arkansas border, but economic and racial divisions have the people who run the cities barely speaking to each other.  6  INFORMANT'S PAYMENT DISAVOWED
Justice Department officials disclaimed responsibility for the decision to pay $45,000 to the informant in the murder-for-hire case against a daughter of Malcolm X.  6  FIT FOR BATTLING REPUBLICANS
Despite gaining six pounds, President Clinton is in "excellent health," his doctor reported.  8  DEMOCRAT MAY VIE WITH CLINTON
Former Gov.
Robert Casey of Pennsylvania took the first step toward challenging the President for the Democratic nomination in 1996.  8  A PUTTY FOR BRITTLE BONES
A paste injected through the skin can be used to patch fractured limbs and hips and repair the ravages of osteoporosis.  7  Religion Journal: An opera about the Holocaust and conscience.  7  Metro Digest 25  H.M.O.'S CATCHING ON
New York State is fast catching up with the rest of the country, as new figures show that 25 percent of its residents have now joined health maintenance organizations. 1  IN SEARCH OF BUDGET SUPPORT
To pressure Democrats to support Gov.
Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23  Editorials  The troublesome Shabazz case.
No dearth of bombers.
British-American strains.
Broadway robbery.
Letters  Russell Baker: A little cyber grouch.
Bob Herbert: Formula for tragedy.
Who is a woman I admire?
Amelia H. Chamberlain: Mama's dark world.
Nicole A. Plumail: An open mind.
Margaret Huffman: The laundry room.
Ivellisse Rodriguez: On the run.
Deepti Thomas: The storyteller.
Chronicle 24  Bridge 19  Crossword 16


The Pursuit of Love In a Warm Climate
When one friend tells another that she "almost" had sex, you know you're in the middle of a coming-of-age story.
"Trop de Bonheur" ("Too Much Happiness"), set among teen-agers in the sunny South of France, is a smart, proficient example of the genre.
The female friends are Vale rie, the more buxom one, who has just been told she might as well go to a vocational school, and her smarter but less-developed friend, Mathilde.
The film might have been called, "One Loses Her Virginity, the Other Doesn't." The boys are Didier and Kamel, both of whom are predictable enough to lust after Valerie.
Cedric Kahn, directing his second feature, creates a strong sense of atmosphere, as the foursome meets for a swim or at the public square at night.
And he places the characters at that specific moment when girls want, and can get, boys a little bit older.
When Kamel's brother, Brahim, drives by the square, Valerie and Mathilde can't resist going off with a guy in a car.
Didier and Kamel are left to walk to an impromptu party at Mathilde's house, while her parents are away.


Allies Urge Ex-Yugoslav States To Accept Reduced U.N. Force; Bosnian Army Claims a Victory
The Bosnian Army, pursuing offensives that have rekindled the Bosnian war, said today that it had captured an important Serbian communications tower near the central Bosnian town of Travnik.
The Muslim-led Government of President Alija Izetbegovic also appeared to be seeking to weaken the hold of the Bosnian Serb leader, Radovan Karadzic.


Observer; A Little Cyber Grouch
Does your blood run cold, friend, when you read about the glories of "cyberspace"?
Do you have to repress a shriek of protest every time you hear or read or think about "the information highway"?
If so, it means you are an old stick-in-the-mud and are doomed to end up in the dustbin of history unless you surrender immediately and come along quietly into the age of electronics amok.


U.S. Proposes to Tighten Rules On Safety of Commuter Planes
The Department of Transportation yesterday proposed tougher operating requirements and equipment standards for small commuter planes, bringing them closer to the standards for bigger planes operated by the major airlines.
The agency predicted the changes would prevent nearly 100 accidents and scores of deaths over the next 10 years.
The new rules cover about 1,100 planes with 10 to 30 seats and would cost the airline industry $275 million, according to the Federal Aviation Administration, which regulates the airlines.
The Transportation Secretary, Federico F. Pena, said the cost would add less than $2 to each one-way ticket on the smallest planes, and 68 cents on the larger ones.


Stay Tuned for 24-Hour Fairfield News
Cablevision, the Long Island-based cable television company, plans to bring round-the-clock local news to Fairfield County, Conn., this spring and is planning similar programming for Westchester County, northern New Jersey, the Bronx and Brooklyn.
"I think it will be great," said Joseph P. Ganim, the Mayor of Bridgeport, whose city would share in the expanded coverage.
"It will open up all kinds of new avenues for everyone in Fairfield."


Police Find More Chemicals Tied to Sect
The police found tons of raw materials to make explosives on Friday in a warehouse used by a religious sect, adding to public concern about a huge stockpile of chemicals and explosives that by some calculations theoretically could have killed millions of people.
The Friday evening newspapers only added to the public jitters with estimates of the potential effects of the chemicals that have been confiscated so far from the sect, Aum Shinrikyo, which appears to be the prime suspect in the poison gas attack on Tokyo's subway system on Monday.


On Pacific's Deep Floor, Japanese Find Fish
An unmanned Japanese underwater vessel reached the floor of the deepest part of the world's oceans today and discovered fish living there, researchers said.
The discovery, nearly seven miles below the ocean surface at the bottom of the Marianas Trench, would represent the deepest sighting of fish on the planet.
Marine scientists said the finding was interesting, though not surprising, since it has long been known that there is life in the inky recesses of the ocean.


Post Office Survivor's Help Is Recounted as Heroic Act
Bullets had shattered his face and he was having trouble breathing, but David Grossman struggled to stay conscious as he lay bleeding in a Montclair post office.
Hours later, as a ventilator kept him alive in a hospital, he fought the pain and shock long enough to give investigators a detailed account of the shooting, which killed four men.
The hours after Mr.
Grossman was shot were recounted today by his wife at a news conference at the hospital here, where he remains in critical condition with three bullet wounds.
Speaking to reporters for the first time, his wife, Karin Abarbanel, praised the mettle of her husband, who is expected to recover fully.


Clinton Is a Few Pounds Heavier But in Fine Health, Doctor Says
Despite regular jogging and exercise, President Clinton has gained six pounds over the last 14 months.
But he "continues to demonstrate excellent health and vigor," his physician, Dr.
E.
Connie Mariano, said today after supervising his second annual medical checkup as President.
Mr.
Clinton, who is 48, runs three miles five times a week and plays golf more frequently than in his first two years as President.
He played 17 holes on Thursday.


Nasdaq Registers a Record In Uncovered Short Sales
Traders recently increased their bets that a record number of stocks prices will fall, as uncovered short sales on the Nasdaq exchange rose 3.8 percent in the month that ended March 8, the National Association of Securities Dealers said yesterday.
The number of stock issues that were sold short but not yet covered reached 4,723, the highest ever, up from 4,709 in February.
The number of shares sold short rose to 778.3 million from 749.9 million.


Three Men and a Baby Product
Once upon a time, nothing but the high-priced disposable diapers were good enough for the bottom of the American baby.
Two giants split up the market and walked away with huge profits: Procter &amp; Gamble with its Pampers and Luvs and Kimberly-Clark with its Huggies.
Other Fortune 500 companies, including the Scott Paper Company and Johnson &amp; Johnson, challenged the diaper duopoly but fell flat.
Cheap store brands lured away bargain-seeking consumers, but P.&amp; G. and Kimberly sat alone at the top.


Researchers Create Bone Healer, but a Patent Issue Arises
After trying some 1,200 times, a team of mineralogists and chemists has come up with a paste that can be injected through the skin into a broken bone, where it hardens in 10 minutes into something very similar in composition, texture and strength to natural bone.
The researchers, at the Norian Corporation of Cupertino, Calif., say the product will find wide use patching fractured limbs and hips and repairing the ravages of osteoporosis.


Another Student Protest at City Hall


BUSINESS DIGEST
Salomon Brothers Bids For Block of Derivatives Salomon Brothers offered to buy up to $8.1 billion of derivative securities, clearly deciding that the worst is over for derivatives and they are now probably underpriced.
Other securities firms quickly followed Salomon.
Within hours, Morgan Stanley said it would bid for the same block of derivatives, and J. P. Morgan and Merrill Lynch also said they were active in the market.
The firms hope to profit by trading, retaining or restructuring the securities.
Page 1.
By using relatively simple techniques to diffuse the risk of the derivatives immediately, these firms can lock in a hefty profit. 38.
Durable Goods Signal Slowdown, Sending Stocks, Bonds Soaring  Orders for durable goods fell 0.8 percent in February to $163 billion, the first decline in four months.
The report provided further evidence that the manufacturing expansion was slowing and eased fears that the Fed would increase interest rates next week. 36.
The report helped send the Dow up 50 points, to a record 4,138.67, and 30-year bonds up a full point, reducing their yield to 7.36 percent That's the lowest level in a week.
The dollar rose to 1.4210 marks and 88.95 yen. 37.
Signs of Success Help Peso, Stocks The peso rebounded to 6.815 to the dollar and the Mexican stock exchange roared back 107 points amid signs that the country's economic recovery plan was beginning to work. 38.
Senate Votes to Repeal Tax Break The Senate voted to repeal a tax break aimed at helping minorities buy cable and broadcast companies.
The vote is a setback for Viacom, which agreed last year to sell its cable operations for $2.3 billion to a black entrepreneur in California. 39.
Group Demands Tax Cut Delay Dozens of moderate Republicans in the House, joined by 23 Democrats who have consistently voted with the majority, demanded that any reductions in taxes be delayed until Congress has passed spending cuts sufficient to compensate for the lost revenue as well as to balance the budget. 1.
Rules Proposed for Small Aircraft The Transportation Department proposed tougher operating requirements and equipment standards for small commuter planes, bringing them closer in line to the standards for planes operated by the major airlines.
Among the requirements, commuter pilots could no longer work longer hours than pilots for the major carriers and would receive the same level of training. 1.
Boeing Offers Retirement Option Boeing announced retirement incentives intended to reduce the number of involuntary layoffs needed to reach its goal of cutting 7,000 jobs this year.
The plan will result in a one-time charge of $350 million to $400 million in the company's second fiscal quarter. 39.
Time Warner to Sell Atari Stake Time Warner plans to sell part or all of its 24.5 percent stake in Atari in a move to reduce its debt.
The stake is worth about $42.9 million. 41.
Shareholders Say No to Rowland Roland (Tiny) Rowland narrowly lost a shareholder vote to become president of Lonrho, after having been dismissed as co-chief executive.
He was to be named president, but the board withdrew its support. 38.
Bronco II Settlement Rejected  A judge has rejected Ford's settlement stemming from claims that the Bronco II is prone to rolling over.
The judge said the agreement provided huge fees for lawyers but "zero" benefits for Bronco owners. 7.
H.M.O.
Membership Rises in New York New figures show that more than a quarter of the residents of New York State have joined health maintenance organizations, up from 19 percent two years ago.
It is estimated that 4.5 million New Yorkers now belong to the health organizations. 1.
Pharmacy Fund Tackles Cash Woes The Pharmacy Fund is dealing with the problems that pharmacists have getting reimbursed by insurers.
The new company buys bills from the previous day's prescription sales at a slight discount, paying the pharmacist immediately and eliminating weeks of cash flow delays.
The Pharmacy Fund then collects from the health plans. 39.


Bridge
The American Contract Bridge League, based in Memphis, suffered a major blow when an employee embezzled funds from the League's Charity Foundation and Educational Foundation over a six-year period ending six months ago.
Last month, the employee, Christy Jones, pleaded guilty in Federal District Court in Memphis to embezzling $1,238,557.92, and she is to be sentenced on April 28.
She faces up to 30 years in prison with no parole, plus a $1,000,000 fine.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Veteran Pianist Displays His Strengths  Abbey Simon Carnegie Hall


Sending Debussy Back to His Own Day
A strange and marvelous universe came to life on Thursday night at the Metropolitan Opera.
In Jonathan Miller's stunning new production of Debussy's "Pelleas et Melisande," the mythic kingdom of Maeterlinck's play was eliminated; there was no well, no forest, no grotto, no dim vault with yawning depths.
The hapless characters also lacked the crowns and gowns and accouterments of ersatz medievalism.
The entire opera took place between the decaying walls of a classical mansion designed by John Conklin, with draped statues and crates, a leafless tree, empty picture frames and creaky scaffolding.
There was no outside or inside, only a disintegrating world on the verge of abandonment.
The walls slowly rotated with each instrumental interlude, so that even the sets seemed to breathe along with James Levine's supple conducting.
In the midst of this world, the ailing gentry, dressed in Clare Mitchell's costumes of Debussy-era suits and dresses, played out its drama of jealousy.


Howe Could Be Retiree or Replacement
Frustrated and frightened and aggravated and angry about baseball's lingering labor dispute, Steve Howe said today he was considering retiring from the Yankees or crossing the picket line to play for the replacement team if the strike continues.
Howe contended that several Yankees and players from other teams have told him they are pondering defying the union, although he did not name them.
He also criticized the players' union for not fully answering questions when he calls.
As animated as ever, Howe, the Yankees' union representative, said the strike has irritated him enough to make him want to quit baseball and go home.


Sibelius, Blunt and Finally Austere
Were it not for a few hard decisions made the other way, Colin Davis might have played a major part in American orchestral life this past 25 years.
But it was not to be.
He has remained in Europe, and we catch him in this country as he makes himself available.
New York Philharmonic listeners will especially remember Mr.
Davis's generous gift of Weber's "Freischutz" done in concert a few seasons ago.
He is at the Philharmonic again, last week conducting Mahler at Avery Fisher Hall and on Thursday night presenting an all-Sibelius program.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.00
6.01
3.53
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.64
5.68
3.47
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.80
5.83
3.79
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.08
7.18
6.63
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.36
7.44
7.01
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.24
8.33
7.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.35
6.38
6.07
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 8


Connecticut Women Still Wait for a Test
Maybe someone in this National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament -- perhaps Virginia on Saturday or Tennessee or Colorado or Stanford next week -- will give the Connecticut women's basketball team a test.
Maybe not.
In the first three rounds, Connecticut has overrun Maine by 30 points, Virginia Tech by 41 and, on Thursday night, Alabama by 31.
UConn's defense has been smothering, its offense almost unstoppable from the low post, deadly from the perimeter.


Corrections
A brief report by Reuters in Business Day yesterday about a proposed acquisition of Cannell Entertainment Inc. by the New World Communications Group misstated the title of a television program produced by Cannell.
It is "Silk Stalkings," not "Silk Stockings."


Camby Is In Control For UMass
It was not March Madness, but more like March Mismatch.
Second-seeded Massachusetts, looking every bit like a team determined to reach Seattle, made quick work of sixth-seeded Tulsa tonight with a one-sided, 76-51 victory before 19,689 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The sophomore center Marcus Camby highlighted an impressive UMass effort, totaling 20 points, 9 rebounds and 5 blocks.
Guard Derek Kellogg added 12 points as UMass (29-4) advanced to Sunday's East Regional final against Oklahoma State for a berth in the Final Four.
Tulsa, reaching the Sweet 16 for the second consecutive year, ended its season at 22-8.


Montreal Journal; Quebec's Anglos Talk of a Separation
Within a 30-mile radius of downtown Montreal, three-quarters of Quebec's non-French-speakers live in communities with a medley of English and French names, like Cote St.
Luc, Hampstead, Snowdon and Lachine.
Known as "Anglos" if their basic language is English and "Allophones" -- a term taken from Greek roots for "other sounds" -- if they are recent immigrants, they make up an estimated 18 percent of Quebec's population of seven million.


Suspect Assails U.S.  Ignoring the advice of his lawyer, the man accused of engineering the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center released a diatribe saying Palestinians had a right to attack the United States for its support of Israel. The man said he was an engineer and explosives expert.  Article, page 27.


Not All Colleges Bemoaning Albany Cuts
AT most private and public colleges in New York, the talk among administrators is mainly about cuts in state aid.
To compensate for the proposed cuts, tuition at Iona College in New Rochelle could go up 6 percent next year and at Purchase College as much as 60 percent.
Many colleges and universities are considering dropping courses, and some fear they might have to close.
But in the president's office at Mercy College, Jay Sexter is eschewing budget concerns for Far Eastern philosophy, and the only cutback he cares about is a recently announced reduction in tuition at the 40-acre campus fronting the Hudson River here.
Moreover, enrollment is increasing, and the number of courses is growing.


March 19-25; Into The Light
In sports, it was a week to emerge from the shadows, or at least try to.
Last Sunday, Michael Jordan abandoned a lackluster minor-league baseball career and returned to the Chicago Bulls, brightening immensely the horizons of the National Basketball Association and companies like Nike whose products he endorses.


Q and A
Off to Balmoral
Q.
I believe Balmoral Castle in Scotland is open to the public this summer.
Can I take public transportation to get there? -- V. Askerly, Brooklyn, N.Y.


Who Put the Lid on gp120?
Some 15,000 vials of a colorless, odorless, waterlike liquid are lined up in trays in a room so cold, so remorselessly quiet, you can't help thinking of it as a tomb.
In a way, it is.
Each vial contains a one-milliliter dose of a product known as gp120, which has cost its manufacturer, Genentech, $100 million and untold grief.
Is gp120, as some scientists believe, a crucial first approximation of the desperately needed vaccine to prevent AIDS?
Or is it, as others say, nothing more than expensive dishwater?
No one knows.
Neither Genentech's product nor a similar vaccine made by Chiron Biocine has yet been tested enough to tell.
So far, no vials have passed through the enormous steel doors to the loading dock beyond and from there into syringes and into the arms of the 10,000 volunteers whose bodies alone can answer the question.
Instead, the vials sit and wait, with nothing to interrupt their silence but a workman's boom box, which suddenly sings out from the loading dock: "Who'll Stop the Rain?" The Eureka Moment
"I was in Nigeria for cholera in 1970," Don Francis says fondly, as if recalling a world's fair.
"The Sudan for Ebola virus, Phoenix for hepatitis B, just about everywhere for smallpox." The resume of his long career with the Centers for Disease Control reads like an itinerary of miracles.
In Africa, India, Bangladesh, Francis helped eradicate terrible illnesses by the bold application of vaccine programs.
But here in the United States, in his disheveled office at Genentech's headquarters on San Francisco Bay, miracles keep getting derailed.
To Francis, the company's vaccine evangelist, gp120 represents the best hope yet of beating AIDS, and he is determined to test it and see.
An equally determined army of opponents is arrayed against him.
Perhaps that's why a ceramic figure of Sheetala Mata, the Indian goddess of smallpox, is sitting on his window ledge, embracing and supposedly blessing three vials of gp120.
"They'll need all the help they can get," he says.


Rome Modern Art Gets A Home in a Convent
A 17th-century Carmelite convent has become Rome's newest museum, the Modern and Contemporary Municipal Art Gallery.
Opened in January, the collection comprises more than 4,500 works dating from 1883 to 1943.
Though the municipal gallery was first opened in 1925, it migrated from one Roman palazzo to another for 40 years until the 60's when many of the works were either placed in storage or distributed to public offices.
The collection remained hidden until it made the convent its new home.


Indefatigable, Bill Baird for the Offense
THE pineapple palms and balmy breezes of Florida claimed another mature Long Islander this winter season.
Bill Baird, almost 63, spent February in the Sunshine State.
But not by the pool.
On the picket line.
Although eligible for Social Security, Mr.
Baird keeps working, or in his words "crusading." "The fight is never ending," he said.
An abortion-rights advocate for 32 years, Mr.
Baird maintains that "even today people don't know a war is going on."


IN SHORT: FICTION
THE JOURNALIST  By Harry Mathews. Godine, $21.95.


SILENCE IS OLDEN
Regarding Maureen Dowd's observations on "Silent Cal" Coolidge (On Washington: "Silence is Olden" Feb. 26), I am reminded of another example of our 30th President's economy with words.


Dutch Rescuer to Give Talk
THE 50-year-old photographs show smiling friends and a group clustered around a table.
Dr.
Tina Strobos, a psychiatrist here, points at different faces.
This one died in a concentration camp, she says.
That one was never heard from again.
This one moved to Israel, where she still visits the woman's grandchildren.
The pictures represent Dr.
Strobos's youth in the Netherlands, a youth she said she feels homesick for, a youth cut short by the five-year occupation by the Nazis beginning in 1940.
Dr.
Strobos was then a 20-year-old medical student, and pictures of her show a strikingly beautiful, dark-haired young woman.
Along with her mother and grandmother, Dr.
Strobos, whose family consisted of Social Democrats and atheists, sheltered more than 100 Jews in their house in Amsterdam.


THE WORLD: Fear Itself; Finding New Reasons to Dread the Unknown
WE are living in toxic times.
The boundaries of the body feel as vulnerable as the borders of the country.
Invisible, unknowable threats have replaced nuclear bombs as the source of collective fear.
This spring, our fancies turn away from love to thoughts of nerve gas wafting through subway lines, unpronounceable cults with messianic masters who proclaim the end is here and aim to take us with them, strangers carrying diseases boarding airplanes, the grinning skull in a new lover's face, men with guns walking into the post office, media stars turned murder suspects -- the whole panoply of natural and unnatural horrors parading past our eyes on every channel.


Drawings of Jittery Moments
THE No. 1 spot in the Jersey City Museum is the wall facing visitors as they enter the largest gallery.
In the present exhibition, a drawing invitational organized by the museum's curator, Alejandro Anreus, the space is occupied by a grid of flashing black and white images that measures 9 1/2 feet by 12 1/2 feet.
Robert Birmelin is the artist and, notwithstanding a long record of shows in Manhattan as well as New Jersey, it is as if he had been waiting for the opportunity.


Sarah Cooper, Martin Williams
Sarah Ann Cooper, the daughter of Ann E. Cooper of Middlebury, Vt., and Michael A. Cooper of New York, was married yesterday to Martin Glynn Williams, the son of Angela L. Boulton of Cirencester, Gloucestershire, England, and Keith E. Williams of Cheltenham, Gloucestershire.
Justice Albert M. Rosenblatt of the Appellate Division of the New York Supreme Court in Brooklyn performed the civil ceremony in the Pegasus Suite at the Rainbow Room.
Mrs.
Williams, 28, is a freelance arts and education consultant in New York and London.
She graduated summa cum laude from Middlebury College.
Her father is a partner in Sullivan &amp; Cromwell, a law firm in New York.
Her mother is a writer and consultant to nonprofit organizations in Middlebury.


Traveling Light
To the Editor: Your article reminded me of my friend's Uncle George.
As a Cincinnati brewer on occasional business trips, he started out with an almost empty suitcase and bought what he needed -- clean shirt, underwear, even once, a whole suit -- as he went along.
Uncle George said he traveled lighter and looked better that way.
JOHN K. JACOBS  Highland, N.Y.


Third St. Enjoys a Fragile Revival
Margaret Flanagan remembers the prayer vigils held outside an abandoned building where drugs had flowed freely.
Another woman, too frightened to give her name, talks about the heroin addict she chased from the Miracle Garden with a machete.
Up and down Third Street between Avenues A and B, residents talk about their long struggle with drug dealers -- many with renewed hope.
Like many blocks on the Lower East Side, this street of sagging walk-ups and storefronts, and the people who live on it, have endured the presence of drug dealers for decades, despite their prayers said at Most Holy Redeemer Church.
Now, many say, their prayers are being answered.


THE TRASHING OF PROFESSIONALISM
I doubt Bruce Nauman's immodest claim that his work is "like getting hit in the face with a baseball bat."
There's absolutely nothing like the sweet crack of a baseball bat on fragile cheekbone.
Hyperbole will only get you so far.
ROBERT C. SOMMER New York


Town Seeks Donations From Untaxed Groups
FOLLOWING the lead of cities like Portland, Me., and Philadelphia, Greenburgh recently embarked on a campaign to solicit donations from tax-exempt organizations in an attempt to generate revenue.
The justification behind the program is that such funds will help cover the cost of providing the organizations with municipal services like fire and police protection and garbage collection and should also deflect criticism from residents reluctant to welcome tax-exempt organizations to the community.
"The tax exempts don't pay anything," Town Supervisor Paul J. Feiner said.


Traveling Light
To the Editor: My wife and I have practiced Mr.
Eisner's method whenever we have traveled.
However, when we were in a charming small hotel in Delft, Holland, the Hotel de Ark, not too long ago, I placed what we call a "leaver" shirt in a waste can in our room.
The chambermaid kindly washed it and pressed it and placed it neatly folded on our bed and there it was awaiting my return from a day's tour.


New Yorkers &amp; Co.
Guitars, Business Papers And Leases of the Stars
Say you're in the market for a guitar.
A good guitar.
A really good guitar.
A really good guitar signed by -- Bob Dylan?


Void, Self, Drag, Utopia (And 5 Other Gay Themes)
FEW ART EXHIBITIONS ARE perfect, but some can be markedly imperfect and still be amazing, inspiring one eye-opening, mind-shifting experience after another.
"In a Different Light," put together on a shoestring at the University of California, Berkeley, is such an experience.
When a work deemed central to its focus is unobtainable -- say, Marcel Duchamp's masterpiece "The Bride Stripped Bare by Her Bachelors, Even" -- a reproduction is substituted.
Short cuts aside, this messy laboratory of a show percolates new ideas about contemporary art and its presentation.
"In a Different Light," which runs through April 9, has been organized by Lawrence Rinder, curator at the University Art Museum at Berkeley, and Nayland Blake, a video and installation artist from San Francisco.
It aims to account for what its organizers, both of whom are gay, call "the resonance of gay and lesbian experience in 20th-century American art."


Mexico Lives by Virtual Law
A KEY to understanding the social and political turmoil going on in Mexico these days is a terse phrase that President Ernesto Zedillo works into almost every one of his speeches.
"Rules, clear rules" are what he asks for, telling the Mexican people that he wants to play by the rules in a country where the rules have long been ignored.
The spectacular arrest several weeks ago of the elder brother of former President Carlos Salinas de Gortari on charges of planning a high-profile murder has become the symbol of Mr.
Zedillo's vow to place no one above the law.
His hard-line approach gained him immediate popularity in these tough economic times.


RESULTS PLUS
HIGH SCHOOL BASKETBALL  Marbury Leads Lincoln  The New York State Federation Basketball Class A championship had a New York City flavor last night as Lincoln of Brooklyn defeated Christ the King of Queens, 55-52,before 2,000 at the Glens Falls Civic Center.
Stephon Marbury, who was named Mr.
New York Basketball of 1995, scored 28 points to lead the Railsplitters (26-3) to their first state championship.
"I came in very intense in the first half," said Marbury.
"In the second half, we just stayed in it. In another match of New York city schools, Mount St. Michael Academy (28-1) of the Bronx beat Francis Lewis of Queens, 64-39, in the Class championship, for its 26th consecutive victory. N.H.L.  Capitals Tie Flyers  Peter Bondra scored the tying goal with 10.9 seconds left in regulation, giving the Washington Capitals a 2-2 tie with the Philadelphia Flyers yesterday at Landover, Md.
The Capitals had pulled the rookie goaltender Jim Carey when Washington's Michal Pivonka lined up for a face-off in the Philadelphia end with 13.4 seconds left.
Pivonka pushed the puck to Dale Hunter, who sent it across the crease to Bondra.Goalie Ron Hextall was too late to stop Bondra from stuffing the puck into the right side of the net.
Bondra's fifth goal in four games enabled Washington to extend its home unbeaten streak to eight games (5-0-3).
The Capitals are 9-1-2 in their last 12 games. (AP) CANADIENS 3, SENATORS 2: Brian Savage and Valery Bure scored as Montreal ended a two-game losing streak against visiting Ottawa.
Mathieu Schneider also scored for the Canadiens, who moved into a tie with Florida for 10th place in the Eastern Conference. (AP)
SHARKS 3, KINGS 1: Sandis Ozolinsh scored his first short-handed goal in the N.H.L. and the rookie Jeff Friesen had two assists, leading the San Jose Sharks past the Los Angeles Kings in Inglewood, Calif.
Tom Pederson and Pat Falloon also scored for the Sharks, and Arturs Irbe stopped 32 shots. (AP) SKIING  Ogiwara Jumps to Lead  Kenji Ogiwara of Japan, the three-time World Cup champion, rode a head wind at Sapporo, Japan, yesterday to the day's longest jump, 95.5 meters, to take the lead after the ski jumping portion of the season's last World Cup Nordic combined competition, ahead of Mario Stecher of Austria.
Tergat, 25, sprinted away from his teammate and the race favorite, Ismael Kurui, at just past the halfway point of the 12,000-meter course and went on to win in 34 minutes 5 seconds, an 8-second margin.
Tulu, the Olympic 10,000-meter champion in 1992, took her first world cross-country gold with a time of 20:21 over the 6,450 meters, 8 seconds ahead of Catherina McKiernan of Ireland. (AP) GOLF  Green Up by Two Shots  Tammie Green, her game steady despite pressure from Nancy Lopez and Laura Davies, shot a 2-under-par 70 yesterday to maintain her lead in the Nabisco Dinah Shore tournament at Rancho Mirage, Calif.
Green, who went to 5-under for the tournament,has a two-shot lead over Lopez and a three-shot advantage over Davies heading into today's final round of the first of the four major L.P.G.A. championships.
Green began the day with a two-shot edge on Lauri Merten and Kelly Robbins.
Merten shot a 73 to fall five shots off the lead, and Robbins struggled to a 76 that dropped her back into the pack. (AP) COLLEGE HOCKEY  Four Left in Tourney  Boston University and Maine won quarterfinal matches last night at the National Collegiate Athletic Association East Regional in Worcester, Mass.
The Terriers defeated their nemesis, Lake Superior State, 6-2, after Maine had eliminated Denver, 4-2, before a crowd of 10,881.
The two teams from Hockey East advanced to the semifinals on Thursday in Providence, R.I.
B.U. will play Minnesota, a 5-2 victor over Colorado College yesterday at the West Regional in Madison, Wis.
Maine's foe will be Michigan, which defeated Wisconsin, 5-4, in another quarterfinal.
TRACK AND FIELD  A Brisk Time in Relays  With winds gusting to 40 miles an hour causing a windchill factor in the low 30's yesterday, Boys and Girls High School's winning 1,600-meter time of 3 minutes 22.2 seconds in the 14th annual Bishop Ford Relays was outstanding.
The meet at the Riverbank track facility near West 143d Street and the Hudson River drew entries from the city's Catholic and public high schools.
Boys and Girls also won the boys' 3,200 relay in 8:21.3.
Mount St.
Michael also was a double winner (sprint medley and 400) in boys' events.
Tilden turned in the best girls' performance with a 4:12.1 triumph in the 1,600 relay.


Smoking Room
To the Editor: One of the great joys of travel is dining around, and so I had been looking forward to my next visit to New York City and its great restaurants.
However, having read "Last Refuge of Smokers: Very Small Restaurants" (Travel Advisory, Feb. 12) saying that only places with fewer than 35 seats will allow smoking, I have canceled the trip.


Fire Erupts in Warehouse
More than 60 firefighters in Hackensack, N.J., were fighting a three-alarm fire in a chemical warehouse last night that had not been brought under control after more than five hours, fire officials said.
The blaze began about 7 P.M. in a one-story warehouse at 55 Devoe Street, where officials believed the chemicals sodium persulfate and ammonium were being stored, said Deputy Chief Joseph Thorton of the Hackensack Fire Department.


Theater District: Rustic to Elegant
BECCO ** (212) 397-7597; 355 West 46th Street; $$; all major cards


The Modernizing Plan For Greenwich Hospital
We would like to clarify some points regarding "Hospital's Plan Taking Shape" (March 19) about Greenwich Hospital's plans to rebuild and modernize.
The new Greenwich Hospital will provide all the services presently provided our patients in a better, more cost-effective manner.


All About The Irish, Mensa, Peddlers, Alarms; If Car Alarms Don't Stop Thefts, Let's Ditch Them
To the Editor:
It's encouraging to learn from your March 19 article "Your Car, the Sitting Duck" that a car-theft-data expert says there's not much evidence that car alarms prevent theft.
Alarms go off all too frequently, but I'm never aware of anybody running to see what the trouble is.


Rosalind A. Fahey, Kevin J. Kruse
Rosalind Ann Fahey, a daughter of Angela and Richard Fahey of Bernardsville, N.J., was married yesterday to Kevin Joseph Kruse, a son of Cathleen and Joseph Kruse of Florham Park, N.J.
The Rev.
Giles P. Hayes performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Perpetual Help Roman Catholic Church in Bernardsville.
The couple, both 24, graduated magna cum laude from Dartmouth College.
Ms.
Fahey, who will keep her name, expects to receive a law degree from Harvard University in June.
She is to become an associate at Willkie, Farr &amp; Gallagher, the New York law firm, in the fall.


Seneca Feud Boils Over; 3 Are Slain
Three men were killed and a fourth was wounded early yesterday in a shootout on a tense Seneca Indian reservation in western New York where rival factions for the tribal leadership have clashed repeatedly in recent weeks, Seneca officials and Erie County authorities said.
"We're on the verge of a civil war," Rose Patterson, an aide to Seneca President Dennis Bowen, said after a night of gunfire and death on the Cattaraugus Reservation, 30 miles southwest of Buffalo and a few miles from the eastern shore of Lake Erie.


The Client
When you've got what they want, you can afford to relax.


The California Factor
The California Republican Party has produced three Presidents in this century, and now Gov.
Pete Wilson thinks he can be the fourth.
There has been a lot of talk about the micropolitics of his potential candidacy.
Will California voters forgive him for running out on a troubled state?
Will his G.O.P. colleagues excuse him for turning the executive power over to a Democratic lieutenant governor?
Is Mr.
Wilson too dull and chilly to appeal to a broader audience?
What about polls that show him behind both President Clinton and Senator Bob Dole in his own state?
But the more interesting questions have to do with the threat that Mr.
Wilson represents, if he can get rolling, for the other Republican Presidential aspirants and for President Clinton.
The general election danger of a California candidate for Mr.
Clinton is obvious.
He will have a hard time carrying the other two Sun Belt megastates, Texas and Florida.
Facing a native-son contest for California's 54 electoral votes would be a big obstacle.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Called up Junior Braddy, outfielder, from their minor-league complex.


U.C.L.A. Spoils Half of Connecticut's Big Day
They do not have to feel quite so personal a responsibility to uphold the championship tradition of their school, because Toby Bailey and J. R. Henderson were not yet born.
That is how much time has passed since the U.C.L.A.
Bruins won their 10th national championship in a historic 12-year period, a dominance that once seemed as if it would never end.
As a senior-dominated team attempted to reach a point in the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament once considered an annual trip in the U.C.L.A.
Invitational, Bailey and Henderson combined with the creative relentlessness of the senior guard Tyus Edney to lead the Bruins to Seattle.


U.S. Will Now Get Share of Proceeds From Canadian Drug Arrests
The United States will begin receiving proceeds from the sale of property seized from drug traffickers and other criminals in Canada under an agreement signed this week.
In cases where Canadian investigative work has assisted the American authorities in apprehensions and convictions, the United States already shares the proceeds of seized assets with Canada.
But Canada had previously lacked the legal authority for a reciprocal policy.


Company Picnic
The grass is green. The sky is clear. But play it cool. The boss is here.


Connecticut Q&amp;A: Ed Dombroskas; Diversity Is the Draw for Tourism Industry
TOURISM, like travel, conjures up images of relaxation, seldom a picture of the bustling multibillion-dollar industry it represents, an industry that is growing rapidly and changing our social, technological, environmental and economic lives.
Tourists spent $3.9 billion in Connecticut in 1993 (the latest year for which figures are available), supporting 110,000 jobs in the state.
And that is exclusive of the totals from the Foxwoods casino complex.


INSIDE
INVESTING IT Page 5  As the winds of change blow through Washington, investors are starting to feel the breezes.
By Glenn Collins.
INVESTING IT Page 6  Just got your tax bill?
High, is it?
There are a few things you can do, besides moving to Liechtenstein.
On Your Mind.
By Laura Pedersen.
SPENDING IT Page 11  Joint ownership has its own strange arithmetic.
Sometimes, one homeowner is enough, But two can be better.
By Mary Rowland.
VOICES/Page 13 Bill Gates of Microsoft makes his case for the proposition that his company has encouraged, not suppressed, software inovation.


The World of a Harlem Beat Cop


Not a Peripheral Character
To the Editor:
When the dust settles (if it ever does) around Anais Nin's personal life, I hope that her work is recognized for its poetic insight.
In her last diary there is a beautiful passage that begins, "In music I feel most deeply the passing of things." Bruce Bawer, who reviewed Deirdre Bair's "Anais Nin: A Biography" (March 5), should consider reading that passage as a contrast to his meanspirited dismissal of Nin.
He writes, "If Nin is remembered at all, it will not be as a pioneer but as a colorful peripheral character who embodied, in an extreme form, some of the more unfortunate distinguishing characteristics of our age."


No Island Stays an Island
REEF By Romesh Gunesekera. 190 pp. New York: The New Press. $20.


Sports of The Times; Tyson Faces Newest Challenge
IF you're nobody unless your face is on a T-shirt, Mike Tyson is somebody again.
The T-shirts have been on sale for about a week.
They're black with him glaring at you, his boxing gloves up.
The red, green and gold lettering sneers, "March 25, 1995," as if yesterday's date of his release from an Indiana prison will live in history.
Whatever his future, he's free to box again.
But what did he leave in prison during those three years?
What did he learn there?


March 19-25: Government-Paid; Malcolm's Daughter on Trial; So, Too, Is Her Accuser
The credibility of the star witness in the murder-for-hire case against Qubilah Bahiyah Shabazz was hit hard in a Federal court last week when he admitted to being promised $45,000 and living expenses by the Government for his help in the case.
The witness, Michael K. Fitzpatrick, long a Government informer, said at the hearing in St.
Paul, Minn., that he had already been paid $34,000 after taping dozens of his telephone conversations with Ms.
Shabazz, and accusing her of trying to hire him to kill Louis Farrakhan, the leader of the Nation of Islam.


New York On Call
The New York Convention and Visitors Bureau has a new 24-hour telephone service that provides access -- through a touch-tone phone -- to several hotels, ticket agencies, tour companies and restaurants.
A touch-tone phone is needed to select prerecorded options on the automated menu.
For more detailed help, multilingual travel counselors are on call weekdays from 9 A.M. to 6 P.M. and weekends and holidays from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M.
The number is (800) 692-8474.


To Our Readers
Starting next week, the suggested Sunday newsstand price of The Times in the greater New York area will increase to $2.50.
The change results from a sharp rise in the cost of paper.
The Times's weekday price will be unchanged.


Getting There
Looking as if you've arrived.


For Better or for Worse: Life as a Caretaker
BEVERLY KIDD gets out of bed at 4 A.M. after Maxwell the cat stands on her chest and licks her awake.
She goes into the kitchen and drinks coffee until 6, talking back at talk radio, reading books on alternative therapies and plowing through stacks of medical bills and insurance forms.
It is the best part of her day.
At 6, Robert Kidd wakes up.


A Guru's Journey -- A special report.; The Seer Among the Blind: Japanese Sect Leader's Rise
As a boy attending a school for the blind, Shoko Asahara was weak-sighted but had better vision than his classmates.
So he emerged as a king of the school, the one who would lead his buddies off campus when they wanted a restaurant meal.
In exchange, they would pay for the meal.


Countering Price Hikes With Efficiency
HOW to succeed in business by really trying.
That is the story of the Strauss Paper Company here.
When the family-owned concern, a large distributor of paper products, was recently hit with the sharpest increase in paper-product prices in 50 years, instead of throwing in a proverbial -- if paper -- towel, the company embarked on a work-smarter campaign to solidify its position in the marketplace.
"The paper industry has always been cyclical, but even industry veterans say they have never seen anything like the cost of paper today," said Stewart J. Strauss, the 41-year-old president of Strauss Paper.


Nasdaq: Nice Try, But Is It Enough?
Nasdaq is a funny operation.
On one hand it is a regulatory organization, supposed to make and enforce rules governing trading.
On the other hand, it is a membership organization, with directors chosen by the very people it is trying to regulate.
Make the members happy, and the people running Nasdaq risk alienating the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Placate the S.E.C. and the members get surly.
It is that background that should be kept in mind regarding Nasdaq's latest attempt to reform its rules for trading over-the-counter stocks.
The new system, announced with great fanfare last week, is supposed to make it easier for individuals to trade at better prices.
But it shows signs of having been tailored to keep the members happy.


Bach at Baroque Festival
THE Hoff-Barthelson Music School's 30th yearly Baroque Festival is under way in Scarsdale.
This evening at 7 in Hitchcock Presbyterian Church, the school's Wind Ensemble, Suzuki Strings and Symphonette will appear under their respective directors, Joseph Piscitelli, Barbara Berg and Robert Schwartz.
Also on the program, Mark Mandarano will conduct the Festival Orchestra and Chorus in the Bach Magnificat, with Amy Ogden, Sally Williams, Salvatore Roselli and Russell Ashley as vocal soloists.


BENEFITS
Sheltering the Homeless  MONDAY -- The Beyond Shelter Coalition, which raises money for the renovation of housing for homeless New York families, is to benefit from a concert of Jewish music at 8 P.M. at Symphony Space, 2537 Broadway at 95th Street.
Tickets, $12, from (212) 662-3663, or at the box office.
Hearts of the City  WEDNESDAY -- Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, who is to receive the Heart of the City award, and four others will be honored by Heartshare at a dinner and a silent auction at the New York Hilton.
Heartshare provides family counseling, foster care and health services in New York.
The event begins with a cocktail reception at 6 P.M., followed by dinner at 7 and the awards ceremony at 9.
Tickets, $250, from (718) 330-1101.
For Barnard College  WEDNESDAY -- George Plimpton will be the master of ceremonies at a black-tie dinner at the Pierre that will benefit the Barnard College scholarship fund.
Grace Mirabella, the founder of Mirabella magazine, and Harry P. Kamen, the chairman of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, will be honored.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. will be followed by dinner and dancing at 7:30.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 838-2660.
Merchant-Ivory Film Premiere  WEDNESDAY -- The premiere of "Jefferson in Paris," a film by Ismail Merchant and James Ivory, will benefit the French-American Foundation, which seeks to strengthen cultural and educational links between the two countries.
The film will be shown at 7 P.M. at the Paris Theater, 4 West 58th Street, followed by dinner with Greta Scacchi, Nancy Marchand and other stars from the film, at the Plaza.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 935-1033.
Designed to Help the Homeless  WEDNESDAY -- Cynthia Rowley and more than 85 other New York clothing designers have contributed special designs to a fashion show and spring ball to be held at Webster Hall, 125 East 11th Street.
The event will raise money for Housing Works, an organization that provides housing and counseling to homeless people with AIDS and H.I.V.
A reception with the designers will be held from 6 to 8 P.M., followed by the fashion show at 8 and a performance by Joi Cardwell, a singer.
Open bar.
Tickets, $75 for the reception and fashion show, or $15 for general club admission including the fashion show, from (212) 353-1600.
For Drug Rehabilitation  WEDNESDAY -- A dinner at the New York Hilton will celebrate the 35th anniversary of Samaritan Village, a drug and alcohol treatment center in Briarwood, Queens.
The event begins with cocktails at 6 P.M.
Robert F. Kennedy Jr., the chief lawyer for the Hudson Riverkeeper, an environmental organization, and William Bolster, the president and general manager of WNBC-TV, are to be honored for their contributions.
Tickets, $250, from (718) 206-2000.
Impact on Homelessness  THURSDAY -- A cocktail-buffet and auction will be held at 6:30 P.M. at the law offices of Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell, 450 Lexington Avenue at 45th Street, to benefit Community Impact, an organization that provides emergency food and shelter to homeless and low-income families, tutorial programs for children and care for the elderly in Harlem and Morningside Heights.
The auction features vacation trips, Broadway show tickets and restaurant meals.
Tickets, $35, from (212) 854-2617.
Blues in the Night  THURSDAY -- United Cerebral Palsy of New York City will benefit from an evening of blues music beginning at 7 at the 200 Fifth Club, at Fifth Avenue and 23d Street.
The band Valentine Smith will perform.
There will be a cocktail-buffet and a raffle of vacation trips and other items.
Tickets, $60, from (212) 683-6700, or $75 at the door.
A Dance Party for Children  THURSDAY -- A dance party from 7 to 11 P.M. at Expo, 124 West 43d Street, is to benefit the orthopedic treatment and rehabilitation programs of Alyn Hospital in Jerusalem.
Cash bar.
Tickets, $20, at the door.
Information: (212) 869-8085.
Comedy at the Walter Reade  THURSDAY -- Joy Behar, Judy Gold and other comedians will perform at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center in a benefit for Dorot Inc., an agency that provides shelter, meals and companionship to elderly New Yorkers.
A champagne and dessert reception at 8 P.M. will be followed by the show at 9.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 769-2850.
The Coverall Ball  FRIDAY -- New York Cares, an organization whose volunteers tutor children and offer assistance to people with AIDS, among other programs, is holding its second annual Coverall Ball.
Guests will be asked to put on coveralls and help paint a mural in the cafeteria at Washington Irving High School, 40 Irving Place at East 16th Street.
The event, from 8 P.M. until midnight, will include dancing.
Beer, wine and sandwiches will be served.
Tickets, $30, from (212) 228-5000.
Salsa Dance  FRIDAY -- A seventh annual spring salsa dance will benefit Promesa, an organization in the Bronx that renovates housing for low- and middle-income families and provides drug treatment and other social services.
The group Conjunto Classico will sing and other musicians will perform at the dance, which begins at 8 P.M. at Club Broadway, 2551 Broadway at 96th Street.
Raffle prizes will include vacation trips to Puerto Rico.
Open bar.
Tickets, $25, from (718) 991-5516, extension 313.
Diffa Preview  FRIDAY -- A preview of an exhibition and sale of art, furniture, fashions and musical collectibles from the 1960's will benefit Diffa, the Design Industries Foundation Fighting AIDS.
The event, from 6 P.M. until midnight, will be held at the 69th Regiment Armory, 26th Street at Lexington Avenue.
The singer Richie Havens is among those scheduled to perform.
Tickets, $25, from (212) 255-9877.
To Support Performance Art  SATURDAY -- An April Fool's evening of performances and a champagne party begins at 6:30 at the Knitting Factory, 74 Leonard Street.
Proceeds will benefit Franklin Furnace, a TriBeCa gallery and performance-art space.
Karen Finley and other performance artists are scheduled to appear at 8.
Bush Tetras, a punk rock band, and the Brooklyn Funk Essentials will play at 11.
Tickets, $75, or $50 for the 8 P.M. party and performances alone, from (212) 219-3006.
Honor for Tony Randall  SATURDAY -- The actor Tony Randall will be honored at a dinner-dance at the Marriott Marquis for Gift of Life Inc., which pays for the surgery and hospitalization of children with heart ailments from around the world.
Gift of Life is a project of the Rotary Clubs of Kings, Queens and Nassau counties.
The evening begins with cocktails at 7.
Tickets, $150, from (718) 281-0582 Mostly Sullivan  NEXT SUNDAY -- The annual fund-raiser for the New York Gilbert &amp; Sullivan Players will be held at Symphony Space, 2527 Broadway at 95th Street, at 3 P.M.
The music hall skit "Cox and Box," created by Arthur Sullivan and F. C. Burnand, will be performed, followed by selections from Gilbert and Sullivan operettas.
Tickets, $20, from (212) 864-5400.
A Casino Evening  NEXT SUNDAY -- The Business and Professional Women of Hadassah will hold its seventh annual casino night.
The event, which is to begin at 7 at the Crowne Plaza Hotel, is to raise money for the Mother and Child Center of the Hadassah Hospital in Jerusalem and other projects.
On the program are blackjack, roulette and other games of chance, dancing and a raffle of vacation trips, restaurant meals and other items.
Cash bar.
Tickets, $85, from (212) 765-7050, or at the door.
Manhattan Miracles  NEXT SUNDAY -- The New York premiere of the one-man show "The Only Thing Worse You Could Have Told Me," by Dan Butler, will benefit Miracle House, a Manhattan residence that houses visiting families of New Yorkers with AIDS or H.I.V.
The evening will begin with drinks at 5:45 at the Grove Street Cafe, 53 Grove Street at Bleecker Street, followed by the performance at 7 at the Actors' Playhouse, 100 Seventh Avenue South at Barrow Street.
There will be a late supper at the Grange Hall, 50 Commerce Street at Barrow.
Tickets, $125, or $75 for the performance alone, from (212) 799-0563, extension 229.
Beauty, Ball Gowns and Babies  APRIL 3 -- The 20th-anniversary Cosmetic and Fragrance Industry Beauty Ball at the Waldorf-Astoria is to benefit the prenatal care programs of the Greater New York March of Dimes.
Daniel J. Brestle, the president of Clinique Laboratories Inc., is to be honored.
The black-tie evening will begin with a cocktail reception at 7, followed by dinner.
Tickets, $700, from (212) 353-8353.


Young America Sailing Smoothly in Wake of 2 Disasters
While the women's America's Cup team has drawn most of the attention here lately for adding a man to its crew, a camp at the other end of town has stayed quietly but methodically on track.
PACT 95's yacht, Young America, could become the first sailboat to clinch its berth in the Citizen Cup defenders' finals.
One more victory in the semifinals would assure that place, which could be attained with a victory over Stars &amp; Stripes on Sunday.
Young America defeated Mighty Mary by 47 seconds today.
It was a race the Pact 95 team began dominating within 10 minutes of crossing the start line.


All About The Irish, Mensa, Peddlers, Alarms; The Peddlers on Avenue C: 'A Filthy Embarrassment'
To the Editor:
As the owner of a small video rental store on Avenue C near Ninth Street, I take strong exception to your March 12 article "Crackdown on Ave. C Peddlers," which reports on police efforts to clear the avenue of unlicensed peddlers.


Sharyn A. Unger, Glenn Schwinger
Sharyn Andrea Unger, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Unger of North Hills, L.I., was married last evening to Glenn Bradford Schwinger, a son of Melvin Schwinger of Westbury, L.I., and the late Thelma Schwinger.
Rabbi Charles Klein performed the ceremony at the Hudson Theater in New York.
Mrs.
Schwinger, 28, is an art teacher at Manhattan East Junior High School.
She graduated from New York University.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Tenzer Greenblatt.
Her mother owns New York Reporting Service, a court-reporting company.
The bride is a granddaughter of Judge Jacob Mishler of the United States District Court in Manhattan.


'Look What You Look Like!'
Take your shirt off and get in front of the mirror.
Have a good look.
C'mon.
Don't be a baby.
No washboard abs, huh?
But were there ever?
All right.
So maybe the Soloflex guy and you look like you're different species.
But perhaps he doesn't have three kids and a lawn that grows clover as if it were a cash crop.
Look, it's obvious.
If you don't work out at a gym regularly, you're not going to be approached for the cover of Joe Weider's Muscle and Fitness magazine.
However, that's not the point of this examination.
What's important is, Are you standing the way your mother told you to?
Shoulders back, chest out, hips square, spine straight, butt in, feet flat, head high and weight balanced?
Okay. Now we've got a problem.


A Landscape Artist Who Left His Mark
THE BRONX?
Riverdale?
The subject of the current show in the Glyndor Gallery at Wave Hill here is Samuel Parsons Jr. (1844-1923), a third-generation horticulturalist-turned-landscape architect who served New York City's Department of Parks for 30 years.
It seems appropriate to begin this review by taking a cue from the show's curator, Charles Birnbaum, coordinator of the National Park Service's Historic Landscape Initiative and himself a landscape architect.
In his preface to "The Art of Landscape Architecture" by Parsons, which is to be reissued shortly, Mr.
Birnbaum introduces the designer's father, Samuel Baum Parsons, as a nurseryman for whom horticulture was an art on a par with painting and sculpture.
The elder Mr.
Parsons was the first to import Japanese maples into the country; he was also the first to propagate rhododendrons, which may explain his son's evident fondness for the shrub.


Nothing but Net for Women, Nothing for Men


Fine Arts: Eight Tracks
With their flea-market cachet and cockroachlike durability, hissing eight-track tapes are making a comeback in punkish circles.


The Die Has Been Cast: It's Virginia-Arkansas
Scribbled on the Virginia chalkboard late Friday night was the phrase, "And then there were 8." Teams, not players.
Virginia may have injuries to declare, but it can also look forward to a Midwest Regional final.
The Cavaliers proved Friday that there is not necessarily power in numbers -- on the court or in the stands -- and the question now is if they are ready for overtime.


Handy Man


King, at the Helm Again, Plans Smooth Road to Title
Mike Tyson's first fight in his comeback attempt will be in late June or early July, against a ranked fighter but probably not a blockbuster name, Don King's boxing director, Al Braverman, said yesterday.
"You don't know how much rust he's accumulated," explained Braverman, a longtime figure in boxing who is also King's matchmaker.
"You don't go for a desperate shot to make a lot of money after being away for three years."


The Company. A Fable, Tailored.
AS INTRIGUING AS YOU MAY FIND THE COMPANY, don't get any bright ideas.
There is no personnel department to sound out for a job.
There is no point in calling anyone you know at this paper about putting in a good word for you.
And don't even think of calling The Company's new president and trying to sweet-talk him into choosing you as his perfect right-hand man.
The Company is not accepting proposals, business plans for restructuring or development prospectuses for new products.
It doesn't hear you knocking, and you can only come in in your dreams, baby.
In your dreams.
That's because The Company doesn't exist.
Sometimes a little fantasy can shed new light on a whole field of reality.
And what this edition of Men's Fashions of the Times hopes to do with this conceit is expose that, regardless of season, what American men care about most of all, whether they admit it or not, whether they like it or not, is minding their own business.


Westminster Cathedral Is 100
A festival of music, lectures and exhibitions celebrating the 100th anniversary of the founding of Westminster Cathedral will take place in London through November.
Among the highlights is a series of Lenten Meditations by European cardinals, and a "Festival of Flowers" from May 17 to 20, with the theme "Cathedrals of the World." Two million fresh flowers will be displayed along with a circular floral carpet 18 feet in diameter, 10 two-tier chandeliers made of flowers, 42 trees and 10 floral archways.


God, Gospel and the Camcorder
IT is 11 A.M. on Sunday and the Memorial Baptist Church in Harlem is rocking.
On the pulpit, Marvin Hadley bangs out the notes of gospel music on the keyboard.
Below, drums thunder at the hands of Robert Livingston Jr.
In their Sunday silks, hats and suits, worshipers trickle in.
Also arriving are 200 casually dressed European, Canadian and Asian tourists armed with camcorders, tape recorders and cameras.
Soon, the church is filled.
Latecomers jam onto the steps.


Gertrude Stein, Dedicated Republican
To the Editor:
Thank you for Miranda Seymour's review of Renate Stendhal's "Gertrude Stein: In Words and Pictures" and Linda Simon's "Gertrude Stein Remembered" (Jan. 29).
As a G.I. who was stationed in Paris after World War II and as someone who knew both Gertrude Stein and Alice B. Toklas, I can only say that Ms.
Seymour has brought back that happy period when I was in their company.


Oven Does the Trick for Impromptu Dining
OFTEN on weekends I find myself putting together an impromptu lunch or dinner for which the food is bought at the last minute.
As a result, I have to keep it simple.
One solution is to cook as much as possible in the oven.
The other day I came across an interesting recipe by the celebrated French chef Joel Robuchon: just the sort of thing I had in mind -- a pork loin roasted with fresh sage leaves over several different kinds of vegetables.
It sounded delicious, but the recipe had an enormous amount of fat in it.


Former Boxing Champion Set Free


How Not to Blow the Oscar Speech
WINNING AN OSCAR causes people to do strange things in public.
It inspires honorees to perform one-armed push-ups, to kiss statuettes while giving indiscriminate thanks and to lose not only their shoes but their heads on the way to the podium.
Few have truly mastered the art of the acceptance speech, hitting just the right balance of grace, wit, gratitude and brevity.
Should one tell a joke, make a political statement, offer a verbal love letter?
Is it best to hold back and say almost nothing?
Whom do you thank?
And how?


The Good Fight
To the Sports Editor:  Joe Lapointe's column on fighting in hockey ("Hand Over Fist, Fighting Surges in the N.H.L.," The Times, March 12) made some good points but erred by omission.
Lapointe used statistics to show that fighting increased last season and continues to increase this season.
While the average fights per game were up last season, the increase only reached the level from two seasons earlier, and the normal pattern of fighting prevailed, with a high rate in the early season that then tailed off.
That suggests the decrease in the 1992-93 season was an aberration.
Any statistics this season must be viewed as distinct, due to the shortened schedule and intraconference scheduling that increases the importance of each game and intensified rivalries.


New-Look Lobbying
Grass-roots lobbying has always swayed Congress, so now special interests are trying to mimic the popular movements.
Page 20.


In Recital, Harpsichord or Trio
A HANDFUL-PLUS of offerings at 3 and 4 P.M. today start off another busy concert week.
Two of the 3 o'clock recitals, in New Haven, are free: Mark Bromberg, the director of music at United Church on the Green plays Bach, Buxtehude and Couperin on pedal harpsichord in the historic church; the Ensemble Festivo (clarinet, oboe and bassoon) offers a Purcell sonata and William Byrd's "Fantasy Trios" at the Yale Center for British Art, before spinning off into works by Beethoven and Gershwin.


Jessica Pressler, Daniel Greenstone
Jessica Anne Pressler, the daughter of Judge Sylvia B. Pressler and David A. Pressler of Englewood, N.J., is to be married today to Daniel Alan Greenstone, a son of Myra and Jay Greenstone of Fort Lee, N.J.
Rabbi David Feldman is to officiate at the Teaneck (N.J.) Jewish Center.
The bride, 30, is a psychotherapist with Jewish Family Services in Hackensack, N.J., and has a private practice in Sparta, N.J.
She graduated from Drew University and received a master's degree in social work from Columbia University.
Her father is a lawyer in Hackensack.
Her mother is a presiding judge of the Appellate Division of the Superior Court of New Jersey, in Hackensack.
The bride's first marriage ended in divorce.


A Union Outbids Private Competitors
In what Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani called a landmark agreement, one of New York City's labor unions has for the first time outbid private companies to provide a municipal service.
The Mayor said the arrangement would save the city $1 million a year and would serve as a model to wrest greater productivity from the unions in the years ahead.
Article, page 40.


Mother's Role
To the Sports Editor:
Just one problem with your very touching story of Coach Michele Sharp's raising the son of a basketball player and drug addict, Debbie Lytle ("Far Above and Beyond the Call of Coaching," The Times, March 19).
Responsibility, or the lack of it, is what plagues our nation, in particular our young people, today.
Lytle has a child and an addiction.
Maybe, if forced to, she would make the responsible decision.
Then again, maybe not.
The decent thing for Debbie Lytle to do now is to legally turn that child over to the woman who has raised him.
Being a mother means more than giving birth.
It means "being there."  JACK EISNER  Princeton, N.J.


Straight Out of Australia, to L.A.
Russell Crowe is wearIng dark glasses, a day's growth of beard, jeans, a work shirt and black biker boots.
This is not surprising for an Australian-bred actor who has been described as having the animal magnetism of the young Marlon Brando.
What is surprising are his fingernails.
They are pristine, manicured, covered in clear nail polish -- and just right for a new role (opposite Denzel Washington) as a computer-generated outlaw in "Virtuosity," which is currently in production.
"When you're cyber-realized," Mr.
Crowe says reasonably, "you have perfect fingernails."


UNCLE BOB
I was struck by Liddy Dole's anecdote of the party Senator Dole threw for their whole apartment building -- but nobody thought to invite the building employees.


Advantage Seles
To the Sports Editor:
Of course Monica Seles deserves sympathy ("Seles's Lost Two Years: A Father's Lament," The Times, March 19), but she is luckier than most victims of violence.
She has recovered physically and she is wealthy enough to choose not to return to work.


A Venue for Tapas, the Popular Spanish Bar Food
TAPAS, the inexpensive appetizers served as bar food throughout Spain, have never quite taken root on Long Island.
At one time Barney's in Locust Valley served them along with its regular menu, and Carol's in Southampton also had a brief fling with them.
But judging from the crowds at Helena's, a stylish new Spanish storefront, at 21 Main Street in Sag Harbor (725-0101), that is changing.
Diners have waited up to an hour and a half on Friday and Saturday nights, and the place was full of year-round residents on a recent rainy Sunday night.
When the summer people arrive on the East End, Helena's will no doubt be an even hotter spot.
And all this popularity is deserved.


In Glen Cove, Suozzi NeverDefeated DeRiggi
"Glen Cove Tries to Stop Contractor From Reopening City Incinerator"  [ March 12 ]  contained several inaccuracies.
Among them was the statement, "The meeting  [ in December 1993 ]  was one month after Mr. Suozzi had defeated Donald P. DeRiggi in his quest for re-election." Mr.
Suozzi's opponent in 1993 was City Councilman John Maccarone, and Mr.
Suozzi was elected.
The latter's campaign for the mayoralty in 1991 was unsuccessful, and Donald DeRiggi was resoundingly re-elected as Mayor and Supervisor of the City of Glen Cover.
Mr.
Suozzi never defeated Donald DeRiggi.
MAGGIE and ED POLK Glen Cove


Phils Sneak Into Park
Like children sneaking into a private swimming pool, three striking Philadelphia Phillies found their way into the forbidden grounds of Jack Russell Stadium in Clearwater, Fla., on Thursday.
A little after 4 P.M., infielder DAVE HOLLINS joined pitchers CURT SCHILLING and TOMMY GREENE in what they thought would be a secret workout at a stadium that's supposed to be forbidden to the union players.
The Phillies' replacements had the day off.


Bad Boss? Let Us Know!
Have you had a bad boss?
Send your story -- no longer than 500 words, please -- to On the Job, Money and Business, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York 10036.
Or by E-mail to onthejob@nytimes.com.
Names will be withheld upon request.
All submissions become the property of The Times.
They may be edited, and may be republished in any medium.


Judge Tells Health Department to Stop Experiments on Patients
A state judge has ordered the New York State Health Department to halt hundreds of experiments on children and on mentally ill patients who are not competent to give their consent, until the department writes new rules for such experiments.
The new order, which will not take effect until an appeal is heard in the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court, could affect 400 psychiatric experiments, about $52 million worth of research, overseen by the Office of Mental Health.
It may also prohibit or modify many other experiments under the larger State Department of Health.


Irene M. Herold, Edward Spruck 3d
Irene Marie Herold, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest J. Herold of Fayetteville, N.C., was married yesterday to Edward Peter Spruck 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Spruck Jr. of Oxford, Conn.
Msgr.
William Delaney officiated at St.
John the Evangelist Church in Stamford, Conn.


TURNAROUND


March 19-25: Safe Haven?; A Big Push by Turkey Into Northern Iraq
Turkey sent 35,000 troops into northern Iraq last week in its war against Kurdish rebels.
The venture is not looking like a short-term affair.
Its allies want a swift withdrawal, but Turkey says the forces will stay put until there are guarantees that rebels will not set up new camps when the troops leave.
This could mean the creation of a buffer zone in northern Iraq, which the United States says would be unacceptable.
Such a zone would overlap the safe haven set up by the allies to protect Iraqi Kurds from President Saddam Hussein's forces after the Persian Gulf war.


Mayor's Silence on Dole Rankles G.O.P. Leaders
Five months after Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani endured the wrath and ostracism of his Republican colleagues for his crossover endorsement of Mario M. Cuomo, there are signs that the Mayor has reopened those wounds by failing to endorse the Presidential candidacy of Senator Bob Dole.
With the notable exception of Mr.
Giuliani, top Republicans from across the state have shown unusual solidarity in supporting Mr.
Dole.
So far, the Kansas Senator has picked up endorsements from Gov.
George E. Pataki, all 14 New York Republicans in the House of Representatives, and the 7 Republican members of the City Council.


Offbeat L.I. Playwright Returns With a Collage
CAN you get the dress on sooner?" the director, a man of overtopping proportions, asked the performer. "And put it on frontways like you're looking in the mirror.
I might put a few more flowers on it.
You should be under a red light.
It'll make you look good."
"I think of 'Coco' with Katharine Hepburn," the director said to no one in particular.
"That finale with all the red dresses. I love it. That's what I want to put into this scene."


Hold the Phone
To the Editor:  In her article "Tommy Lee Jones Makes a Movie, and It's All Him"  [ March 5 ] , Betsy Sharkey describes Mr.
Jones's television movie "The Good Old Boys" as set in Texas around 1906.
In speaking of the changes then transforming the West, Ms.
Sharkey mentions "people embracing telephones that will help make the Pony Express obsolete."


Corrections
A brief article last Sunday about Gold's Gym, which has delayed its opening in the former Yorkville Total Fitness Center, referred incorrectly to the swimming pool.
It is being completely refurbished; it is not new.


Nancy E. Gavlick, Peter J. Cannon
Nancy Elaine Gavlick, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard E. Gavlick of Stratford, Conn., is to be married today to Peter James Cannon, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul J. Cannon of Ridgewood, N.J.
The Rev.
Edward Scull is to officiate at St.
Pius X Roman Catholic Church in Fairfield, Conn.
The bride is an associate director at Yankelovich Partners, a market-research and consulting firm in Norwalk, Conn.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
Her father owns Gavlick Machinery, a trading company in Bristol, Conn.


Journal; 'Succeed' Succeeds Again
Right up until its opening Thursday night, people weren't exactly panting for a Broadway revival of "How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying."
"Nightmare sexual politics" was the way The Village Voice, that reliable arbiter of correct thinking, summed up this Kennedy-era musical comedy in a preview piece, warning that the show could be "enough to make you puke."


Teen-Agers in the Orphanage Storm Have Lost Families but Found Voices
When House Speaker Newt Gingrich held up orphanages as the best place to put the destitute children of families denied welfare, journalists all over the country scurried to talk to people who remembered growing up in them decades ago.
But here in New York City, a small group of teen-age journalists living in the modern equivalent -- group homes for foster children -- have been having their own say.


Oven Does the Trick for Impromptu Dining
OFTEN on weekends I find myself putting together an impromptu lunch or dinner for which the food is bought at the last minute.
As a result, I have to keep it simple.
One solution is to cook as much as possible in the oven.
The other day I came across an interesting recipe by the celebrated French chef Joel Robuchon: just the sort of thing I had in mind -- a pork loin roasted with fresh sage leaves over several different kinds of vegetables.
It sounded delicious, but the recipe had an enormous amount of fat in it.


Purchase Dancers Try Out In Uncertainty
UNCERTAINTY over the future of the State University lent a sober tone recently to a day of auditions held for admission into the Purchase College division of dance here.
Drawn by what is acknowledged to be one of the top three or four dance conservatories in the country, high school students from as far away as Oregon brought their well-practiced techniques and artistic passion to be measured against a group of their peers.
Even the out-of-state parents knew of the college's troubles, asking worried questions about possible increases in tuition and the likelihood that the prestigious division would survive Gov.
George E. Pataki's proposed budget cut of $290 million to the university statewide.


Corrections
A report last Sunday in the A La Carte column of the New Jersey Weekly about dinners to benefit the Share Our Strength anti-hunger campaign, misstated the telephone numbers for reservations.
For the April 24 Taste of the Nation dinner at the Madison Hotel and the April 27 dinner at the Sheraton Meadowlands, the number is (800) 955-8278; for the May 1 dinner at the Forsgate Country Club in Jamesburg, (609) 924-3663.


March 19-25; Going Bug-Eyes
Is it not enough that ordinary flies have two bulging, blood-red compound eyes, each made of 800 little eyes that allow their owners to see a hand coming at them from behind or above or the side?
Did scientists really have to outfit a group of laboratory fruit flies with extra eyes that sprout like mushrooms on the wings, the legs, the antennae, the thorax -- as many as a dozen superfluous eyes on a single fly?
Truly this is a fly-by-sight operation, though whether the redundant eyes can actually see anything remains, well, under investigation.
What the startling experiments do suggest, however, is that scientists may have discovered the long-sought "master control gene" for eye development.
Dr.
Walter J. Gehring and his colleagues at the University of Basel in Switzerland report in the current issue of the journal Science their success in using a gene called eyeless to create near-perfect eyes wherever they insert the gene in the tissue of an embryonic fly.
"This is Frankensteinian science at its best," a fellow geneticist declared.
Dr.
Gehring estimates that at least 2,500 other genes answer to the command of the eyeless gene in the construction of a fly eye.


Traveling Light
To the Editor: For years my family has emulated Robert Eisner in "Traveling Light: Carry It On, Leave It There" (Feb. 19).
This has been easy, we simply wear and pack our soon-to-be discarded clothing, both under- and outerwear, worn or outdated.
Items that would otherwise be donated to local charities for resale, recycling or whatever are taken on the trip.
When these clothes become soiled, we simply fold them neatly and place them next to the wastebasket, where the local cleaning person will find them and decide on their disposal.
Occasionally a hotel management requires a written release of personal items from the donor, so a little note to this effect can be left with discards to make things easier.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
PRISONERS OF THE JAPANESE POWs of World War II in the Pacific.
By Gavan Daws.
Morrow, $25.


A Cellist Continually in Search of an Author
MORE THAN 100 OF THE most important works in the cello repertory carry a second name on their title pages, alongside those of their various composers: Mstislav Rostropovich.
Mr.
Rostropovich, who turns 68 tomorrow, played the premieres of these works and, in many cases, personally commissioned them.
His younger colleague Yo-Yo Ma estimates that of the works making up the core of the cello repertory, Mr.
Rostropovich ushered perhaps a third of them into existence.


We Can Work It Out
RENEWED combat in the Balkans last week suggests that nationalists there are determined to continue fighting to reclaim territory they believe is theirs.
But although there is apparently more tragedy in store for Bosnians, Croats and Serbs, their bloody conflicts have had at least one sobering effect.
Watching that carnage (as well as the bloody Russia-Chechnya and Armenia-Azerbaijan conflicts), leaders of some European nations whose populations are also a mix of potentially hostile ethnic groups are stepping back from the brink.
The chauvinistic nationalism that some were preaching a few years ago has softened as people realize that inciting old hatreds is a recipe for disaster.
This realization has been encouraged by the policies of the European Union, which virtually every country on the continent is anxious to join.


The Meeting
You feel all eyes are on you. And you're right.


Another Day Older and Running Out of Time
AMERICANS are scared.
They are looking toward retirement not with the optimism of their parents, but with fear.
Three out of four working Americans expect people their age to face a financial crisis when they retire, according to a New York Times/CBS poll.
Over half say they have not begun to save for retirement.
And many see themselves reaching old age without the company-paid pensions and Social Security that allowed their parents to live so comfortably.


Traveling Light
To the Editor: Mr.
Eisner is on the right track when he suggests that airports install castoff-clothing bins next to the coinboxes.
Like Mr.
Eisner, I also jettison old clothing when I travel.
I'll always remember checkout day in Mexico City, when an incredulous chambermaid couldn't believe her good luck at finding my worn-out shoes, loose socks and torn T-shirts.
"Senor, no quiere estos?"


DIARY
ENTERTAINMENT Investing in a Dream Team  For a decade or so, Paul Allen has followed his bliss about as far as money could take him.
That's pretty far, for Mr.
Allen was a Microsoft co-founder -- he went to high school with Bill Gates -- and left as a billionaire in 1983.
Since then, he has indulged all manner of passions -- from buying a basketball team to financing a Jimi Hendrix museum in Seattle.
Now he's made his biggest investment yet, putting $500 million -- even for him, a hefty bet -- into that ultimate entertainment dream team, Dreamworks SKG (Spielberg, Katzenberg and Geffen, that is).
That sum gives him an 18.3 percent stake, with the three founders retaining two-thirds.
Mr.
Gates later got in on the act, too (does he have a finger in everything?), with Microsoft forming a multimedia joint venture with Dreamworks.


The Struggle to Protect Indian Graves
In early 1994, an amateur collector of Indian artifacts here offered a customer a cache consisting of beads, belts, buffalo teeth and a bone labeled "Cheyenne grave rib." The bone turned out to be a leg, not a rib, and the customer turned out to be an undercover agent with the Bureau of Land Management.
The collector, Richard P. Maniscalco, 49, of Rappahannock Academy, Va., a videotape supervisor for the United States Information Agency, became the first person charged under a law passed in 1990 prohibiting the transporting, buying or selling of Indian remains.
He pleaded guilty in December to two misdemeanors: selling archeological resources and violating the 1990 law by trafficking in Native American remains.


Movie Master
ANTONIONI The Poet of Images.
By William Arrowsmith.
Edited by Ted Perry. 195 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press. $25.


Memories of Thanksgiving Begging
To the Editor:
When I was growing up in Weehawken, N.J., in the 40's, the "Anything for Thanksgiving?" greeting was very much an established custom.
My husband, who grew up on 148th Street in Manhattan in the 30's, remembers it from his neighborhood also.
I was never aware of any particular ethnic background in Weehawken, but my husband's neighborhood was primarily Italian, Irish and Jewish.
BARBARA L. KLETT  Manhattan


A Guatemalan Colonel And a C.I.A. Connection
Fair-skinned and hard as nails, Col.
Julio Roberto Alpirez is "a soldier above all," in the words of Gen.
Hector Gramajo, a former Guatemalan Defense Minister.
For at least five years, Colonel Alpirez was also a well-paid secret operative for the Central Intelligence Agency and a murderer, a United States Congressman says.


Bach at Baroque Festival
THE Hoff-Barthelson Music School's 30th yearly Baroque Festival is under way in Scarsdale.
This evening at 7 in Hitchcock Presbyterian Church, the school's Wind Ensemble, Suzuki Strings and Symphonette will appear under their respective directors, Joseph Piscitelli, Barbara Berg and Robert Schwartz.
Also on the program, Mark Mandarano will conduct the Festival Orchestra and Chorus in the Bach Magnificat, with Amy Ogden, Sally Williams, Salvatore Roselli and Russell Ashley as vocal soloists.


Caryn B. Parness and Keith E. Evans
Caryn Blaine Parness, a daughter of Arlyne and Mel Parness of Chestnut Ridge, N.Y., is to be married today to Keith Eric Evans, a son of Yvonne and Tom Evans of Whitman, Mass.
Rabbi Reuben Katz is to officiate at the New York Hilton.
The bride and the bridegroom graduated from Emerson College.


A Guru's Journey -- A special report.; The Seer Among the Blind: Japanese Sect Leader's Rise
As a boy attending a school for the blind, Shoko Asahara was weak-sighted but had better vision than his classmates.
So he emerged as a king of the school, the one who would lead his buddies off campus when they wanted a restaurant meal.
In exchange, they would pay for the meal.


All About The Irish, Mensa, Peddlers, Alarms; If Mensas Are So Smart, Why the Molasses Fixation?
To the Editor:
Having read Barbara Stewart's amusing March 12 article "Mensa and the Mating Game," I could not help paraphrasing Dorothy Parker, to wit:


Jane K. Rabbiner, Marc P. Gershman
Jane Karen Rabbiner, a daughter of Susan H. Rabbiner and Paul C. Rabbiner of East Meadow, L.I., and Marc Peter Gershman, a son of Deborah I. Gershman of Bayside, Queens, and the late Malcolm J. Gershman, were married last evening at Temple Beth Sholom in Roslyn Heights, L.I.
Rabbi Arthur Schwartz performed the ceremony.


Topics of The Times; A Clearer Path for Highways
Highway "demonstration projects" were once real tests to see whether new engineering techniques would actually work.
Today they are 99 percent pork, testing only whether members of Congress can get extra dollars for their districts.
Regular roadwork may also be pork, but at least it is screened by highway planners.
Demonstration projects fly on the strength of their sponsors.
Enthusiasm for the breed is clear: In 1982, Congress authorized just 10 projects, at a cost of $362 million.
Last year it authorized 283 projects, costing $1.4 billion.
Representative Frank Wolf, an eighth-term Republican from Virginia, has vowed to stop the practice this year -- if he can.
His chairmanship of the Transportation Appropriations subcommittee gives him leverage at the point where money is appropriated, and he aims to vote zero funds for these projects.


Still Out in the Cold
OUR GAME By John le Carre. 302 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $24.


Moves to Bar Strikebreakers May Be Unenforceable
Legislators in several states and cities have expended considerable legislative energy in the past couple of months trying to block strikebreaking baseball, the new sport club owners will introduce a week from tonight.
The results of the legislators' efforts are not impressive, and in the two sites where they have been successful, the results are meaningless.
Furthermore, if any of the other legislative efforts become successful and meaningful, they may be rendered unenforceable.


March 19-25; Crazy Horse's Granite Stare


Chain Gangs to Return To Roads of Alabama
The image belongs more in the past than in the present: convicts, shackled together by leg irons, laboring by the roadside.
Like Confederate widows, Yellow Dog Democrats and faded signs that say "See Ruby Falls," the chain gang's era in Southern history seemed long gone.
But soon, along the highways of northern Alabama, the chain gang will shuffle back into view.
Despite protests that leg irons represent a part of the American penal system best forgotten, the state prison commissioner is going ahead with plans to put 400 inmates in irons and set them to work on Alabama's roadsides.


Plans Drawn To Help Fight Poison Attack
Over the last year New York City has stepped up efforts to counter chemical and biological terrorism attacks of the sort that occurred in Tokyo last week, Dr.
Margaret A. Hamburg, the city Health Commissioner, says.
Among the efforts was a daylong drill after a simulated attack involving a bacterium, anthrax.


Corrections
A brief note last Sunday inviting the reader to submit an article describing a personal experience involving finances or to express a point of view about a business or financial topic misstated the E-mail addresses.
They are:


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


U.N. Proposal Would Let Iraq Sell Oil to Buy Relief Goods
A group of countries opposed to the lifting of any sanctions on Iraq has drafted a Security Council resolution that would allow the sale of some Iraqi oil to raise money for relief goods, diplomats said this week.
The new resolution -- written by Argentina, Britain and the United States -- is intended to reduce pressures for the broader lifting of sanctions while testing whether President Saddam Hussein is genuinely interested in alleviating the hardships caused by shortages.


Countering Price Hikes With Efficiency
HOW to succeed in business by really trying.
That is the story of the Strauss Paper Company here.
When the family-owned concern, a large distributor of paper products, was recently hit with the sharpest increase in paper-product prices in 50 years, instead of throwing in a proverbial -- if paper -- towel, the company embarked on a work-smarter campaign to solidify its position in the marketplace.
"The paper industry has always been cyclical, but even industry veterans say they have never seen anything like the cost of paper today," said Stewart J. Strauss, the 41-year-old president of Strauss Paper.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: March 26, 1995
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
9
TOM CLANCY'S OP-CENTER, created by Tom Clancy and Steve Pieczenik. (Berkley, $6.99.) The operations of a secret Government agency.
2
4
INCA GOLD, by Clive Cussler. (Pocket, $6.99.) Dirk Pitt contends with a ring of thieves for possession of ancient artifacts in the Andes.
3
6
ACCIDENT, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) A car collision involving four teen-agers tragically alters the lives of five families.
4
9
THE DAY AFTER TOMORROW, by Allan Folsom. (Warner Vision, $6.99.) A doctor stumbles into a tangle of conspiracies.
5
2
MISTRESS, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $5.99.) A former schoolteacher's efforts to unmask her aunt's blackmailer in London.
6
4
NIGHT PREY, by John Sandford. (Berkley, $6.99.) Lucas Davenport investigates a case involving a body found in a wildlife preserve.
7
5
THE CAT WHO CAME TO BREAKFAST, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Jove, $5.99.) Jim Qwilleran and his cats investigate catastrophes.
8
41
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
9*
4
THE ROBBER BRIDE, by Margaret Atwood. (Bantam, $6.50.) A woman who long manipulated three friends suddenly reappears.
10
1
DECIDER, by Dick Francis. (Jove, $5.99.) An architect gets caught between the warring factions of a clan that owns a racecourse.
11
5
HEARTSTONE, by Phillip Margolin. (Bantam, $6.50.) A New Hampshire detective and district attorney probe a seven-year-old murder.
12*
22
CONGO, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An American team seeks to discover why a group of archeologists died among ruins.
13
3
LORD OF FALCON RIDGE, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $6.50.) Romance and adventure among vikings living in 10th-century Britain.
14
9
ICEBOUND, by Dean Koontz. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The world's future is threatened by a tidal wave, storms and a psychopathic killer.
15
8
FAMILY BLESSINGS, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove, $6.50.) A widow's affection for the close friend of her late son creates familial tension.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
27
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
63
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Everyday spirituality.
3
4
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Pocket, $5.99.) An analysis of canine behavior.
4
3
SAVED BY THE LIGHT, by Dannion Brinkley with Paul Perry. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) An account of two near-death experiences.
5
9
HOW WE DIE, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Vintage, $13.) A surgeon reflects on "life's final chapter."
6
26
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) The reminiscences of two black sisters.
7
15
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Love and relationships.
8
14
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $5.99.) Observations by the star of "Seinfeld."
9*
22
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $5.50.) Essays on life and death, good and evil.
10*
108
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
11*
594
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott
Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
12*
5
MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Vintage, $12.) The life of a young black man in America.
13
30
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.
14
2
HUSBAND, LOVER, SPY, by Janice Pennington with Carlos de Abreu. (St. Martin's, $5.99.) A television celebrity's 17-year search for her husband, a mountain climber who disappeared.
15
11
CONTRACT WITH AMERICA, by Newt Gingrich, Dick Armey, et al. (Times Books/Random House, $10.) The Republican program.
16*
36
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) Innovation in business.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
26
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) Stories meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."
2
204
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
3
6
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY: An Experiential Guide, by James Redfield and Carol Adrienne. (Warner, $8.99.) Ways to apply the inspirational message of the novel "The Celestine Prophecy."
4
7
WHAT TO EXPECT THE TODDLER YEARS, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $15.95.) Counsel.
Rankings reflect sales, for the week ending March 11, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Carole Colliton, and Burke Doar
Carole Anne Colliton, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Colliton of Vernon, Conn., was married yesterday to John Burke Doar, a son of Anne Doar of Brooklyn and John Doar of Manhattan.
The Rev.
Joseph Trainor performed the ceremony at St.
Mary of the Assumption Roman Catholic Church in Brookline, Mass.
Mrs.
Doar, 27, is a registered nurse in cardiac intensive care at Beth Israel Hospital in Boston.
She graduated from Fairfield University.
Her father is a retired anesthesiologist.


Bosnian Serb Crossroad: Win Soon or Seek Peace
For the second time in less than six months, the Muslim-led Bosnian Army has won significant victories against the Bosnian Serbs, pushing them onto the defensive and raising questions about the Serbs' long-term ability to continue the war.
In twin offensives this week in central and northern Bosnia, Government forces have advanced several miles and have captured or surrounded two important Serbian communications towers, United Nations officials said today.
Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader, responded today by appealing for direct peace talks with the Government.


White House In an Appeal To Women
The White House, in an effort to energize female voters, has unfurled a strategy to contrast the fate of women and children under the Republican Congress with that under President Clinton's programs.
Women voted overwhelmingly for Mr.
Clinton in the 1992 Presidential election, and Administration officials view them as a natural constituency for his policies.
And although his approval rating among women slipped last October, to 42 percent from 54 percent in January 1994, it has risen in the last several weeks to 48 percent.


Habitats/West 26th Street; From East River Views to a Large Loft
IF you wonder why they sold their swank nine-room pre-war with two doormen and views of the East River and bought an enormous unattended loft on a bleak manufacturing block in the Flower District, just ask them.
"This is a neighborhood full of serious working immigrants trying to realize the American dream," the wife of the couple replied.
"This is the sewing-machine capital of the world, with people loading and unloading things from trucks. It's full of hustle and bustle; it's fascinating.


MARKET TIMIMG
Monday  The K Mart board is expected to discuss the company's search for a new chief executive.
No candidate has the inside track.
The United States and Japan resume trade talks in Tokyo over automobile parts.
Auto trade is the biggest part of the record U.S. trade deficit with Japan.
The last day that Japanese companies can book profits for the current fiscal year.
Profit-taking is expected to push Japanese stocks lower.
Existing home sales for February to be released.
Forecast: down 1.1 percent.
Tuesday  The Federal Reserve's Open Market Committee meets.
Analysts said the slowing economy should keep the Fed from raising rates.
Eastman Kodak is expected to discuss at a news conference in San Francisco its foray into digital-imaging.
Cameras, scanners, printers and strategic alliances should be on the agenda.
The Board of Supervisors of Orange County to vote on a proposal to put a half-cent sales tax increase on the ballot.
Wednesday  President Clinton will preside over the Southern Regional Economic Conference in Atlanta that the White House said could result in some fine-tuning of Administration economic strategies.
New home sales for February are due out.
Forecast: down 4.7 percent.
Thursday  The Bundesbank is meeting to decide whether to reduce German interest rates.
Many analysts expect a rate cut.
Friday  Final revision in gross domestic product for the fourth quarter is scheduled for release.
Forecast: unchanged.
Also, factory orders for February.
Forecast: up 0.4 percent.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3
The Memorial Baptist Church in Harlem becomes a gospel stop on the tourist map to the tune of $50,000 a year.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4
Where high-end gets affordable in the pet-care market: the DogWash.


Repressed Memory and Rules of Evidence
To the Editor:
Steven Rose's review of "The Myth of Repressed Memory: False Memories and Allegations of Sexual Abuse," by Elizabeth Loftus and Katherine Ketch am, and "Making Monsters: False Memories, Psychotherapy, and Sexual Hysteria," by Richard Ofshe and Ethan Wat ters (Feb. 26), is imprecise in the area of rules of evidence.


Wind and Vestiges of Dry Winter Stir a Mad Whirl of Brush Fires
Hundreds of firefighters battled at least eight serious brush fires in New York City and on Long Island yesterday, as high winds and the remains of a dry winter left the metropolitan area vulnerable to even the slightest sparks.
A minor injury to one firefighter was reported, and several homes in Suffolk County were evacuated when a raging brush fire threatened parts of Brookhaven Town.


When Pols Didn't Worry About the 'Character Issue'
EVEN AS POLITICS HAS COME to be dominated by tales of scandal and misconduct, so two projects (a film about to be released and one in the script stage) about long-dead leaders, Washington and Jefferson, will plunge us into the character issue of the 18th century -- at the risk of importing the intellectual vacuums of the 20th.
"Jefferson in Paris" opens on Friday and focuses on the years from 1784 to 1789, when Thomas Jefferson was America's Minister to France.
But aside from one scene in which Jefferson inspects a copy of the Declaration of Independence chez Lafayette and another that has him signing papers with Dutch bankers -- the International Monetary Fund of the day -- all we see is personal.
Indeed the film's director, James Ivory, and producer, Ismail Merchant, give us Tom's spring break in Paris.


Genuine Psychic Powers
To the Editor:
Something about Helena Blavatsky still gets under the skin of skeptical mod erns.
In the century since her death, book after book has gleefully bludgeoned the reputation of this woman who brought Eastern theosophical concepts to the West and paved the way for the New Thought movement sweeping the country today.


All About The Irish, Mensa, Peddlers, Alarms; The Peddlers on Avenue C: 'A Filthy Embarrassment'
To the Editor:
The police crackdown on Avenue C peddlers is unfortunate.
Many of the sellers appeared to be either homeless or semi-homeless with their humble wares arranged on pieces of cardboard or on old sheets.


Cheryl J. Goren, Richard B. Robins
Dr.
Cheryl Jennifer Goren, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Nathaniel Goren of Oakwood, S.I., is to be married today to Richard Bruce Robins, a son of Henriann Robins of Westfield, N.J., and Dr.
Bernard Robins of Lebanon, N.J.
Rabbi Daniel Liben, a brother-in-law of the bridegroom, is to perform the ceremony at the Fair Lawn (N.J.) Jewish Center.
The bride, 28, will be known as Dr.
Goren Robins.
She works at the New York Veterans Administration Medical Center, where she is the chief resident of the dental service and the senior resident in periodontics.
She graduated summa cum laude from Brandeis University and received her dental degree from New York University.
Her father is a periodontist in Oakwood.
Her mother teaches kindergarten at Harvest Preschool in West Brighton, S.I.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-15  AMERICANS SENTENCED IN IRAQ  Two Americans arrested by Iraq after they reportedly strayed across the Kuwait border have been tried and sentenced to eight years in prison, officials said.  1  JAPANESE LEADER'S RISE  The life of Shoko Asahara shows that it is possible for a religious figure to acquire in a few years the capability to engage in something closer to war than terrorism.  1


World Trade Center Suspect Linked to Plan to Blow Up 2 Planes
A computer disk and documents found in an apartment here in January show that Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, the man accused of engineering the World Trade Center bombing, was only days away from trying to blow up two American jumbo jets near Hong Kong and that he had personally planted a test bomb that exploded aboard a Philippine airliner, American and Philippine officials said today.
The material reveals that Mr.
Yousef, now in custody in New York, was planning for bombs to explode simultaneously aboard two United Airlines 747 jets -- one arriving from Los Angeles, one from Singapore -- as they approached Hong Kong's international airport on Jan. 22, investigators said.


Topics of The Times; Olympic Swat Teams Hit Atlanta
The word "Olympic" is 30 centuries old.
It means of, or belonging to, Olympus, the fabled home of the Greek gods.
With the coming of the 1996 Olympic Games, business owners in Atlanta have learned yet another meaning: "Of, or belonging to, the Atlanta Olympic Committee, usable only with permission from us."
Ordinary trademarks are limited to a single service or product.
But in 1978, Congress granted the Olympic Committee a "supertrademark," permitting it to control the name and symbols of the Games in an almost unlimited fashion.
The measure was intended to protect the committee's fund-raising activities from fraud.
Businesses that used "Olympic" before 1978 are permitted to keep using it under limited circumstances.
Far-flung violations tend to escape notice for the moment.
But cities that host the Games are subject to sweeps by trademark monitors -- and prosecution from Olympic lawyers.


Traveling Light
To the Editor: "Traveling Light" really struck a note with me.
I'm a believer, and on a 1994 two-week tour of the British Isles I managed to unload one suit, a pair of past glory black shoes, two and one half sets of fraying underwear, two pair of toe-holed socks, one pair of stretch-waisted pajamas and two recent Reader's Digests, which ultimately made their way around the bus before reaching oblivion.
The return trip wasn't any lighter; these disposals simply made room for some of the gifts my wife and I purchased.


Rabbi's Musical Spirit Endures
Throughout his life, Rabbi Shlomo Carlebach, the foremost songwriter in contemporary Judaism, tried to inspire people to greater Jewish awareness.
On the one Sunday a month he conducted services at 305 West 79th Street, he could fill the small synagogue with 200 people.
But when he was on tour -- singing his religious folk songs in coffeehouses, concert halls and synagogues around the world -- it was often hard at his synagogue to gather a minyan, the quorum of 10 needed for Jewish prayer.
Rabbi Carlebach died Oct. 20 at the age of 69, but it seems that his message is growing more powerful: At his synagogue, Kehilath Jacob, known simply as the Carlebach Shul, there are crowds at every service.


HUSH OF SUICIDE
Jennifer Farbar's father may be finally smiling, having ended his pain.
But countless thousands of friends and family who discovered the hanged, shot, asphyxiated or otherwise successful suicides' bodies will carry their gruesome memories and pain to their graves.


Picking Stocks Its Own Size
A TINY mutual fund just two years old is popping up at the top of many stock fund rankings and attracting new money at a fast clip.
But before investors send their checks, they should take a close look at the fund's portfolio and decide how much risk they are willing to take.
The fund, called Perkins Opportunity, belongs to one of the riskiest categories -- funds that buy stocks of small companies.
And even within that category, it appears to be among the riskiest.


Rangers At a Loss To Reverse A Trend
With 17 games remaining in the regular season, the Stanley Cup champion Rangers are clinging to the eighth and final playoff spot in the Eastern Conference standings.
The Rangers are tied in points with the Devils and Sabres for sixth place, but they have played more games and, therefore, trail them in winning percentage.
And the Hartford Whalers, that juggernaut led by the former Ranger Glen Featherstone, are just a point behind, with a game in hand.


Lisa Phillips And Leon Falk
Lisa Phillips, a curator at the Whitney Museum of American Art in New York, and Leon Falk, an independent film producer in Los Angeles, were married in New York on Monday.
Rabbi Joseph H. Gelberman performed the ceremony at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park.
Ms.
Phillips, who is keeping her name, graduated cum laude from Middlebury College.
Her first marriage ended in divorce.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Warren H. Phillips of Bridgehampton, L.I.
Her father retired as the chairman of Dow Jones &amp; Company in New York.
He and the bride's mother, Barbara Phillips, are the owners of the Bridge Works Publishing Company in Bridgehampton.


Nets Re-enter Playoff Territory With Comeback Victory
The survey was a simple one, concocted this afternoon in the mind of P. J. Brown.
The Net forward wondered aloud how many of his teammates knew they were even in a playoff race, adding, "I'd really like to know."
Chris Childs knows. Derrick Coleman knows. And now the Miami Heat knows, too.


Mike Glass, Martha R. Friedricks
Martha R. Friedricks, a vice president with the Corcoran Group, a residential real estate company in New York, is to be married today at the Lotos Club in New York to Dr.
MacEllis K. Glass, an orthopedic surgeon in Stratford, Conn.
The ceremony is to be performed by Rabbi Jonathan Glass of the Civic Center Synagogue in New York, who is a son of Dr.
Glass.
The bride, 53, is a graduate of Northwestern University.
She is a daughter of Ida Robbins of Southfield, Mich., and the late Arthur Robbins.
The bridegroom, 63, is known as Mike.
He graduated from New York University and received his medical degree from Harvard University.
Dr.
Glass is also an assistant clinical professor of orthopedic surgery at Yale University in New Haven.
He is the son of the late Benjamin and Dora Burk Glass.


Name That Era
The Week in Review has received more than 200 suggestions for a name for the post-post-cold war era.
All submissions mailed or E-mailed by this weekend will be reviewed and considered for publication in next Sunday's Week in Review.


M18 to Be Trimmed to a Shuttle Service
After Alan F. Kiepper, president of the Transit Authority, toured the hilly route of the M18 bus last week, the agency voted not to eliminate the line, but to keep it running on a shorter route and with less service.
Starting at the end of June, the M18 will function as a shuttle, running at half-hour intervals between 110th Street and 167th Street, along the length of Convent Avenue and on parts of St.
Nicholas and Manhattan Avenues.
During peak hours, the buses will run every 20 minutes.


A Journey to a Mysterious Country: The Mind
WILLA CATHER, NOVELIST, theater critic and would-be physician, said that only writers, performers and doctors could have the experience, "unique and marvelous, of entering into the very skin of another human being." Through neurology and psychology we have now gained entrance to the mind and the brain too; those centers of thought, movement, feeling, speech and judgment.
The diseased brain, the mind that is feverishly alert or in a deep perceptual slumber, and the body that struggles to contain them: this is the spectacle that the British director Peter Brook puts before us in his rich and strange theater piece "The Man Who," an adaptation of the neurologist Oliver Sacks's book of case studies "The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat."
Dr.
Sacks likes to call his studies stories or clinical tales, for he sees his patients as figures of myth besieged by powerful forces.
"Classical fables have archetypal figures -- heroes, victims, martyrs, warriors," he writes in his book's preface.
"Neurological patients are all of these." They are travelers to unimaginable lands who have brought their stories back to civilization, tales as fabulous as anything found in "The Odyssey," "The Arabian Nights" or "The Mahabharata," the vast Hindu epic that Mr.
Brook staged eight years ago.
And Dr.
Sacks depicts himself as an explorer-bard, a scientist and romantic on a quest for new myths and symbols.


Town Seeks Donations From Untaxed Groups
FOLLOWING the lead of cities like Portland, Me., and Philadelphia, Greenburgh recently embarked on a campaign to solicit donations from tax-exempt organizations in an attempt to generate revenue.
The justification behind the program is that such funds will help cover the cost of providing the organizations with municipal services like fire and police protection and garbage collection and should also deflect criticism from residents reluctant to welcome tax-exempt organizations to the community.
"The tax exempts don't pay anything," Town Supervisor Paul J. Feiner said.


All About The Irish, Mensa, Peddlers, Alarms; On the Subway, a Response To a Teen-Ager's Taunt
To the Editor:
A few days after reading "Rebels Against the Rude" (Feb. 26), I ventured into the subway when school children were tumbling in; my mind said, "Don't go," but I was in a hurry.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
BROKEN UMBRELLAS Written and illustrated by Kate Spohn. Unpaged. New York: Viking.


IN SHORT: FICTION
BAD ALCHEMY  Poems. By Dionisio D. Martinez. Norton, $17.95.


'Leap Into the Unknown'
To the Editor:  In his essay "Keepers of the Flame, and Hot"  [ March 12 ] , Tom Piazza describes the "new generation" of jazz players as if they represent the entire range of artistic choices possible in jazz.
They do not.
They simply represent those who have been allowed to flourish in this reactionay age of jazz.
They play what they have been taught (often quite well) rather than what they have discovered for themselves.
While these are selectively nurtured, others have been left to fend for themselves.


Dutch Rescuer to Give Talk
THE 50-year-old photographs show smiling friends and a group clustered around a table.
Dr.
Tina Strobos, a psychiatrist here, points at different faces.
This one died in a concentration camp, she says.
That one was never heard from again.
This one moved to Israel, where she still visits the woman's grandchildren.
The pictures represent Dr.
Strobos's youth in the Netherlands, a youth she said she feels homesick for, a youth cut short by the five-year occupation by the Nazis beginning in 1940.
Dr.
Strobos was then a 20-year-old medical student, and pictures of her show a strikingly beautiful, dark-haired young woman.
Along with her mother and grandmother, Dr.
Strobos, whose family consisted of Social Democrats and atheists, sheltered more than 100 Jews in their house in Amsterdam.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Say It Again, Sam, And You'll Regret It
"LIFE is like a box of chocolates," the golfer Nick Faldo said earlier this month after winning the Doral-Ryder Open and its top prize of $270,000.
"You never know what you're gonna get."
Better face it.
Another all-purpose cliche has been spawned and it is spreading uncontrollably.
Tomorrow night, "Forrest Gump," the owner of 13 Academy Award nominations, may well speed off with a Range Rover full of Oscars, leaving us to suffer at least several more months of goofy citations from the script.


Purchase Dancers Try Out In Uncertainty
UNCERTAINTY over the future of the State University lent a sober tone recently to a day of auditions held for admission into the Purchase College division of dance here.
Drawn by what is acknowledged to be one of the top three or four dance conservatories in the country, high school students from as far away as Oregon brought their well-practiced techniques and artistic passion to be measured against a group of their peers.
Even the out-of-state parents knew of the college's troubles, asking worried questions about possible increases in tuition and the likelihood that the prestigious division would survive Gov.
George E. Pataki's proposed budget cut of $290 million to the university statewide.


A Woman's Obsession Pays Off -- at a Cost
OBSESSION is a wild, defining force.
Like fire, it can forge or destroy.
The line be tween the two, as any smithy knows, is thin.
Jennifer Kristina Harbury walked that line for several years.
When friends said stop, she did not stop.
When enemies said stop, she did not stop.
She left legions of quizzical admirers in her wake.
She made enemies, too, and appeared on a death list.
But she had convinced herself that she could change the course of history and she never did back down.


Normandy Bridge Cuts Travel Time to North
Driving time between Honfleur in Normandy and Le Havre in northern France has been cut from an hour to 20 minutes with the opening of the the Normandy Bridge.
The bridge is connected to the A29 autoroute.
The bridge's 2,808-foot span over the mouth of the Seine makes it the world's longest cable-stayed bridge, in the building of which cables supporting the roadway are attached to the bridge's towers.


Joelle Levine and Eliezer Friedman
JOELLE SUSANNAH LEVINE, 24, and Eliezer David Friedman, 29, met five months ago while out walking late one night on the deserted cobblestone streets of the Old City in Jerusalem.
Both were in Israel to take breaks from their secular lives in America to study Torah and return to the practice of Orthodox Judaism.


Is Oscar on Fast-Forward Or, Alas, Fast-Backward?
HOLLYWOOD HAS JUST CONDUCTED AN- other round of its favorite cultural census, and when the results are revealed tomorrow night, they will reveal more than who's hot and who's not.
The voters for these awards are, at least nominally, the people who make movies.
So their judgments should be revealing about where movies are headed.
The Academy faces watershed decisions this year, notably on the question of whether the film industry is in a forward-looking frame of mind.
The best-actress category is especially telling in that regard.
The current cover of Vanity Fair hardly bodes well for the future of movie ingenues, with 10 of them posed for what looks like a police lineup after a raid on a high-class brothel.
"The Power and Glamour of the Movies," says a caption next to Jennifer Jason Leigh, who, in fact, delivers a different message, stripped to her underwear and reduced to a feral crouch.


Commercial Property/Hotels; At New York Hotels, Things Are Looking Grand
CDL International, a Hong Kong hospitality company, buys the Hotel Macklowe on West 44th Street for nearly $164,000 a room, second in per-room price nationally in 1994 only to the Phoenician, the Babylonesque Arizona resort hotel that sold last year for about $386,000 a room.
Thayer Capital Partners, an investment group, raises $120 million to invest in all-suite hotels, while LaSalle Partners forms a hotel group to help clients pick which properties to buy.


Riddle and Variations
MOZART A Life.
By Maynard Solomon.
Illustrated. 640 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $35.


Memories of Thanksgiving Begging
To the Editor:
Your March 5 F.Y.I. item concerning Thanksgiving begging brought back glorious memories of growing up in Sunnyside Queens in the 1930's and 40's.
On Thanksgiving we dressed as ragamuffins -- three Irish-American kids -- and went from backyard to backyard, pub to pub, looking for handouts.
But with a difference.
We played Irish traditional music on the fiddle and flute and sang and danced to it.


IN SHORT: FICTION
CHILDREN OF THE DUST  By Clancy Carlile. Random House, $20.


Memories of Thanksgiving Begging
To the Editor:
As a child in the 30's in Ridgewood, Queens, I joined my two brothers to go out begging on Thanksgiving, dressed more or less as hoboes.
We mainly went calling at stores in the neighborhood and especially the bars and grills.
They were usually quite busy early on Thanksgiving because the men of the family fled there to escape briefly the uproar that ensued with the arrival of relatives. (All adult male newcomers were advised of my father's whereabouts and joined him post haste, though with definite instructions as to when to reappear for the feast.)


No Toasters at This Bank. It's Giving Away a Lawsuit.
WANT to bet some money on what the last word of this column will be?
It's possible to make an educated wager -- consider the topic, figure out the related jargon, then take a flyer.
But, still, it would amount to nothing more than gambling on somebody else's decision.
No one would dare call it investing.
Unless, perhaps, they worked at California Federal Bank.
This month, the bank announced it was planning to distribute a new security that amounts to little more than a lottery ticket.
The catch: owners of this ticket will have to pay taxes on it soon -- even if it ultimately proves a loser.


The Bottom Half
Socks
"I don't trust anyone who wears novelty socks," says Gene Chace of Camouflage in New York.
"They look nasty and insincere. A well-dressed man should wear unobtrusive socks that act as a bridge between his shoes and his pants. Forget about pattern and concentrate on quality. "Unfortunately, men don't ever think of buying socks, which is why they're always displayed near the checkout counter as a point-of-purchase item."


In Mutual Funds, Sophisticates Prefer A Bit of Naivete
NEW is nice.
It is fresh and exciting and full of promise.
People like to buy new things, from toothpaste to laptop computers.
In stocks, new equals the big score.
If you had sunk $10,000 into Dell Computer, the Austin, Texas, computer manufacturer, when it went public eight years ago, you could be sailing on your yacht in the Caribbean today instead of scanning this newspaper for financial advice.


Through the Eyes of a Beat Cop
Every working day, Officer Marvin Miller, 31, makes rounds from 148th Street to 150th Street, from Broadway to Amsterdam Avenue.
He knows the faces of the young men he suspects of being drug dealers and the names of the illegal mechanics who ply their trade on a streetcorner.
For some storekeepers on his beat, he is a friend and ally; others turn wary and tight-lipped when drops in.
He is one of dozens of new officers and commanders ushered into the 30th Precinct after a corruption scandal last year.
He, like the other new officers, are fighting stigma as well as crime.
Recently, Jennifer Kingson Bloom, a reporter, accompanied Officer Miller as he walked his beat and talked about his job.


Go Ahead, Make Him Cry
CLINT EASTWOOD APPEARED.
HE FILLED the whole doorway of his office bungalow.
He wore a shiny maroon golf shirt, old blue pants hiked up high on his waist and black rubber loafers.
"Hi," he said.


POSTINGS: Preparations Continue for Restoration of New Amsterdam Theater; Finding Traces of 'an Enchanted Garden'
The architect Hugh Hardy says the interior of the New Amsterdam Theater, the Art Nouveau cynosure of 42d Street playhouses, has the "imagery of an enchanted garden."
Yes, but years of neglect left it looking like a garden to which defoliant had been liberally applied.


A Democrat's Contract With Meriden
SINCE he took office in 1993, Meriden Mayor Joseph J. Marinan Jr. has tackled welfare reform, overhauled the Head Start program and a city dental clinic, and put more than 15 new police officers on the street.
His administration has privatized garbage collection and police and fire dispatch services, and cut its City Hall staff by 12 percent.
When he took office, the city was providing $12,000 for legal fees of low-income tenants involved in a dispute with their landlords; he offset that with an equal amount for landlords.


Corrections
A picture caption on page 20 of the Television section today and a listing for Tuesday on page 23, about the new sitcom "Bringing Up Jack," are outdated.
The premiere of the series has been postponed.
In its place, an episode of "Grace Under Fire" will be shown on Tuesday at 9:30 P.M. on ABC.


Still Looking to the Persian Gulf
ANYONE tempted to think it will be easy to keep restricting Iran's and Iraq's access to the world's oil markets might consider these facts:
The Middle East holds two-thirds of the world's oil reserves.
At the rate the world is increasing its use of oil, it will need 10 million more barrels a day by the year 2000.
Some analysts and economists say the Middle East is the only place where that extra 10 million barrels a day can be brought into production fast enough.


What U.S. Publishers Found, Good and Bad, at Cuba Book Fair
To the Editor:
Re "Cuba: Time to Change Direction" (editorial, March 19):


From Harlem to Beijing


Not So Special
YOU WERE WRONG about Janet Reno's powers as Attorney General," whispered Daniel Schorr, senior correspondent of National Public Radio, seated next to me at a speech Henry Kissinger was giving to the Nixon Center for Peace and Freedom in Washington.
In the moment when Henry turned from a castigation of multilateralism to the necessity of the expansion of NATO, I whispered back I was rarely wrong, but sometimes mistaken.


More Pun Fun
To the Editor:  In her article on Marcel Duchamp and Man Ray, "A 53-Year Bond Between Breakers of Rules"  [ March 16 ] , Vicki Goldberg misses Duchamp's most delicious pun.
Regarding Duchamp's androgynous alter ego, Ms.
Goldberg writes: "Her best-known incarnation is her first, Rrose Selavy ('C'est la vie')."


In Glen Cove, Suozzi Never Defeated DeRiggi
Glen Cove Tries to Stop Contractor From Reopening City Incinerator"  [ March 12 ]  contained several inaccuracies. Among them was the statement, "The meeting  [ in December 1993 ]  was one month after Mr.
Suozzi had defeated Donald P. DeRiggi in his quest for re-election." Mr. Suozzi's opponent in 1993 was City Councilman John Maccarone, and Mr. Suozzi was elected. The latter's campaign for the mayoralty in 1991 was unsuccessful, and Donald DeRiggi was resoundingly re-elected as Mayor and Supervisor of the City of Glen Cover. Mr. Suozzi never defeated Donald DeRiggi. MAGGIE and ED POLK Glen Cove


Countdown To Pataki Budget Threat
During almost two months of budget negotiations, Gov.
George E. Pataki has sought to gain leverage with the Legislature by threatening to shut down state government if a budget is not enacted by April 1, the start of the fiscal year.
But a week before Mr.
Pataki's doomsday deadline, the Republican Governor's warning seems to have created only modest pressure.
And a tangle of legal, practical and political problems has led the Governor to reconsider his original plan, leaving it unclear whether he will act on his threat.


The View From: Taftville; Life Returns to a 19th-Century Textile Mill
THE rhythmic hum of a twister, a machine used to ply yarn, fills the turn-of-the-century red brick building at the Ponemah Mill in Taftville.
A pile of grayish-white Cotswold wool lies on the floor near a carding machine.
Boxes overflowing with skeins of Ponemah woolen yarn are everywhere.
The mill, which closed in 1972 after a century of textile manufacturing, is stirring with life again.
In 1990, the newly formed Quinnehticut Woolen Company moved into 10,000 square feet on the ground floor of Ponemah's Mill No. 3.
Antiquated textile machines are again spinning Ponemah yarn for knitters and weavers.
Squeezed into a corner of the ground floor is the factory store, where samples of sweaters, socks, and other items made from the yarn hang on the walls.
The company also supplies yarn to several hundred small retail shops aroud the country, said Dale Plummer, a founder of the company.
Its list of mail order customers is growing, he said, and business at the factory store is steady.


Reincarnating Armory: Gym and Shelter?
The cavernous drill shed of the Park Slope Armory, where the tramping of soldiers once echoed, would reverberate with the thump of basketballs in a new incarnation as an athletic center.
The network of smaller rooms at the dilapidated brick armory off Seventh Avenue could house an alternative school, or provide offices for numerous community groups.


For 20 Years Taproot Has Had Fine Writers
I am writing to correct a number of errors regarding the Taproot Workshops and Journal in the interview with Claire Nicolas White in "Encounters, From an Autobiography, Tales That Echo"  [ Feb. 19 ] .
For 20 years Taproot has reached elder writers in all occupations and professions who wish to set down their experience in permanent form.
The organization was not, as the article indicates, founded specifically as a poetry program or a project for semilliterate farm workers or nursing homes.
Taproot writers are first-hand witnesses of the war in Afghanistan, survivors of the Holocaust and dwellers in rural Long Island.
They write in whatever genre they choose -- fiction, essay, memoir, verse -- for this creativity is the flowering of their own age.
We have never yet held a workshop for farm workers, although the idea is a fascinating one.
Taproot was founded in 1974 by Laura Fox.
Claire Nicolas White did not become a member of the Taproot board until 10 years later.
However she was one of the organization's finest teachers, and would be welcome in that capacity again at any time.
I am at a loss to understand, as are a number of our members, how Taproot's organizational purpose is viewed as "blurred." We have only begun to fulfill our original bylaws.
We reach many thousands of elder writers, publish two annual anthologies of their work and hold community events such as intergenerational programs, literary events and master classes.


View by Day, But Dance By Night
In Paris, Barneys invites designers and other friends to unwind, March 19.


Bridge Repairs to Disrupt Off-Peak Subway Service
The Transit Authority will extensively reroute subway service between Manhattan and Brooklyn during off-peak hours this summer because of construction work on the Manhattan Bridge.
Transit officials said yesterday that beginning May 1 the bridge would be closed to subway traffic from 9:45 A.M. to 3:30 P.M. on weekdays and from 4 A.M.
Saturday to 10 P.M.
Sunday.
They said an estimated 50,000 daily passengers and 175,000 weekend riders would be affected.


Farmland Tax Benefits May Widen
If you want a tax break, get a horse.
That's the advice that people with a few acres of land may soon be getting if proposed amendments to New Jersey's 1964 farmland assessment law are approved.
Among other changes, tax breaks would be given for land used for boarding, training or rehabilitating livestock, including horses.


Andrea Grant, Michael Leffler
Andrea Grant, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Merrill T. Grant of New York, was married last evening to Michael Evan Leffler, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen S. Leffler of Oyster Bay, L.I.
Rabbi Aaron Panken officiated at the St.
Regis Hotel.
Ms.
Grant, 27, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Kenyon College and is a candidate for a doctorate in child psychology at New York University, from which she received her master's degree in the subject.
Her father is a television producer and a co-chairman of Koslow-Grant Associates, a production company in New York.


Nutritional Needs Of Children
The March 12 article "Rickets, a Relic, Shows Up Again" confirms what hunger groups in New Jersey have been trying to convey for years.
New Jersey, some of your children are starving!
Some children on diets like vegan or macrobiotic or even folllowing strict dietetic religious observances may have micronutrient deficiencies despite the goodwill and intention of their parents to provide adequate nutrition.
Thousands of children, however, are suffering from the subclinical effects of not only rickets, a micronutrient deficiency, but also from macronutrient deficiencies.


March 19-25: Haunted by Carnage; Accused Killers in Rwanda Die in a Stifling Cell
The ethnic blood bath unleashed in Rwanda last year continues to bedevil the nation, despite the promise of the new Tutsi-led Government to forgo indiscriminate vengeance in favor of due process in bringing killers to justice.
United Nations officials disclosed last week that 24 Rwandans accused in last year's massacre -- in which hundreds of thousands of people, mostly Tutsis, were slaughtered by members of the Hutu majority -- had suffocated in a small police cell stuffed with 74 such suspects in the capital, Kigali.
More than 23,000 have been rounded up to await trial for the ethnic killings, in prisons nearly as miserable as the police station.


Pataki and Giuliani Join Forces on Tuition
For two months, Gov.
George E. Pataki has said that the State University of New York could absorb much of a proposed $290 million cut in state aid by tightening administrative and teaching costs, and he has offered a partial list of ways to do it.
For several weeks, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has contended that the City University of New York could handle a proposed $45 million cut in city aid in similar fashion.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CHELSEA  $350,000
426 West 23d Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,500-sq.-ft. duplex co-op in a brownstone; elevator, dining area, fireplace, private garden; maintenance $1,067, 60% tax-deductible, listed at $385,000, 26 weeks on market (Brokers: Kingman &amp; Associates; Corcoran Group)


Soil's the Key, and the Time to Test Is Now
Everything smells good at this time of year.
The air has bouyancy, grasses are greening, buds are swelling, crocus are perfuming the air.
These signs indicate that life underground is going strong.
The earth is pungent and even the birds are singing a new song.
While all this sort of rhapsodic feeling is fine to express, it should also remind gardeners that it is time to know their soils.
Soil test time is here.
And the sooner the task is completed, the better, for the pressure is on at the laboratories that do the testing.


When Whitman Comes Calling
AT 2 o'clock on the morning of Feb. 1, lights still burned in the new corporate headquarters of Dendrite International in Harding Township.
Maintenance workers polished and cleaned.
A photographer set up his lighting equipment.
A red carpet was rolled out.
Two hours later and 100 yards down the road at Monterey Gourmet, cooks were turning out tiny crepes and potato latkes for the big event.
The Governor was coming.
For Lou Ares, Dendrite's manager of marketing communications, the planning for Christine Todd Whitman's visit to the company was a nightmare of large and small demands: guest lists, invitations, floral arrangements, flags (state and American).
"The devil is in the details," he said.
"I would wake up at 3 A.M. and think about another contingency to cover."


Life After Silence
WAITING FOR THE DARK, WAITING FOR THE LIGHT  By Ivan Klima.
Translated by Paul Wilson. 234 pp.
New York: Grove Press. $21.


Memories of Thanksgiving Begging
To the Editor:
My brother and I were Thanksgiving "ragamuffins" in what is now called the Midwood section of Brooklyn -- we called it simply Flatbush then -- beginning in the early 1930's and continuing until our personal vanity led us to retire.
We were "too big" to appear in public in the guise of urchins.


UNCLE BOB
Newtniks have no fear because they grew up with stock market corrections, not the Crash, and with "undeclared international interventionary military police actions" instead of the War.
They promise a big picture, then whine about waiting in line to spend taxpayers' money to switch office spaces.
Gingrich may be a historian, but Dole is history.
If his candidacy gets some of these middle-aged babies to grow up, I'm all for it.
JENNIFER KRAMER Kearny, N.J.


The Real Thing
To the Sports Editor:
Back in January, I received a 1995 Major League Baseball Calendar, with the recognizable M.L.B. seal attesting to the fact that it is genuine merchandise.
Because it now seems probable that a 1995 major league season will be a grossly fraudulent affair, it is comforting to know that at least my calendar is authentic.


BEHIND THE WHEEL/Volvo 850 T-5R; New Proof That a Box Isn't Always a Square
I KEEP calling the car a TR-5, but I know that's not right. Boy, is that not right.
For one thing, the TR-5 was a roadster.
For another, it was built by British Leyland back in 1968, officially known as the TR-250.
It was a spidery Olde English sports car that was heir to all the ills the phrase implies.
Fun, sure.
But . . .
No, this is not a TR-5.
This one is a T-5R, as up-to-date as motoring gets.
And it is a rock-solid, front-wheel-drive Volvo.


Mason to Rejoin Knicks As Riley Decides His Fate
Anthony Mason flew to Seattle today, where he was expected to be activated from the suspended list for the Knicks' game Sunday night against the Supersonics.
Mason has been serving a five-game suspension for "conduct detrimental to the team," the aftermath of an argument between Coach Pat Riley and Mason during a March 14 game against the Denver Nuggets.
Mason was to miss his fifth game against the Los Angeles Clippers tonight, but Riley and Mason planned to meet Sunday morning in Seattle.
Although the Knicks had given no official word, Mason's suspension was expected to end after that meeting.


London Outing
To the Editor: I share the inclination to buy books about Britain when I'm visiting there, described by Susan Allen Toth in her essay "In Britain, Bookish Passions" (Jan. 15).
One felicitous find was Jilly Cooper's wildly funny and very human book "The Common Years," a journal she kept when she lived in the London suburb of Putney.
She wrote a lot about her neighbors, neighborhood and the adventures she had walking her dogs on the Barnes and Putney Commons near her house.


Patience on the Bench Proves to Be Only One of Anthony's Virtues
Playing time is something Greg Anthony can no longer count on.
He has spent much of this season on the bench, watching, waiting, watching, waiting.
And 20 times this season, Pat Riley has coached an entire game without asking Anthony to take off his warm-ups.
The experience has tested Anthony's tolerance, but it does not seem to have diminished his confidence.
Thursday night in Denver, Anthony delivered when he got his first opportunity in weeks to play meaningful minutes.
Playing 17 minutes, Anthony had 5 points and 1 assist, helping the Knicks to a 104-101 victory over the Denver Nuggets.


Julie Feldstein And Mark Kessler
Julie Lynn Feldstein, a daughter of Judy and Richard Feldstein of New York, and Mark Kessler, a son of Syma and Martin Kessler of Merrick, L.I., were married last evening in New York.
Rabbi Peter J. Rubinstein officiated at the Pierre.
Mrs.
Kessler, 25, graduated from Union College in Schenectady, N.Y., and received a master's degree in elementary education from the Bank Street College of Education.
She is a teacher at the Epiphany Community Nursery School in New York.
Her father is the chairman of Richfel Associates, an investment management company in New York.


Ladies' Mile Restoration
To the Editor:
It has been a pleasure to witness the restoration and revitalization of Ladies' Mile ("Restoration for the Final Stretch of the Ladies' Mile," Feb. 12).
These magnificent buildings, protected by the Landmarks Preservation Commission, now draw thousands of shoppers to the neighborhood and have growing economic viability.
However, Gil Yesnowitz, representative for the owner of The Ehrich Brothers Stores, complains of increased "difficulty" and "expenses" due to landmark designation.
Did he ever think that if it wasn't for the Landmarks Preservation Commission, Ladies' Mile might not have achieved such a dramatic transformation that has allowed building owners to command higher rents for their landmarked properties?
KEN M. LUSTBADER  Manhattan


Shopping the Outlets: Are They Worth the Trip?
NADIA ABDULLAH, a medical supervisor in Flatbush, loves clothes but wages a personal crusade against the retail price.
"I never pay full price -- I hate that," she says.
On many weekends, her crusade takes her beyond the city's borders to the burgeoning factory outlets off suburban highways, where she attacks the racks and bins in places like Secaucus, N.J., Central Valley, N.Y., and Franklin Mills in Philadelphia.
"I shop till I drop," she says.
"I shop all day in Franklin Mills, and if I don't ever have to come out, it's fine with me."


Blaming Gay Victim in Talk TV Murder?
To the Editor:
Re "Shameless Homophobia and the 'Jenny Jones' Murder" (Week in Review, March 19), on the murder of a gay man allegedly by the straight man to whom he revealed his secret infatuation during the taping of a television talk show:


Watters Joins Eagles
RICKY WATTERS became a Philadelphia Eagle yesterday after the San Francisco 49ers refused to match Philadelphia's $6.9 million, three-year offer sheet.
"We're thrilled to have obtained one of the premier running backs in the N.F.L.," Eagles Coach RAY RHODES said of the 25-year-old Watters.


Turkey Offers Kurd Rebels Reform Plan
As Turkish tanks have rumbled down dirt roads in northern Iraq and warplanes have pounded suspected positions of separatist Kurdish rebels in a huge counterinsurgency operation this week, Turkish officials have been promising reforms to improve life in Turkey for the Kurds.
Over the past few weeks, Prime Minister Tansu Ciller has promised the 11 million Kurds in Turkey that the Government will lift restrictions on broadcasts in Kurdish and will allow Kurds to establish their own schools once Turkey crushes the Kurdish Workers Party guerrilla movement.


Corrections
The Market Watch column last Sunday about the rising value of the yen misstated the sum that was lost by Japanese businesses as a result of the decline of the dollar since 1977.
It is $400 billion, not $400 million.


Sports of The Times; Bulls Are Unlikely to Rebound With Jordan
WHAT they are saying out here is that it's just a matter of time before Michael Jordan is Michael Jordan.
What they were thinking after Friday night was how long will it take before Jordan becomes frustrated not by what he can't do, but what his team can't do.
His team can't rebound.
His team never had a center who frightened anyone, but Jordan doesn't have Horace Grant working for him now, doesn't have anyone who, as Grant said, "will do anything to get the ball."


BEST SELLERS: March 26, 1995
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
56
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
2
2
5
BORDER MUSIC, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A Texas rancher, trying to erase his Vietnam trauma, takes to the road with an exotic dancer.
3
3
40
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
4
5
2
OUR GAME, by John le Carre. (Knopf, $24.) Espionage, larceny and murder in Eastern and Western Europe in the post-cold war era.
5
4
7
ORIGINAL SIN, by P.D.
James. (Knopf, $24.) Adam Dalgliesh probes a case involving intrigue, malice and murder in a prestigious London publishing house.
6
6
6
DAISY-HEAD MAYZIE, by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $15.) In words and pictures, the story of a girl whose head unexpectedly sprouts a daisy.
7
11
137
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
8
3
THE JUROR, by George Dawes Green. (Warner, $21.95.) A woman's life takes a fearful turn when she is chosen as a juror for a mob trial.
9
1
PHENOMENAL WOMAN, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $10.) Four poems celebrating women.
10*
7
3
THE GLASS LAKE, by Maeve Binchy. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The unspoken ties that bind a woman and her mother in a small Irish town.
11
8
10
KISS THE GIRLS, by James Patterson. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The police detective Alex Cross pursues a serial killer and the kidnapper of his niece.
12
1
MCNALLY'S TRIAL, by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $23.95.) Archy McNally uncovers the criminal operation responsible for extraordinary profits made by a Palm Beach funeral home.
13
9
5
THE CAT WHO BLEW THE WHISTLE, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Putnam, $21.95.) Aided by his two cats, Jim Qwilleran investigates embezzlement and a murder.
14
14
3
ROGUE WARRIOR: GREEN TEAM, by Richard Marcinko and John Weisman. (Pocket, $23.) Navy Seals contend with a violent religious movement.
15
15
4
THE CUNNING MAN, by Robertson Davies. (Viking, $23.95.) A doctor uses shamanism and Platonism as well as scientific medicine in his practice.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
2
BREAKING THE SURFACE, by Greg Louganis with Eric Marcus. (Random House, $23.) The memoirs of the former Olympic diving champion.
2
2
24
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
3
3
13
SISTERS, by Carol Saline.
Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of sisters, reported in words and pictures.
4
4
6
THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House, $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the lives of all Americans.
5
5
7
I WANT TO TELL YOU, by O.J.
Simpson. (Little, Brown, $17.95.) The former football star, now on trial for murder, responds to letters he has received.
6
6
2
AN ANTHROPOLOGIST ON MARS, by Oliver Sacks. (Knopf, $24.) Seven tales about people who compensated for their neurological afflictions by constructing worlds of their own.
7
7
55
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
8
9
5
THE DISCIPLINE OF MARKET LEADERS, by Michael Treacy and Fred Wiersema. (Addison-Wesley, $25.) A discussion of competitive business strategies.
9
8
29
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up comedian.
10
11
9
INSIDE THE WHITE HOUSE, by Ronald Kessler. (Pocket, $23.) Anecdotes about events at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue during the past 30 years.
11
12
NICOLE BROWN SIMPSON, by Faye D. Resnick with Mike Walker. (Dove Books, $14.95.) The former wife of O.J.
Simpson as remembered by a friend.
12
10
7
RAGING HEART, by Sheila Weller. (Pocket, $18.) An account of the marriage of O.J. and Nicole Simpson.
13
13
66
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
14
12
17
THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY, by Robert G. Hagstrom Jr. (Wiley, $24.95.) An account of the career of the man said to be the world's most successful investor.
15
15
2
BEING DIGITAL, by Nicholas Negroponte. (Knopf, $23.) A discussion of ways computers will change our lives in the future.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
96
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
2
2
6
THE BEARDSTOWN LADIES' COMMON-SENSE INVESTMENT GUIDE. (Godin/Hyperion, $19.95.) Tips for successful investing from 16 Illinois women.
3
3
48
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
4
4
2
THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra. (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $12.95.) How to "generate wealth in all its forms."
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending March 11, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) DREAMING: Hard Luck and Good Times in America, by Carolyn See. (Random House, $23.) The novelist's memoir of her family revels in a woman's point of view as it paints a portrait of drugs, drink and freedom set in California.
IN LOVE WITH DAYLIGHT: A Memoir of Recovery, by Wilfrid Sheed. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) This writer's account of his battles with alcohol, drugs and cancer is grim, but it's told with whimsical wisdom and good-natured resolve.
MOVING HOUSE: Stories, by Pawel Huelle. (Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace, $18.95.) These tales by a Polish writer turn on the longings and workings of memory in Gdansk.
THE NEW VICTORIANS: A Young Woman's Challenge to the Old Feminist Order, by Rene Denfeld. (Warner, $21.95.) The author, who is 28, contends that established feminism, like its suffragist predecessor, has abandoned the quest for equal status and turned to bashing male vices.
NEW YORK 1960: Architecture and Urbanism Between the Second World War and the Bicentennial, by Robert A.M.
Stern, Thomas Mellins and David Fishman. (Monacelli/Penguin, $125.) A huge book that examines the city's development as the world capital of finance and art, and the disputes and decisions that directed it; with extensive local descriptions.
SEEING THE UNSEEN: Dr.
Harold E. Edgerton and the Wonders of Strobe Alley, edited by Roger R. Bruce. (George Eastman House/MIT, $39.95.) Edgerton's amazing work in high-speed photography; a CD-ROM comes with it.
SIX MYTHS OF OUR TIME: Little Angels, Little Monsters, Beautiful Beasts, and More, by Marina Warner. (Vintage, paper, $10.) Humorous, urgent essays on how myth and fiction enshrine and fix categories like the moral condition of children.
TERRIBLE HONESTY: Mongrel Manhattan in the 1920s, by Ann Douglas. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $25.) New York analyzed as the locus of the national psyche when Americans attacked the conditioned responses of the pre-1914 world.
TOMORROW IS ANOTHER COUNTRY: The Inside Story of South Africa's Road to Change, by Allister Sparks. (Hill &amp; Wang, $22.) A South African journalist's fast-paced, gripping account of the process that led to the end of apartheid.
TOM PAINE: A Political Life, by John Keane. (Little, Brown, $27.95.) A good introduction to a difficult, often unlovable character and a highly effective propagandist of revolution.
THE TUNNEL, by William H. Gass. (Knopf, $30.) This sprawling novel (652 pages) by an American master is all spun out of the head of its monstrous protagonist, a language-driven professor of fascist views who is as dreadful as he is plausible.
A VOID, by Georges Perec. (Harvill/HarperCollins, $24.) The letter E never occurs in this 1969 French novel or in its translation by Gilbert Adair; what does occur is a wildly amusing feast of puzzles, mind games and rules broken just to exhibit their latent existence.


Victim of Post Office Attack Is Mourned


How to Succeed on TV, In Art and Without Paper
UPTOWN -- "The reason this show has been so popular over the years is that it's based on reality," Walter Cronkite was saying on March 23.
He was waiting at the Richard Rodgers Theater for the to go up on opening night for the revival of "How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying."
"I think we all know that while some talent is required to succeed in business," Mr.
Cronkite said, "a lot of chutzpah is an advantage as well."


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Ahoy and All That
THE first Washington home of Representative Gary L. Ackerman sank.
"I was in Queens having dinner with my wife, Rita," he said, "and I get this phone call." He had owned a houseboat for just 24 hours when he was told that it was no longer afloat.
"I guess I didn't ask the right questions when I bought it," he said.
All that was left was a life preserver that Mr.
Ackerman continues to own and may still find use for.


MARKET TIMING
Monday The K Mart board is expected to discuss the company's search for a new chief executive.
No candidate has the inside track.


Felicia Taylor, Charles Schuster
Felicia Rodrica Sturt Taylor, a business news anchorwoman for the CNBC cable television network, was married last evening to Charles Beall Schuster, a bond salesman at W. R. Lazard, Laidlaw &amp; Meade, a New York securities brokerage.
The Rev.
Dr.
Mark S. Anschutz performed the ceremony at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
Schuster, 30, works in Fort Lee, N.J.
She graduated from Northwestern University.
The bride is the daughter of Mary Schott of Palm Beach, Fla., and Rod Taylor of Beverly Hills, Calif.
Her father is the film actor.


TB Spread on Airliner, But Risk Called Small
The first confirmed case of tuberculosis being spread from one passenger to others on a commercial airline was reported this month by Federal health officials.
Four people became infected on a United Airlines flight from Chicago to Honolulu last spring, when they were seated near a woman with the disease.
The Government report also cited three earlier incidents of TB transmission on domestic flights involving flight attendants and crew members.
According to Dr.
Kenneth Castro, director of the division of tuberculosis elimination at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which conducted the study, the risk to travelers is small.
"Tuberculosis is not highly contagious," said Dr.
Castro.
"It takes prolonged exposure to be infected." He defined prolonged exposure as eight or more hours on a plane.


New Airline Links Three Eastern Cities
Nations Air, a new airline, has started daily service between Pittsburgh and Philadelphia, and between Philadelphia and Boston.
The carrier, (800) 248-9538, operates five weekday departures in Boeing 737's from Pittsburgh to Philadelphia with continuing service to Boston.
It also offers daily flights along the same route in the opposite direction.


More Home Deliveries Make Staying In Easier
WITH the suburban home increasingly the locus of activities ranging from work -- aided by computer communications systems -- to recreation -- including home entertainment centers and gyms -- it is tempting for residents to retreat behind their front doors and venture forth only when absolutely necessary.
Such impulses are all the more understandable when family members are felled by illness or kept indoors by inclement weather.
While it can often seem that one's life is spent in service to the house -- waiting for appliance repairs, carpet measurements or furniture deliveries -- there is no denying that dry-cleaning and pizza deliveries are welcome.


Oven Does the Trick for Impromptu Dining
OFTEN on weekends I find myself putting together an impromptu lunch or dinner for which the food is bought at the last minute.
As a result, I have to keep it simple.
One solution is to cook as much as possible in the oven.
The other day I came across an interesting recipe by the celebrated French chef Joel Robuchon: just the sort of thing I had in mind -- a pork loin roasted with fresh sage leaves over several different kinds of vegetables.
It sounded delicious, but the recipe had an enormous amount of fat in it.


To the Builder of a Megamall, Art and History Sell
THE horse family, called "Horses at Play" and poised to frolic in the unfinished fountain, was dusty.
So were the eight-foot bronze "Knot" outside the entrance to Neiman Marcus and the life-size bronze figures of children on a bench in the pedestrian walkway.
But on this sunny morning in early March before the official opening of The Westchester, no amount of dust could trouble Jeremiah W. O'Connor Jr., chairman of the O'Connor Group, developers of the new 12-acre megamall here.
The $250 million mall was on time and on budget, 95 percent leased and expected to boost the treasuries of the city, county and state, not to mention the company itself.


Uptown, Like Downtown, Rejects Ex-Prostitutes' Home
When Dr.
Joyce I. Wallace, the AIDS researcher, tried to convert part of her Greenwich Village home into a residence and education center for former prostitutes last year, the community reacted with outrage.
The proposal died when the city Department of Homeless Services refused to fund the home.
Ruffled but undaunted, Dr.
Wallace relocated.
She moved her home to midtown and her project to Washington Heights, purchasing a house on 187th Street at Audubon Avenue in the hope of finding a warmer reception in a less affluent part of the city.


How a Yankees Farm Team, Newly Named, Landed in Norwich
GLENN CARBERRY was in his car two years ago, listening to WFAN, the sports-talk radio station in New York.
His ears perked up when he heard Barry Gordon, an owner of the Albany Yankees, a minor league baseball team, say that his effort to move the team to Long Island, where he lives, had been blocked by the Mets, who did not want the competition for fans.
Mr.
Carberry immediately thought of a new home for the Albany team.
"Why not Norwich?" he asked.
Mr.
Carberry, a lawyer from Norwich, had proposed the city as a minor league site during his unsuccessful campaign for Congress as a Republican in 1992, when he lost to the Democratic incumbent, Sam Gejdenson.


Corrections
A brief article last Sunday about credit seminars for women offered by Budget and Credit Counseling Services, misstated the name of the group's president.
He is Luther R. Gatling, not Leonard.


After Three Years in Prison, Tyson Gains His Freedom
Whether the blue dawn that broke like a thin ribbon across the Indiana horizon this morning was fitting symbolism for Mike Tyson upon his release from the Indiana Youth Center prison, only time and Tyson will be able to determine.
More than 200 reporters and camera crews, along with hundreds of curiosity seekers, some wearing T-shirts that read, "Tyson is Back," waited for hours in the cold and dark outside the low, red-brick administration building here about 18 miles east of Indianapolis to witness the 28-year-old Tyson step into a waiting black limousine after serving three years and six weeks of a six-year sentence for a rape conviction.


A Shower for Rocky, Spot and Fluffy
"MAKE sure you dry the ears," said Glen Gaylinn, keeping a steady gaze on Rocky, a 170-pound Great Dane, who gamely stood for 40 minutes of sponging, spraying, blow-drying and brushing.
"It prevents swimmer's ear." Mr.
Gaylinn, who owns and operates the Dog Wash, was talking not to a groomer, but to Rocky's owner, Alice D'Ambros.
Ms.
D'Ambros had driven in from Staten Island just so she could bathe Rocky at this self-service bathhouse for dogs, a sort of canine carwash in the lower level of a squat building at 177 McDougal Street, just a Frisbee's throw from the dog run at Washington Square Park.


After an On-Court Clash, Comeback Never Comes for Pitino and Crew
Twenty minutes after his team sustained a stunning loss to North Carolina, Rick Pitino appeared in the interview room looking like a man who had lost his best friend, then seen the ghost of his best friend.
Everything had gone right yesterday, but then, nothing had gone right in this Southeast Regional final: Kentucky's vaunted press had rattled North Carolina, forced turnovers, created opportunities.
With a sold-out Birmingham-Jefferson Civic Center filled with a boisterous pro-Kentucky crowd, the Wildcats, who had begun a steady stream of chatter virtually from the opening tip, jumped to an 8-2 lead.
Although it was early, North Carolina seemed there for the taking.


2 Powerful Rights Give Third Title To Savon
He is the Olympic heavyweight champion, the most recognized amateur fighter in the world.
So they gave Felix Savon of Cuba the run of the boxing venue at the Pan American Games, inside the ring and out.
Officials let him use the copying machine to make photocopies of a book of prayers.
Referees and judges posed for pictures with him, as if they were excited children pawing for autographs.


BRUCE NAUMAN, COMPLEX COWBOY
On a recent visit to Washington, D.C., I visited the Hirshhorn Museum and was fortunate enough to see the Bruce Nauman show ("Bruce Nauman, Complex Cowboy," by Andrew Solomon, March 5).
Before entering the portion of the museum where Mr.
Nauman's art was displayed, I overheard a very agitated woman talking to staff security guards.
I moved closer to hear what the trouble was.
This woman was shouting: "This stuff is not art." She went on: "How could anybody call this art. This exhibit was disturbing."


Lawyer Continues Battle for New Nightspot at Site of Old Club 2000
The Fotopoulos brothers are well-known lawyers and landlords in Washington Heights.
Harry Fotopoulos, who is also an insurance agent, has run unsuccessfully for public office for decades, and the old-fashioned second-floor law office he shares with his brother, Dimitrios, at the corner of Broadway and 176th Street is perennially plastered with campaign signs.
While Harry has had a higher profile because of his political aspirations, it is now his brother who is being talked about.
Dimitrios Fotopoulos's plan to open a second-floor nightclub on 157th Street and Broadway has sparked angry protests and has been turned down by city and state liquor authorities.


What if Love Can't Save The World?
THERE'S A TYPICAL STEVIE WONDER moment at the the end of "My Love Is With You," from his new album, "Conversation Piece." He's repeating, "My love is with you" and "I'm with you," while in the background, perfectly meshed into the rhythm and then emerging, is a chant: "Ban the handgun." In the song, and throughout Wonder's career, benevolent optimism collides with concrete problems; for the moment, music holds them in an unlikely balance.
For more than two decades, Wonder, now 44, has occupied his own pop universe.
He was a teen-age prodigy in the 1960's, letting loose his serpentine vocals and jazzy harmonies even within the hit-factory routine of Motown Records.
But with "Music of My Mind" in 1972, he broke free and started creating most of his music by himself in the studio, overdubbing every instrument he could play (keyboards, drums, harmonica); as synthesizers have improved, Wonder's sonic vocabulary has grown richer.
His private musical laboratory isn't cold or sterile.
He knows how to make machines sound perky, playful, even cuddly, with little squiggles and tendrils of improvisation poking out of mechanical patterns.
On "Conversation Piece," he's not alone; Anita Baker, Branford Marsalis, Ladysmith Black Mambazo and others join him.


CONNECTIONS: Yakety Yak
Last fall, Bezek, the Israeli telephone company, issued a phone card showing President Clinton officiating as Yitzhak Rabin, Prime Minister of Israel, and King Hussein of Jordan shook hands.
DOV, a right-wing group opposed to most of Israel's peace efforts, promptly blew up a telephone exchange in protest.


Local Round Robin Puts Needs on Display
Just the other night, Neil Smith was discussing violins in hockey.
No, not violence in hockey, when two tough guys go toe to toe in a fistic fracas.
The president and general manager of the Rangers was talking instead about the musical instruments with strings attached.
Smith was comparing athletes to instruments in an orchestra.


A SENSE OF PLACE
FORTY-FIVE things to love about New Jersey:
1.
The legends about the fabulous lost pirate treasure beneath the sands of Long Beach Island.


Union Outbids Competitors For Work on Street Signs
In another effort to win labor concessions and save money, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani announced yesterday that one of New York City's unions had, for the first time, outbid private companies to provide a municipal service -- in this case, installing and repairing street signs.
The Mayor called the arrangement "a landmark" that would save $1 million this year and would serve as a model to wrest greater productivity from the unions in the years ahead.


A Restaurant's Place in History
As a resident of the Bethel,Danbury and Hartford areas in the 1930's, I can tell you that the core business of the A-1 meat sauce originated in the meat sauce served at the Heublein Restaurant in Hartford ("Smirnoff White Whisky -- No Smell, No Taste," Feb. 19).
The restaurant was a well-known quality steak house not far from the State Capitol in Hartford.


What Conservatives Stand For
I used to think that those who called themselves "Conservatives" were often reactionaries who chose a nice-sounding term to camouflage their programs.
After reading Robert Previdi's letter  [ "Another Vacuous Plan for a Tax Cut," March 5 ] , I no longer think so, at least in regard to him.
He seems to be a sincere Conservative, a man of integrity and courage, who dares to challenge the Republicans, though a former Republican-Conservative candidate, for their inconsistency (if not hypocrisy) in calling for a balanced budget and at the same time calling for reduced taxes, the other side of the scale needed for a true balance of income with outgo.


March 19-25: 4 Killed in Montclair; Mass Murder in Suburbia: A New York-Area Update
Suburban New York saw one senseless episode of mass murder draw to a close last week and another begin.
Four people were shot to death on Tuesday in a robbery at a small post office in Montclair, N.J., on the same day Colin Ferguson was sentenced to spend the rest of his life in jail for the 1993 murder of 6 people on the Long Island Rail Road and the attempted murder of 19 others.
About 20 hours after the bodies were discovered in Montclair, the police arrested a suspect, Christopher Green, 29, a former postal worker who knew the two postal workers he is accused of killing.
Mr.
Green was also charged with killing two customers and critically wounding another.


Child Welfare System, Under Fire, Staggers On
To the Editor:
The bleak profile of the fate of children in a recent experiment with orphanages is a reminder that large-scale institutional care is not a permissible solution for poor children.


Making Gains on the Winds From Washington
IN its fervor to challenge unnecessary government regulation, the Republican-dominated Congress will soon place another Federal agency in the cross hairs: The Food and Drug Administration.
For many investors, this political hunting party may signal a time to bag some big game -- or to duck for cover.
Of course, the average person may pay more attention to the moral and economic aspects of the F.D.A. dispute than to its meaning for stocks.
House Speaker Newt Gingrich has denounced the F.D.A. as the "leading job-killer in America," for instance, while the agency's supporters have conjured up the specter of babies deformed by drugs like thalidomide under deregulation.
Big questions, and great theater.


UConn Women Face the Music and Win
In one sense, it was like most of the games the Connecticut women's basketball team had played this year.
In the last 10 minutes of the first half this morning, there was a frightening 15-0 run over 2 minutes 20 seconds, then a 9-0 run, then an 8-0 run.
But this was completely different because the team rolling up those points was not Connecticut, the nation's top-ranked team for more than two months, but Virginia.
UConn's dream of a perfect season and a national championship seemed about to be shattered by Virginia's timely shooting and a clever defense that kept the ball away from the Huskies' big post players.


Soil's the Key, and the Time to Test Is Now
Everything smells good at this time of year.
The air has bouyancy, grasses are greening, buds are swelling, crocus are perfuming the air.
These signs indicate that life underground is going strong.
The earth is pungent and even the birds are singing a new song.
While all this sort of rhapsodic feeling is fine to express, it should also remind gardeners that it is time to know their soils.
Soil test time is here.
And the sooner the task is completed, the better, for the pressure is on at the laboratories that do the testing.


Foreign Ministry to Moscow Electric: The Check Is in the Mail
Luckily for Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev, he was in Geneva on Thursday trying to show, in talks with Secretary of State Warren Christopher, that Russia was still a superpower.
Mr.
Kozyrev was lucky not to be in Moscow that day because the Moscow regional electrical authority cut power to many of the elevators -- including those used exclusively by Mr.
Kozyrev and his principal deputies -- in the enormous, gothic Foreign Ministry building that towers over Smolenskaya Square in central Moscow.


Cells and Salesmanship
ALTERED FATES Gene Therapy and the Retooling of Human Life.
By Jeff Lyon and Peter Gorner. 636 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $27.50.


New Evidence May Link Japanese Sect to Attacks
A thousand police officers began a major new search of a chemical laboratory at the Aum Shinrikyo religious sect today, saying they were investigating on charges of "preparation to murder."
The police did not give details, but the charges apparently would be based on Aum's possession of chemicals used to make nerve gas.
The crime of "preparation to murder" is punishable by only two years in prison, but the search also gives the police an excuse to seek evidence connecting the sect to the gas attack on the Tokyo subway system on Monday.


USAir Enters An Agreement With Its Pilots
USAir broke a yearlong deadlock with its pilots yesterday and reached an agreement that could help the financially beleaguered airline drastically cut costs.
USAir, the nation's sixth-largest carrier, did not disclose any details of the agreement, nor did its pilots union, the Air Line Pilots Association.
The airline's statement suggested, however, that the agreement included wage and work rule concessions from the pilots in exchange for "financial returns and governance participation," most likely referring to stock in the company and representation on USAir's board.


Talkin Man Shows Da Hoss Who Is Boss in the Gotham
A Canadian candidate sprang into prominence for the Kentucky Derby yesterday when Talkin Man, the juvenile champion of Canada last year who hadn't raced anywhere in nearly five months, won the Gotham Stakes at Aqueduct.
It was a well-cast partnership that got him there: Roger Attfield, probably the most renowned trainer in Canada, and Mike Smith, the leading jockey in the United States.
And with Talkin Man doing the running, they flashed home by seven lengths over the previously undefeated colt Da Hoss, who in turn had two lengths on Devious Course.


The Lure of Low Fees That Soon Disappear
IT'S a variation on the old bait and switch.
To lure investors, a mutual fund company says its new fund will have bargain-basement expenses, meaning more money for shareholders.
Then the expenses come in far higher than projected, or, as is often the case, they climb from the cellar to the ceiling in a flash.


The Nation; Beware of Him Who Requires New Clothes
DIANNE FEINSTEIN, running unsuccessfully for governor of California in 1990, characterized her male opponents as "blue suits."
"Their blue suits mean business as usual," she harrumphed. "I say elect this dress."


INNUMERACY2
I read with interest and hope Max Frankel on "Innumeracy2 " (Word &amp; Image, March 5).
Is it possible that journalists, Washington's "experts" and all media may take this information and use it wisely?
I rather think not.
Obviously, to the careful reader/ listener, numbers are crunched and molded to one's direction.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: Men's Fashions/Magazine Part 2


More Tohubohu
To the Editor:
It was a linguistic treat to read the term "tohubohu" in David R. Slavitt's article "Passionate Intensity" (Feb. 12).
The word finds its origin in the Hebrew of Genesis 1:2 (tohu wa-bohu), where it describes the formless chaos of the primordial universe.
As such, it may indeed describe elements of contemporary poetry with a degree of precision, notwithstanding readers' objections to the contrary (Letters, March 5).


Accord on King Center Reopens Key Sites
FOR the Rev.
Joseph Roberts, the pastor of Ebenezer Baptist Church in Atlanta, where the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. once served, February's celebration of Black History Month and the King Birthday were painful times.
A dispute between the leadership of the Martin Luther King Jr.
Center for Nonviolent Social Change and the National Park Service had closed the center and the Dr.
King's birthplace to Park Service tours, so busloads of visiting schoolchildren could only stand outside and look at the ocher-colored frame house with the dark brown trim.
"I have sadly seen schoolchildren come and stand outside singing 'Happy Birthday' to Dr. King, but not be able to go inside," he said.
"They didn't understand the tactics that were being used to win something politically. But now that seems to be over."


Stacey I. Gindi, Lewis R. Felder
Stacey Ilene Gindi, a daughter of Aaron and Marlene Gindi of Woodmere, L.I., and Dr.
Lewis Roger Felder, the son of Mrs.
Wilma Felder Shimoff of Miami Beach, Fla., and the late Dr.
Michael Felder, are to be married today in Lawrence, L.I.
Rabbi Bruce Ginsberg is to perform the ceremony at Temple Israel.


Ah, Youth!
To the Editor:  The article about movie titles is mistaken.
"Jumanji," by Chris Van Allsburg, won a Caldecott Award and is a good name for a movie if the producers copy the book.
Maybe your writer didn't know that because she doesn't have a 6-year-old first grader like me.
KATE LUFT Oradell, N.J.


Tizzy Freedman, Thurstan Bannister
Elizabeth Frances Freedman, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Jerome K. Freedman of New Haven, was married last evening at the Yale Club in New York, to Thurstan Roger Ralph Bannister, a son of Sir Roger and Lady Bannister of Oxford, England.
The Rev.
William S. Hicks, a Baptist minister, officiated, and Rabbi Joel S. Goor took part in the ceremony.
The bride and the bridegroom are vice presidents of J. P. Morgan &amp; Company in New York.
Mrs.
Bannister, who is known as Tizzy, graduated from Wheaton College.
Mr.
Bannister graduated from Oxford University.


Don't Quote Me
Mommy, what's a source?
A thing where something comes from; the beginning of a stream.


Traveling Light
To the Editor: Robert Eisner seems to recommend leaving books behind when traveling.
This is not a bad idea -- imagine the joy of finding an English-language book in a hotel room far from home -- but there are times when books must be carried home.
A friend, an English publisher, who had traipsed all over the Far East with a huge collection of books he was showing around, found himself in trouble when it was time to come home.
The check-in clerk insisted he pay hundreds of pounds in overweight, or leave the bag of books behind.
He didn't want to pay, and he didn't want to leave them, and all his charm and smiles failed.
The line of people waiting to check in stretched longer and longer behind him and muttering began.


MY WILD KINGDOM
Let me get this straight.
Patricia Volk sent away her exterminator for fear of the health risks of malathion so that she could convert her apartment into a terrarium teeming with pestilential vermin? ("An Entomological Study of Apartment 4A," March 5)


On Sunday; In an L.I. Plan For a Minaret, Many Symbols
FOR ALL the drive-by commuters wondering briefly about Islam and its chances of assimilation in wary America, the salient development is this: A minaret of modest proportions is at last being planned for the mosque that has taken root here on Brush Hollow Road like a serene, domed exception to the clapboard routine of suburbia.
The minaret will be perhaps two and a half stories high, smaller than first envisioned, well within the zoning laws carefully, respectfully researched by the mosque's elders.
Until now, they shied from erecting this beauteous towering touch, the ultimate focus of a Muslim, never more so than in a new land.


Behind Collapse of a Building, An 80's Investment That Did, Too
During the boom of the 1980's, Marcus I. Lehmann and Morris Wolfson heard the siren call of real estate and followed it to Harlem.
Mr.
Lehmann, 27 years old in April 1987, seemed to be brimming with confidence when he explained in an interview then his formula for success in the low-income housing market.
A property purchased for less than four times its annual rent revenues "will show a bottom line," he said.
"When you get above that, you've got to squeeze."


To the Heart of Song, a Final Time
Is Elly Ameling really saying goodbye?
The encouraging news is that demand for tickets has obliged the Dutch soprano's managers to schedule an extra recital next Sunday in addition to the announced "farewell" on April 9 at Alice Tully Hall.
Perhaps the demand will continue, and the voice will find an Indian summer, and Ms.
Ameling will be like Adelina Patti, who gave farewells from 1886 to 1906 (thereafter confining herself to occasional charity performances through 1916).
Ms.
Ameling is one of the most admired -- and the very most recorded -- of female song recitalists, and she is 62.
Like many another soprano, she used to shave a few years off her age; now she wants to come clean rather than have it thought that her voice didn't last well.
Never mind, all good things must come to an end, but one wants the best ones prolonged.


Dull? Maybe. But Boise Has Promise.
COMPARED with a lot of companies that are going public, the Boise Cascade Office Products Corporation is boring.
It won't accelerate up the information superhighway.
And it's not some snazzy little high-technology outfit, like Tivoli Systems Inc., a software company whose shares have more than doubled in the two weeks since it went public.
If the truth be told, Boise Cascade Office Products is a drab Midwesterner (it's in Itasca, Ill., not Boise) that sells mundane stuff like fax paper, paper clips, desks and chairs to other businesses, and has done so for 30 years.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Special Thanks To My, Um, My . . .
STATUETTE in hand, the Oscar winner peers lovingly into the audience at the woman who has been at her side all these years, sharing triumphs and frustrations, hearth and home.
Above everyone else, the winner says, she wants to thank her . . . well, her . . . you know, her . . .
Companion?
Girlfriend?
Lover?
Partner?
Roommate?
Significant other?
Spouse?
Wife?


Next Week: 'New Jersey'
This is the last issue of the New Jersey Weekly in its present form.
Next Sunday, The Times will introduce an enhanced section -- called simply New Jersey -- with color photos and illustrations, new columns and features, a weekly E-mail forum, expanded calendars of events and an opinion page with articles and letters to the editor.


Some Called Them Flashes In the Pan. (Some Flash.)
IT HAS BEEN NEARLY 10 YEARS since Mike and Doug Starn first startled the art world with their scratched, torn, creased, pieced-together-with-Scotch-tape, often monumental and strikingly beautiful photographs -- and they show no signs of fading away.
Many thought they would, long ago.
Certainly the signs of a hype machine at full throttle were there.
The twin brothers were in their 20's and fresh out of art school when they were embraced by one of the most powerful fine-art dealers in New York, Leo Castelli, and their work was included in the 1987 Whitney Biennial.
Lionized by curators and big-name collectors, they commanded as much as $50,000 for a single photograph and had a waiting list of buyers for their work.


Finding Injured Child, Police Arrest Couple
A Brooklyn man and woman were arrested yesterday after police officers found the woman's 2-year-old daughter semiconscious, with second-degree burns on her buttocks and back.
The man, Ira Manson, 23, and the woman, Patricia Hoyt, 20, identified by the police as his girlfriend, were charged with first-degree assault and endangering the welfare of a minor.


From Roland Petit, a Valentine to the Little Tramp
"SUCCESS IS PALPABLE, meant for immediate consumption," Roland Petit writes in the artful memoirs he has published at home in France.
But success, adds the 71-year-old choreographer, eventually gives way to fame, "which is more abstract."
Mr.
Petit should know.
Unlike most choreographers, he became an international hit at the start of his career.
And, somewhat unfairly, he has had to live up to the legend that resulted from the early triumphs, between 1945 and 1953.
"Chaplin Dances," the 1992 work that the Roland Petit National Ballet of Marseilles performed earlier this month in Washington at the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, epitomizes his predicament.


Chest Protector Doesn't Help Soderstrom
Tommy Soderstrom did not have much time to break in his new chest protector.
The Swedish goaltender's old one was stolen from his locker at the Nassau Coliseum on Friday, the morning after he had shut out the Rangers.
His new equipment arrived this morning.
This afternoon -- whether superstition had anything to do with it -- Soderstrom allowed a goal on the first shot he faced, another on the fourth and was gone at 4 minutes 59 seconds into the game.


Time to Rethink the Tax Cuts
The student protests against his education cuts put Gov.
George Pataki in a pedagogical mood.
He lectured the students fiercely about the need to "bring desperately needed fiscal sanity" to the task of reducing a $5 billion deficit.
If only the Governor would listen to his own sermon.
He would realize that now is not the time to aggravate that deficit with a nonsensical tax cut that accounts for 15 percent of the deficit figure he cited.
Now that the brutal hardship of the budget numbers is clear, he must not let ideology triumph over his common sense and his duty to the well-being of the people of New York.
Of course, Mr.
Pataki ran for governor on a sweeping tax-cut pledge, and he is right about the need for some tax relief for New Yorkers.
But he also promised that the cuts could be carried out sensibly, if not painlessly.


Crumbling Buildings, Roving Dogs: One Man's Empire
Crammed with debris and tangles of electrical wire, the three long-condemned buildings on Park Avenue between 126th and 127th Streets are the epitome of urban blight.
Broken appliances and garbage spill onto the sidewalk, where dogs -- the four-story buildings' only permanent residents -- feed daily.
Passers-by might assume that the city owns these buildings and has let them rot, or that they belong to absentee landlords.
And on the heels of a building collapse on West 140th Street that killed three, the vision is frightening.


Theater; An Independent Woman in 'Mirandolina'
IF you need a theatrical booster shot, and who doesn't, observe the stage traffic at the McCarter Theater.
The ensemble -- a real ensemble, not a wishful thought -- spins along the two tiers of Thomas Lynch's festive set design of an 18th-century inn in Florence.
Everything is warmed by the sunniness of Christopher J. Akerlind's lighting and orchestrated with a joyful sense of measure by Stephen Wadsworth.
Stephen Wadsworth: the McCarter's main man in the categories of director, adapter and translator.
By now, the association between Mr.
Wadsworth and the McCarter is a renewing thing.
The Wadsworth sensibility lifts the soul.


Q. &amp; A.
Altering A Rental Apartment Q We have been tenants in a rent-controlled apartment for 34 years.
The building was in receivership until April 1994, when our new landlord purchased it.
He has corrected the many violations we endured during the receivership, but now refuses to let us have our floors sanded at our expense.
We have had two expert floor repairmen declare that the floors are definitely sandable.
The floors had only been sanded when we took possession 34 years ago; the building is 65 years old.
Does the landlord have the right to refuse us our request to allow the sanding? . . .
Marion Moore, Manhattan.


European Cars: Renting for Less
THIS week may be the time to rent a car for a European trip this summer.
Two major companies, Hertz and the Kemwel Group, offer special rates that expire on Friday.
Avis, Auto Europe and Europcar have no looming deadlines, but with the value of the dollar vacillating, the rates quoted here in mid-March may change.
All the companies here say they will guarantee dollar rates: Once the rental is reserved, the companies say, the price will not increase.


The Fine Points Of Framing Artwork
A recent Home Clinic article, "Picture Frames' 2 Sides: Esthetic and Utilitarian," was, on the whole, informative and conceptually accurate, but there are a few facts of which people should be aware.
First, mat boards come in several varieties and are not necessarily "cardboard." There are three basic types of mats: paper, acid free-museum grade and cotton rag-museum grade.


Who's on First? Who Cares?
No matter how badly the Milwaukee Brewers replacement team plays this season, some fans will be laughing all the way to the bank.
Since 1987, Guaranty Bank, of Brown Deer, Wisc., has been helping Brewer fans identify with their team by offering a C.D. whose interest rate rises with each Brewer victory.
But faced with the prospect that fans, depressed by replacement baseball, would ignore the C.D.'s this year, the bank decided to count every replacement game, no matter who wins, as a Brewer victory.
The true fan's greatest nightmare -- a full year of replacement ball -- would add 1.62 points to the C.D.'s 5.75 percent starting rate, or .01 per game.
But would any playoff or World Series games be rung up as victories as well?
Guaranty makes no promises.
Barnaby J. Feder


Why He Is No. 45
To the Sports Editor:
Behind the hoopla about Michael Jordan's return to basketball, there is the barely noticed human story of a young man mourning the sudden, brutal death of his father.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about the pending execution of Thomas J. Grasso misstated the location of McAlester, Okla., site of the state penitentiary.
It is in eastern Oklahoma, not on the plains.


Blaming Gay Victim in Talk TV Murder?; The Numbers Mislead
To the Editor:
Re "Asked, Told, Pursued" (Op-Ed, March 19) and "The New Rules on Gay Soldiers: A Year Later, No Clear Results" (front page, March 13): The underlying argument for both sides is the number of service people involved.
Gay service members argue that the numbers are the same as before the policy.
The Pentagon argues the numbers are insignificant.
Don't believe the numbers.


QUEENS UPDATE
*
WOODSIDE I.S. 125 remained closed last week as a dispute raged between the Board of Education and the P.T.A., which wants its own contractor to confirm that asbestos levels have abated to acceptable levels.
The school was shut on March 8. *
FLUSHING Plans have been scrapped to install new parking meters on Colden Street between Elder and Juniper Avenues.
New meters will be installed along 142d Street starting at 56th Road, extending around Booth Avenue up to Main Street, and north on Main Street to Elder Avenue.


Stopping Fraud at Co-ops
WHEN Herb Rose, a Mount Vernon, N.Y.-based consultant, examines the books of a co-op or condominium and discovers financial problems, he is hardly ever surprised.
He's not surprised when, as happens all too often, he finds deficiencies in the record-keeping itself.
And he's not surprised when he finds waste and inefficiency even when the records are well kept.


More Home Deliveries Make Staying In Easier
WITH the suburban home increasingly the locus of activities ranging from work -- aided by computer communications systems -- to recreation -- including home entertainment centers and gyms -- it is tempting for residents to retreat behind their front doors and venture forth only when absolutely necessary.
Such impulses are all the more understandable when family members are felled by illness or kept indoors by inclement weather.
While it can often seem that one's life is spent in service to the house -- waiting for appliance repairs, carpet measurements or furniture deliveries -- there is no denying that dry-cleaning and pizza deliveries are welcome.


All About The Irish, Mensa, Peddlers, Alarms; When Breezes Enhanced Movie-Going in Brooklyn
To the Editor:
"Can Owner of Forlorn Movie Palace Buck Multiplex Trend?" (March 5), about the hoped-for reopening of the Sanders Theater, awakened many a memory in this Brooklyn-born-and-bred octogenarian.


Newcomer Schools Raise Old Questions
The special school for immigrants proposed last week by Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines joins a growing field of "newcomer" schools in states like California, Texas and Illinois.
For educators and civil rights officials, the schools raise questions that have long dogged special programs: Do they truly help children or risk harm by isolating them from the mainstream?


All About The Irish, Mensa, Peddlers, Alarms; New School Plans Offer Chance for Soul Searching
To the Editor:
As a senior at Townsend Harris High School, I read your Feb. 26 article "Once Again, a New Building for a High School Is Tardy" with interest.
Rather than just being "devastated" by the latest delay in opening our new school, we should use it as an opportunity.


Deborah Fass, Russell Rothstein
Deborah Fass, the daughter of Drs.
Ariana and Leroy Fass of Rancho Palos Verdes, Calif., is to be married today to Russell Isaac Rothstein, the son of Esther Rothstein of the Bronx and the late Milton Rothstein.
Rabbi Haskel Lookstein is to officiate at the Glen Island Casino in New Rochelle, N.Y.
The bride, 25, and the bridegroom, 26, graduated from Harvard University, she magna cum laude, he cum laude.
She is a Ph.D. candidate in biology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where Mr.
Rothstein is studying for an M.B.A. and a master's degree in technology and policy.


Marnie Thompson And M. W. Miller
Marnie Hallowell Thompson, a daughter of Joan Williamson Thompson and Jonathan Acheson Thompson, both of New York, was married yesterday to Matthew Walter Miller, the son of Gail Lloyd Miller of Mamaroneck, N.Y., and the late Richard Stephen Miller.
The Rev.
Dr.
Mark S. Anshutz performed the ceremony at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
Miller, 25, teaches the second and third grades at the Brearley School in New York.
She graduated from Ohio Wesleyan University, as did the bridegroom.
She received a master's degree in elementary education from the Bank Street College of Education.
Her father is president of the Sawyer Ferguson Walker Company, newspaper advertising representatives in New York.
Her mother is a vice president of Ambrose-Mar Elia, a real estate company in New York.


Working Knowledge
What to start doing immediately *
Write it down.
Of course you can remember everything.
But why should you have to?  *
Shine your shoes. *
Take off the school ring. *
For God's sake, fix your teeth. *
Leave your laptop home on vacations. *
Fill out your expense report the day you get back. *
Unless you wear a crown, remove the crest. *
Stretch every two hours. *
Hang your jacket up instead of flinging it over the back of a chair. *
Dress the way you want to be treated.
What to stop doing immediately *
Forgetting birthdays *
Making that apologetic little laugh whenever you disagree with someone *
Buying short-sleeve "dress" shirts, which make as much sense as tennis pants *
Taking your suits to the dry cleaners every time you take them out of a suitcase  *
Scheduling your day to the second, because you're not in charge of timing *
Asking someone else to change the toner *
Dropping important mail into the building's mail chute *
Talking business on the elevator *
Getting your shirts boxed when they're laundered.
Are you giving them out as gifts? *
Wearing red, white and blue if you're not in a marching band *
Taking the elevator to go up or down two floors *
Wearing gold aviator frames *
Saying "How are you?" to people while you keep on walking *
Talking about how much things have changed instead of changing *
Being afraid of another human being who isn't facing you with a gun Stuff to have in your desk *
Five tokens *
Vitamin C *
A mini Dopp kit *
A spare set of house keys *
An extra white dress shirt *
A black round-neck pullover *
A ZIP code map *
A nail buffer *
A needle and thread *
A Zagat guide *
Talcum powder -- for fresh tie stains. (Sprinkle generously. Leave on for as long as possible. Then nail-brush off. Do not use your hands.) *
The nicest letter any satisfied client ever wrote you *
The dumbest letter any dissatisfied client ever wrote you *
A picture, taken on vacation, of you and someone else looking really ridiculous Entertaining the client *
If it's confidential, don't go where tables are inches apart and there is more waving than behind that window on the "Today" show. *
Atmospheric restaurants don't only seduce lovers.
Wooing is wooing, whatever the pitch. *
If you have no pull and Chez Hoo-hah is booked, call back, use another name and put Dr. in front of it. *
Don't assume the hole in the wall with great jazz takes plastic. *
Don't go somewhere like The Bottom Line dressed like you're ready for them to sign on one. *
Any seats are not better than no seats. *
Seats so close you can smell Riley's cologne?
Do they even like basketball? *
Note that tickets stamped General Admission don't guarantee seating.
You may be standing in the mosh pit. *
All venues can tell you over the phone exactly when the main act goes on. *
At intermission, talk about anything but work.
Think hard. *
Better to go somewhere where you're treated fabulously than to go somewhere fabulous. *
The last thing you say is not "Do we have a deal?" The last thing you say is "Good night." How to get in so the client can get down *
Arrive in a rented limousine -- and you'll wait till you weep.  *
Ditch the wing tips. *
Stash the beige trench. *
Muss your hair. *
If you're still suited up, 86 the tie, leave the shirt buttoned. *
Don't speak, don't wave, smile small, don't say you know the owner. *
Knit hats, big shirts, black jeans, baggy denim, silver, bright solids, fuzzy sweaters, plaid -- yeah.
Gold, ponytails, bleached denim, stripes, appliques, running shoes, baseball caps -- nyet. *
Your party all male?
You might as well send out for pizza. *
Do you own anything in leather that's beat up?
Even a saddle will help.
A few notes for the boss *
Never say, "I know how you feel." *
Never use the phrase "people skills." *
Never underestimate a compliment. *
Can you say "I don't know" without stuttering? *
Don't try to be a buddy.
Buddies can't fire other buddies.
Be a boss.
That's hard enough.
A few notes for the employee *
A promise, not notarized, only sounds promising. *
Don't do it for the compliment. *
It's rarely all about you. *
Quality is not always job No. 1. *
Blood is thicker than coffee. *
Never compare your treatment to someone else's. *
Always have a picture of your kid within eyeshot.
It's time to check those priorities *
When the cleaning woman starts telling you how she really feels *
When you stop caring who wins the Oscars *
When you forget to call about the discounted air fares *
When you're known for your ties *
When no charity has sent you a thank-you note in over six months *
When you've stopped smoking -- and taken up cigars The only people you should blatantly suck up to *
The receptionist *
The U.P.S. guy *
The conductor on the 6:11 A.M. express *
Your garage attendant *
The Toys "R" Us salesman who inventories Mighty Morphin Power Rangers *
Anyone who calls from the I.R.S.
Movie quotes that could come in handy "Badges! We don't need no badges!"  -- The Treasure of  the Sierra Madre "What a stunning apartment! Books are awfully decorative!"
-- Auntie Mame "Sometimes you win. Sometimes you lose. Sometimes it rains."
-- Bull Durham "Do you think I'd be working here if I could afford a real snake?"
-- Blade Runner "You get what you settle for."
-- Thelma and Louise You're fooling yourself if you think *
The old one-button suits in the closet are the same as the new ones in the store *
The old two-button suits in the closet are the same as the new ones in the store *
The old three-button suits in the closet are the same as the new ones in the store *
You have to toss these suits out. (A good tailor can make them just like the new ones in the store.) *
A dark shirt and tie make you look like a gangster. (You wish.) *
Strangers in restaurants will drop their cutlery if you change your hair style *
A new suit won't make much difference *
Home hair dye looks real *
Only women get facials *
Smart folk don't make stupid decisions *
It's not the money, it's the principle *
Another man doesn't clock everything you have on You must remember these *
It's a dog-eat-dog world out there.
And they're short on napkins. *
There are no atheists at an audit. *
The only people with the right to yell at you have the same last name as you. *
Nobody hears anything else you say when you curse. *
"I'm there for you." But with what? *
Can't work with the group?
Work for yourself. *
No one's indispensable, except to your bank account. *
They don't know what they'd do without you, but they'll think of something if they have to. *
How many good sports make the All-Star team? *
The truth hurts, but where? *
Age comes in on little crow's feet. *
It's lonely at the top, but you have so much more space. *
As long as your family loves you, who cares?


Pitcher Died In Robbery Attempt, Police Say
He came to Florida pursuing a fantasy.
Dave Shotkoski, who had been out of baseball for nearly three years, jumped at the chance to be an Atlanta Braves replacement player, taking vacation time from his job as a production supervisor for a Coca-Cola bottling plant near Chicago.
On Friday night, it all turned out wrong when the 30-year-old pitcher was fatally shot in the head in what was apparently a robbery attempt several blocks from the Ramada Inn where the team is staying.


O. Henry With Music
WHATEVER the place of O. Henry's stories in the curriculums of contemporary education, students of generations past will forever associate irony's first meaning with the trick endings of "The Gift of the Magi," "The Cop and the Anthem" or -- your choice.
That William Sydney Porter spent three years doing time for embezzlement in the penitentiary in Columbus, Ohio, may explain his fondness for spinning tall tales of cops and robbers.
It certainly explains "A Retrieved Reformation," which is believed to be a tale taken from real prison life.
The main character, a safecracker, in turn became the inspiration for a Broadway hit, "Alias Jimmy Valentine." And now the story is all gussied up in the guise of an operetta, "Under a Silvery Moon," which is being produced by the Westchester Regional Players, an organization presumably formed for the purpose of putting on the musical.


Jodi Geiger, And Jeff Davis
Jodi Dee Geiger, the daughter of Nathan Geiger of West Orange, N.J., and Susan D. Maynard of Las Vegas, Nev., is to be married this evening to Jeff Alan Davis, the son of Marcia and Theodore Davis of Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
Rabbi Joseph Gelberman is to officiate at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride, 29, is the director of media relations for Comedy Central, the cable television network in New York.
She graduated from the University of Maryland.


In the Region/Westchester; Sales Rising at Big Downtown White Plains Condos
AFTER years of stalled sales, sponsor defaults and other financial difficulties, Westage Towers and Stewart Place, two large high-rise condominium buildings in this city's downtown area, have been attracting renewed sales interest, especially in the last few months, according to brokers.
A third building, the Seasons, the largest of the three major downtown condominiums with 316 apartments, has temporarily taken its available units off the market in the hope that their values will appreciate.
Westage Towers has 254 units and Stewart Place has 182.


Looking for Space Aliens (and Denying Yale)
David Duchovny meets some very strange characters on the job: a flesh-eating beast-woman from New Jersey, a six-foot intestinal worm with a face and a red-lipped, red-nailed, vamping vampire.
"You'd think seeing a Cro-Magnon woman in New Jersey who was 6-foot-1 of pure girth would be the most amazing thing that anybody ever saw," Mr.
Duchovny says dryly.
"But there's always another level of amazement for me to go to."


Corrections
An article yesterday about safety requirements for commuter planes misstated the accident rate for planes with 10 to 30 seats in some copies.
The rate from 1982 to 1992 was .55 per 100,000 departures, not .55 per 10,000 departures.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate
1.
Line-Item Veto: Vote on bill that would give the President the power to veto specific items in spending bills.
Approved 69 to 29, March 23.
1
Connecticut
Dodd (D)
Nay
Lieberman (D)
Yea
New Jersey
Bradley (D)
Yea
Lautenberg (D)
Nay
New York
D'Amato (R)
Yea
Moynihan (D)
Nay
House
1.
Rules: Procedural vote to approve the rules of the debate on the welfare bill.
Approved 217 to 211, March 22.
2.
Substitute: Vote on a Democratic alternative welfare plan that would set time limits on cash assistance but increase Federal welfare spending on child care, education and training.
Defeated 228 to 205, March 23.
3.
Welfare: Vote on bill that would cut Federal spending on social welfare programs over the next five years and give state officials more control over Federal money for welfare programs.
Approved 234 to 199, March 24.
1
2
3
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
2. Gejdenson (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
3. DeLauro (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
4. Shays (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
5. Franks (R)
Yea
Nay
Yea
6. Johnson (R)
Yea
Nay
Yea
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D)
Nay
Yea
Yea
2. LoBiondo (R)
Yea
Nay
Yea
3. Saxton (R)
Yea
Nay
Yea
4. Smith (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
5. Roukema (R)
Yea
Nay
Yea
6. Pallone (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
7. Franks (R)
Yea
Nay
Yea
8. Martini (R)
Yea
Nay
Yea
9. Torricelli (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
10. Payne (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
11. Frelinghuysen (R)
Yea
Nay
Yea
12. Zimmer (R)
Yea
Nay
Yea
13. Menendez (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
New York
1. Forbes (R)
Yea
Nay
Yea
2. Lazio (R)
Yea
Nay
Yea
3. King (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
4. Frisa (R)
Yea
Nay
Yea
5. Ackerman (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
6. Flake (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
7. Manton (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
8. Nadler (D)
A
Yea
Nay
9. Schumer (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
10. Towns (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
11. Owens (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
12. Velazquez (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
13. Molinari (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
14. Maloney (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
15. Rangel (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
16. Serrano (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
17. Engel (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
18. Lowey (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
19. Kelley (R)
Yea
Nay
Yea
20. Gilman (R)
Yea
Nay
Yea
21. McNulty (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
22. Solomon (R)
Yea
Nay
Yea
23. Boehlert (R)
Yea
Nay
Yea
24. McHugh (R)
Yea
Nay
Yea
25. Walsh (R)
Yea
Nay
Yea
26. Hinchey (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
27. Paxon (R)
Yea
Nay
Yea
28. Slaughter (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
29. LaFalce (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
30. Quinn (R)
Yea
Nay
Yea
31. Houghton (R)
Yea
Nay
Yea
KEY: (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Jay Schmalholz and Emily Schindel
Emily Sarah Schindel, a daughter of Dorothy and Stephen Schindel of New York, was married last evening to Jay Stuart Schmalholz, a son of June Whittaker of Westport, Conn.
Rabbi Howard Adam Stecker performed the ceremony at the Puck Building in New York.
Mrs.
Schmalholz, 26, and her husband, 27, work for music-video networks in New York.
She is an associate producer at the VH1 cable network, and he is a producer of sports segments for MTV. ated from Emerson College.
The bridegroom is a graduate of Clark University.


North Carolina Wins Fight, Game And Final Four Spot From Kentucky
It did not take long for North Carolina-Kentucky to turn into a bare-knuckles, big-time brawl.
Less than four minutes into the game, punches were thrown and a neck was grabbed as the two teams skirmished for a Final Four berth.
Only one team was left standing, though.
North Carolina.


Browns Trade Metcalf For First-Round Choice
The Atlanta Falcons acquired ERIC METCALF, the two-time Pro Bowl running back and return specialist, from the Cleveland Browns yesterday.
The deal calls for a swap of the two teams' first-round draft choices, with the Browns getting Atlanta's 10th overall choice and the Falcons acquiring Cleveland's 26th position.
No other players were involved.


The World; In the Balkans, Doing Well by Waging War
IN May 1992, while being held with other Muslims in a Serbian prison camp in Hadzici near Sarajevo, Ekrem Sorguc witnessed a scene that stuck in his mind.
A Serbian guard was trying to pry a gold wedding ring off a prisoner's finger.
The ring would not budge.
So the Serb sliced the Muslim's finger off.
This was brutality, of course, of the banal and bestial kind then being meted out at Serbian concentration camps throughout Bosnia.
But it was also theft.
As well as being hubs for the detention, dispersion and destruction of Bosnia's Muslim population, the Serbian camps were also vast centers for organized larceny.
What a slumping Yugoslav economy had been unable to provide for the previous decade, captive Muslims could provide in the form of German marks, jewelry and abandoned homes.


UNCLE BOB
We are shocked to find ourselves admiring a Republican, but after reading Ruth Shalit's "Uncle Bob," Senator Robert Dole's view of America and our Government actually seems . . . well, realistic (March 5).


Diane K. Barrack, Leor J. Lindner
Diane Karen Barrack, a daughter of Herbert and Donna Barrack of Matawan, N.J., is to be married today to Dr.
Leor Joseph Lindner, a son of Henry and Mina Lindner of Lakewood, N.J.
Rabbi Mark S. Cooper is to perform the ceremony at the Grand Marquis, a catering establishment in Old Bridge, N.J.
The bride, 29, is a computer systems consultant with the Prudential Insurance and Financial Services Company in Holmdel, N.J.
She graduated magna cum laude from Montclair State University.
Her father is the assistant regional administrator for policy and management at the Region 2 office of the Environmental Protection Agency in New York.
Her mother retired as a teaching assistant in the special education department of the Lloyd Road School in Matawan.


INNUMERACY2
Max Frankel's article on the media sloppiness was very interesting, but misquoted and misinterpreted numbers are just part of the problem.
These, combined with the growing tendency to use hazy words like some, experts, may, often, could, and probably, have led to the "trend" article, which has become the refuge of every reporter seeking to achieve fame without accountability.
As example: "Some experts believe X may cause Y, which often leads to dysfunctional consequence Z. Could this be true? Others say it probably is. And since X has increased 100 percent in the past year, watch out."
This is tenuous stuff.
It's verifiable and eye-catching, yet unprovable and perhaps even fraudulent in its layering of statistics on opinion on supposition.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
GRAMERCY Penguins in Sunglasses And Other Goofy Extremes
The faculty at the School of Visual Arts asked students of the cartooning and illustration department to imagine environmental mayhem so severe that animals were forced to adapt to absurd surroundings.
The results, featuring 63 imaginary sights (like a penguin in sunglasses on an Antarctic beach), are on display this week in the exhibit "Out of Context" at the Art Directors Club.


Oven Does the Trick for Impromptu Dining
OFTEN on weekends I find myself putting together an impromptu lunch or dinner for which the food is bought at the last minute.
As a result, I have to keep it simple.
One solution is to cook as much as possible in the oven.
The other day I came across an interesting recipe by the celebrated French chef Joel Robuchon: just the sort of thing I had in mind -- a pork loin roasted with fresh sage leaves over several different kinds of vegetables.
It sounded delicious, but the recipe had an enormous amount of fat in it.


Three Pictures In the Boardroom


THE TRASHING OF PROFESSIONALISM
The article, "The Trashing of Professionalism" by Louis Menand (March 5), raised something for every thoughtful person to wonder about.
My Webster's New World Dictionary defines "elitism" as a "group or part of a group regarded as the finest and the best." Such persons must have an outstanding talent for a given kind of work that most people don't have.
What is bad about that?
Some doctors are better than others.
It goes the same for plumbers, carpenters, athletes, etc.
A high talent does better than a low talent.
Yet in today's world, being branded as belonging to the elite class, way above the ability of most people, is to be looked upon with contempt.


Getting Over the Andes And Traveler's Guilt
I WAS strolling with my husband in Cuzco, Peru, when somebody shouted hello.
It was Ellen, a chirpy Dutch backpacker we'd met on the plane to Lima and run into twice since.
Even before she opened her mouth, I felt a twinge of guilt.
Ellen was the kind of carefree vagabond who ate local specialties like cuy (roast guinea pig) off a cart on the street and never worried whether the ice was safe.
I felt as if I was being pursued by my traveler's conscience.
"I'm so excited," she exclaimed. "I'm off to hike the Inca Trail."


Anglers and Good Weather Poised for Trout Season
At least three times before mid-March this year, earthworm mounds appeared on my lawn, which augurs well for benign weather on the opening of the trout season Saturday in New York State.
I used to rely on the early March arrivals of the first robins for such soothsaying, but then learned that considerable numbers of them annually decline the migration gambit, skulk all winter in swamps and emerge from time to time on balmy late winter days to confuse anticipatory anglers.


A Landscape Artist Who Left His Mark
THE BRONX?
Riverdale?
The subject of the current show in the Glyndor Gallery at Wave Hill here is Samuel Parsons Jr. (1844-1923), a third-generation horticulturalist-turned-landscape architect who served New York City's Department of Parks for 30 years.
It seems appropriate to begin this review by taking a cue from the show's curator, Charles Birnbaum, coordinator of the National Park Service's Historic Landscape Initiative and himself a landscape architect.
In his preface to "The Art of Landscape Architecture" by Parsons, which is to be reissued shortly, Mr.
Birnbaum introduces the designer's father, Samuel Baum Parsons, as a nurseryman for whom horticulture was an art on a par with painting and sculpture.
The elder Mr.
Parsons was the first to import Japanese maples into the country; he was also the first to propagate rhododendrons, which may explain his son's evident fondness for the shrub.


Chechens in a Fallen Capital: Dazed Amid the Devastation
At the war-blasted Grozny airport, now a busy Russian military base, there is a marble plaque on the wall, dedicating the construction of the airport 10 years ago to the 40th anniversary of the Soviet victory over Nazism.
Underneath, a Russian soldier has scrawled: "For the 50th, we destroyed it."
Grozny, the capital of secessionist Chechnya, was taken by the Russian Army two months ago after horrific bombardment and house-to-house street fighting.


Angels Release Randle
The former major league infielder LENNY RANDLE, trying to make a comeback as a replacement player at 46, was released yesterday by the California Angels at their spring training camp in Tempe, Ariz., despite a .333 average.
"Lenny was probably more of a d.h. than anything else," Angels Manager MARCEL LACHEMANN said.
"His defensive skills and speed are not what they were because of age."


Vanguard Fund Takes Aim At a Florida Tax Loophole
FLORIDA residents don't have to pay state income tax, but they do have to pay tax on stocks, bonds and most other investments.
Although relatively low, the tax can add up for wealthy people.
Many Florida residents stumbled on a nifty way to escape the tax in recent years, but they attracted so much attention that their efforts may be thwarted next year.
Oddly enough, the wet blanket is not the Government, but a mutual fund company trying to hold down its costs.


Corrections
A chart last Sunday with an article about a needle exchange program on the Lower East Side misstated the number of clients who regularly use the city's five needle exchanges.
There are 26,000 to 27,000, not 2,600 to 2,700.


Wrapped Up in Art
The first book jackets, devised in the 1830's to protect bindings from London's soot and fog, were made of thin kraft paper and covered all sides of the volume.
Traditionally book designers have believed that fine bindings were a book's ultimate esthetic virtue and the jacket was mere wrapping and advertising.
As late as the 1950's, the American Institute of Graphic Arts refused to exhibit jackets at its annual book show.
However, as Steven Heller, the art director of The New York Times Book Review, and Seymour Chwast, the director of the Pushpin Group, a graphic design company, show in JACKETS REQUIRED (Chronicle, paper, $19.95), "book jackets emerged as one of America's more vital graphic media and became a proving ground for eccentric design." Many of the jackets depicted in the book are creased and torn and look as if they have been moldering on shelves for decades.
It is fascinating, and often surprising, to see the original jackets for contemporary favorites like "A Farewell to Arms" or "Of Mice and Men" or "Appointment in Samarra," but the real standouts are more obscure items like A. H. Bolton's orange and blue design for Maximilian Foster's "Crooked" (1927), whose "art moderne-inspired perspective of skyscrapers evokes the big-city life that comes shattering down on the novel's protagonist." It turns out that you can tell a book by its cover, as Mr.
Heller and Mr.
Chwast demonstrate with Eugene Thurston's jackets for the Mystery League and Alvin Lustig's for New Directions, with a stately, eerily lighted "Paul Bunyan" by Rockwell Kent and with such forgotten classics of shading and perspective as the jacket for "Hacking New York" (1930), in which "the quintessential moderne cityscape sets the stage for the tale of a literary cabdriver." DAVID WALTON


All About The Irish, Mensa, Peddlers, Alarms; Market-Minded Landlords Invented the 'East Village'
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 1 F.Y.I. column solicits clues as to the origin of the term East Village.
The term was definitely the creation of landlords trying to market hitherto unrentable apartments in the Alphabet City area.


Sports of The Times; Husky Fans Celebrate, Then Suffer
THE tiny sect of fans used to resort to kidnapping just to get people to watch basketball at the University of Connecticut.
Now people volunteer to witness these events.
Yesterday had the potential of being the most glorious day yet for the state of Connecticut.
Shortly after high noon, the undefeated and top-ranked Connecticut women held off Virginia, 67-63, to qualify for the Final Four in Minneapolis next weekend.


Child Welfare System, Under Fire, Staggers On; Catholic Bishops Err
To the Editor:
Re "Catholic Bishops Challenge Pieces of Welfare Bill" (front page, March 19): the bishops challenge some fundamental points in the Republican personal responsibility bill.
Unfortunately, the bishops seem to be bowing to the pressures of a well-meaning segment of the Roman Catholic Church that still embraces failed socialistic ideas of welfare.


Not All Colleges Bemoaning Albany Cuts
AT most private and public colleges in New York, the talk among administrators is mainly about cuts in state aid.
To compensate for the proposed cuts, tuition at Iona College in New Rochelle could go up 6 percent next year and at Purchase College as much as 60 percent.
Many colleges and universities are considering dropping courses, and some fear they might have to close.
But in the president's office at Mercy College, Jay Sexter is eschewing budget concerns for Far Eastern philosophy, and the only cutback he cares about is a recently announced reduction in tuition at the 40-acre campus fronting the Hudson River here.
Moreover, enrollment is increasing, and the number of courses is growing.


Louis Armstrong to Remain a Magnet School
In a decision announced Friday, a judge in Queens has ruled against the Parents Association at an overcrowded intermediate school in Jackson Heights that had filed suit to have a nearby magnet school, run by the central Board of Education, placed under the local district's control.
I.S. 145, at 80th Street near Northern Boulevard, has an enrollment of 1,898 students and is operating at 139 percent of capacity.
Thirteen blocks away stands the Louis Armstrong Intermediate School with 1,319 students, about 88 percent of capacity.


Old Elihu's Gift to Yale Also Had Strings
To the Editor:
Re "Yale and Mr. Bass's $20 Million Gift" (editorial, March 18):
The story of pressure brought to bear on Yale University to fulfill the objectives of donors is not new to Yale's history.
The man for whom the university is named, Elihu Yale, drew upon the hugh fortune he accrued as a former servant of the East India Company and colonial governor of Madras to make a substantial donation to the fledgling Connecticut college in 1718.
His goal: to turn Yale College from Puritanism to Church of England doctrine.


Talk About Pain and Suffering; Court Street's Personal-Injury Lawyers See a Grim Future
The lawyers' clients approach the Brooklyn office buildings on canes and crutches, wearing neck braces or arm splints.
They bring their X-rays, their medical files, their tales of pain and suffering.
They are the damaged and the aggrieved, and they are going where thousands before them have gone to look for compensation: Court Street.
There, between Montague and Livingston Streets, they mix with the other lawyers' clients, the accused thieves and felons.
And together, the would-be plaintiffs and the criminal defendants enter the worn world of Court Street's personal injury and criminal defense bar, an iconoclastic, hard-working, long-stereotyped collection of lawyers.


Pondering the Benefits Of Rail Electrification
The article ("Beware the Highway-Motor Complex," Feb. 19) about Stephen Goddard and the rail transportation system in Connecticut, while timely, neglected to make mention of the ever worsening traffic and pollution problems in Fairfield and New Haven counties.
The electrification of the Amtrak line from New Haven to Boston with resulting three-hour travel between New York and Boston should provide several benefits.
It will help reduce passenger vehicle traffic on Interstate 95.
That in turn will help reduce the pollution problem.
Third, increased rail travel should delay the hugely expensive expansion of airports as overall travel between New York and Boston inevitably grows.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
UNCHAINED MEMORIES: True Stories of Traumatic Memories, Lost and Found By Lenore Terr.
Basic Books, $13.
A child psychiatrist explains the process of remembering and how certain painful events, such as sexual abuse, may not be recalled until many years after their occurrence.
At the same time, she acknowledges that some recollections may be false, consisting of fantasies brought on by suggestion.
The result is "a balanced and valuable work," Walter Reich said here last year.


All About The Irish, Mensa, Peddlers, Alarms; They Call the Parade Irish, But It's Really All-American
To the Editor:
Janet Grady Sullivan, the author of the Soapbox essay of March 12, "The Wearing Down of the Green," is misinformed.
The store manager who told her she has no sense of humor was right.
What a downer!


Soil's the Key, and the Time to Test Is Now
Everything smells good at this time of year.
The air has bouyancy, grasses are greening, buds are swelling, crocus are perfuming the air.
These signs indicate that life underground is going strong.
The earth is pungent and even the birds are singing a new song.
While all this sort of rhapsodic feeling is fine to express, it should also remind gardeners that it is time to know their soils.
Soil test time is here.
And the sooner the task is completed, the better, for the pressure is on at the laboratories that do the testing.


Grass Roots, Not So Green, Branch Out
For 17 years, the Umma Group Inc. has been known in central Brooklyn as a civilian patrol.
But today it has grown beyond its modest asphalt roots to become one of the borough's major power brokers.
Umma -- the name is derived from the Arabic word for community -- began as an informal group of eight Muslim families who would pray together and then discuss the problems of their North Flatbush community.
Those discussions led to the formation of a civilian patrol that, at its inception, was "well-intentioned but very green," said Ed Powell, who founded the group along with James Burns.
As the patrol grew, so did its visibility and its reputation as a group able to effect change.
As a result, residents and community groups in Midwood and North Flatbush now rely on Umma for services ranging from ousting drug dealers from apartment buildings to helping landlords collect rent from delinquent tenants to running a day care center.
Umma seems to reach into every corner of central Brooklyn -- it trains civilian and tenant patrols, administers a playground on behalf of the Parks Department (which named the playground Umma Park after the group rid it of suspected drug dealers) and sponsors youth leadership and recreation programs.
Mr.
Powell himself is directly involved in several political or civic groups and is second vice chairman of Community Board 14.
Mr.
Powell's political experience has paid off.
Umma can call on, and get results from, such sources as the local police precinct commander and political representatives up to former Lieut.
Gov.
Stan Lundine, who donated $3,000 in equipment.
In return, these sources gain a liaison with Umma's constituency, much of which has been historically distrustful of government and police.
"Their credibility is very strong," said Inspector Patrick D. Brennan, commander of the 70th Precinct.
Mr.
Powell and Mr.
Burns concede that cooperation with government and police officials has cost them support among those who preferred the group's initial militant posture, when they patrolled the streets in military fatigues.
But Mr.
Powell contended that critics -- like those who denounced the group for trying to mediate a peaceful end to a well-publicized boycott against a Korean grocery store owner in late 1991 -- are "not really from the area."
Within the area, residents heap praise on Umma.
"They're doing the job most of our political people and the police should do," said Billy Huston, president of the Committee for a Better and Safer Nostrand Avenue, a civilian patrol in Midwood.
"Ed and Jim probably have been more responsible for keeping Flatbush together than anyone I know," said Larry Jayson, associate director of the Brooklyn Tenants Council.
But with success have come potential pitfalls.
As even its proponents are quick to admit, mounting expectations could force the organization either to cut back to preserve its effectiveness -- potentially alienating already disgruntled citizens -- or to concentrate more of its efforts on building a more structured organization.
That, they fear, could destroy the activist, grass-roots spirit that has been at the heart of Umma's strength.
Michael Clark, executive director of the Citizens Committee for New York City, a nonprofit organization that assists and trains neighborhood groups, predicted that organizations like Umma will be called on to do more as the city trims back social services.
Even though they know they may not have the resources to take on these responsibilities, Umma and other community groups often find it difficult to say no, said Mr.
Clark.
Indeed, Mr.
Powell and Mr.
Burns relish their roles as guardians of the street.
Even though they have discontinued regularly scheduled patrols, they still carry walkie-talkies in order to respond on a moment's notice to a call from one of the many patrols their organization has assisted -- although these days, calls for help tend to be less urgent. .
"It could just be one of the seniors needs someone to go to the store," Mr.
Powell said.
TONY MARCANO NAME James Burns BORN May 8, 1940, in Keystone, W. Va.
EDUCATION Graduate of Alexander Hamilton High School, Crown Heights, Brooklyn FAMILY Married, father of 11 daughters and 2 sons OCCUPATION Consultant COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES co-founder of The Umma Group, Inc.; vice-president of "Respect Flatbush"; member, Congress of Racial Equality; executive board member, 42d Assembly District Independent Democratic Club.
ON UMMA "We're not a security patrol anymore. We see ourselves as a service provider."  NAME Ed Powell BORN Sept. 23, 1940, in Memphis, Tenn.


The World; Call It Aid or a Bribe, It's the Price of Peace
AT the height of the cold war, Hans Morgenthau, the political theorist and champion of Realpolitik, identified the three tools of the statesman as logic, bribes and threats.
Those may have been the power tools of his time, but no more.
And the consequences are enormous.
The United States has been left with immense power, but it doesn't quite know how to use it.
Again and again, it seems unable to focus its authority and lead others toward a solution for the problems of the day.


Corrections
An obituary headline last Sunday about Harry Specht, dean of the School of Social Welfare at the University of California at Berkeley, misstated his profession.
He was a social worker, not a sociologist.


Reasonable Prices, Dining Under Siege
THE young hostess at Marchello's Garden Grill in Smithtown was under siege.
Her smile disappeared, and she clapped a hand to her head as a sea of irritated customers surged around her.
She had just told one group that the wait for a table would be 30 minutes.
Her explanation that reservations meant just that names were put on a waiting list satisfied no one and generated even more grumbling.
On that harried Saturday night we spent 45 minutes pinned against a wall in a crowded bar, despite having a reservation.
We shifted from foot to foot and dodged busboys and waitresses who snaked precariously through the crowd with loaded trays held aloft.
Fellow sufferers complained of waits of more than an hour.


A Lending Program to Help Break a Co-op Logjam
TWO co-op apartments were sold this year for all cash in the Art Deco building at 200 Pinehurst Avenue, in the pleasantly leafy Fort Washington section of Washington Heights.
But the seller is shy about disclosing the price.
"Those were distress sales," said Elizabeth A. Hurley, president of Platinum Properties of New York Ltd., a broker who handles both sales and management for the sponsor who converted the 111-unit building from a rental six years ago.
They were made at unusually low prices, Ms.
Hurley said, only to lift total sales for owner-occupancy to the crucial level of 40 percent.


Wildlife Refuge on the City's Edge Beckons With First Blush of Spring
There is a wilderness in New York City -- Gateway National Recreation Area -- and as spring takes hold, its dunes and marshes and upland forest bristle with new life.
A harrier hawk lifts off from Jamaica Bay without a flutter, merely by spreading its wings to the wind.
Tangles of Virginia creeper curl around sumac bushes, their berry pods dangling like Christmas ornaments.
Tufts of green poke through still straw-gold stretches of marsh grass.
The towers of the World Trade Center loom in the distance.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
CRAFTS TALK
Four Connecticut artisans will take part in a panel discussion today at 2 P.M. at the Silvermine Guild Art Center in New Canaan, where Craft America, the guild's first national craft competition and exhibition is on view through April 23.
Helen Frost Way, fiber artist and chairwoman of the show, will moderate "Masters of Their Craft," as the session is called.
Members of the panel will include Elizabeth MacDonald, who works in clay; Peter Petrochko, a woodworker; Judith Kaufman, a jeweler, and Irene Reed, a fiber artist.


O. Henry With Music
WHATEVER the place of O. Henry's stories in the curriculums of contemporary education, students of generations past will forever associate irony's first meaning with the trick endings of "The Gift of the Magi," "The Cop and the Anthem" or -- your choice.
That William Sydney Porter spent three years doing time for embezzlement in the penitentiary in Columbus, Ohio, may explain his fondness for spinning tall tales of cops and robbers.
It certainly explains "A Retrieved Reformation," which is believed to be a tale taken from real prison life.
The main character, a safecracker, in turn became the inspiration for a Broadway hit, "Alias Jimmy Valentine." And now the story is all gussied up in the guise of an operetta, "Under a Silvery Moon," which is being produced by the Westchester Regional Players, an organization presumably formed for the purpose of putting on the musical.


Susan Levine, Jonathan Resnick
Susan Joan Levine, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William W. Levine of Aventura, Fla., was married last evening to Jonathan David Resnick, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Burton P. Resnick of Rye, N.Y.
Rabbi Norton Shargel performed the ceremony at the Plaza in New York.
Mrs.
Resnick, 26, is a diamond broker at the Rapaport Diamond Corporation in New York.
She graduated from Hunter College.
Her father, who is retired, was a certified public accountant.


Dead Sure
IN A LABORATORY IN Zurich, a creature that lived some 50 million years ago and was the unlikely ancestor of both the hippo and the camel has been restored to life.
Well, a kind of life anyway.
Religions aside, there are two principal recipes for resurrection.
Both are lurching toward the brink of possibility, thanks to recent enhancements in the power tools of molecular biology.


Keeping Up With the Past
Travelers who don't want to wait to see ancient treasures go on display in museums can beat their friends to the latest discoveries with the current issue of Archaeology magazine.
In its March-April issue, the magazine lists excavations in France, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Algeria, Tunisia, Morocco and Malta that allow visitors to watch the exploration.
The May-June issue will focus on New World sites, primarily in Mexico.


Ghost Towns With Spirit
OF the six ghost towns I visited in southern New Mexico last summer not one fit the dictionary definition of the term -- a town permanently abandoned by its inhabitants.
Whether quiet bedroom communities, well-preserved historical sites or base camps for wilderness exploration, all have at least a handful of residents.
If they are ghost towns it is in the sense that they exist for, with or because of their ghosts -- prospectors and soldiers, ranchers and politicians, outlaws and entrepreneurs, the Indians, the Spaniards, the Mexicans, the Chinese -- whose stories continue to haunt the structures and artifacts they left behind.
While only a serious student of Billy the Kid or mining history would consider these towns destinations in themselves, they're fascinating excursions off roads that can otherwise seem long, dry and extremely hot.
Below, my three favorites.
Pinos Altos
"People like you are finding gold nuggets worth $400 an ounce and up," reads a sign outside the 1866 log-cabin schoolhouse that now houses the Pinos Altos Museum.
"For only seven dollars and ninety eight cents, The Garrett County Trap Gold Company will take you a-pannin' just like in the days of Billy the Kid."


Argentine Arms Sold to Ecuador During War With Peru
About 75 tons of arms from Argentina, which is a mediator in the border dispute between Ecuador and Peru, were illegally sold to Ecuador during its brief war with Peru over the region last month.
Argentina is prohibited from selling arms to Peru or Ecuador because it is one of four guarantors of a 1942 treaty that was intended to resolve border disputes between the two countries.


March 19-25: 'Lazy Fools,' Says Byrd; Champions of Cutting Spending Gladly Hand The Ax to the President
More than a century ago, to the shock and dismay of many of his colleagues, Representative Charles Faulkner of West Virginia introduced the first legislation to make the President and not Congress the keeper of the Federal purse.
Last week, after a string of more than 200 failures extending back to Mr.
Faulkner's in 1876, Congress -- to the shock and dismay of another West Virginian, Senator Robert C. Byrd -- agreed to cede that political privilege to the executive branch in the form of a line-item veto.


'Say My Name and You Say Sex'
ART &amp; LIES A Piece for Three Voices and a Bawd.
By Jeanette Winterson. 294 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $22.


In Search Of Early Americans
ALL over the American Southwest, piles of stone, fragments of pottery, rock carvings, bits of turquoise and squash rinds offer clues about life as the Anasazi lived it 700 to 900 years ago on the mesas and in the canyons.
From what they left behind and from the configurations of their tiny stone cities, we have guessed that the people were tiny, that they ate corn and sheep, that life was communal, egalitarian and precarious.
Keet Seel and Betatakin, ruins of two villages built into the cliffs of Navajo National Monument Park in northern Arizona, are among the most remote and best preserved of the Anasazi ruins.
Though the stonework lacks the precision of the walls at Chaco Canyon, in New Mexico, and the kivas (ceremonial rooms) and rock art are less elaborate, the settings -- giant alcoves in sandstone cliffs inaccessible by road -- are spectacular.
Because of the shelter of the alcoves and the difficulty of getting there, much of both villages, even the stick-and-mud roofs, is intact, and potsherds, arrowheads, corncobs and sheep vertebrae can still be found on the ground.


INSIDE
Guatemalan and the C.I.A.
A Guatemalan colonel's story has exposed the C.I.A.'s longstanding ties with high-ranking officers of a military often accused of making war on its own people.
Page 6.
Deadline?
What Deadline?
A week before Governor Pataki's budget deadline, the pressure on legislators is only modest.
Page 37.
Returning to Chain Gangs
Alabama is planning to bring back that long-gone image of prison life, the chain gang.
Page 9.


March 19-25; The Hard Drives of the Driven
IT is the perfect maxim for the '90's: you are what you input.
It is also the operating principle behind Apple Computer's advertisements for the Powerbook, the laptop computer that, like all laptops, seems to store the world on its chip.


Correction
A report and a picture caption in the Postings column on Jan. 22 about plans to attach markers to buildings of cultural significance in New York City referred imprecisely to the site at which a marker is to be affixed honoring George and Ira Gershwin.
It is 33 Riverside Drive, where they lived when they wrote "Girl Crazy" and "Of Thee I Sing," not 316 West 103d Street, where they had lived earlier.
A reader challenged the Jan. 22 version soon after it appeared, and this correction was delayed by an editorial lapse.


Foreign Affairs; Only 88 More to Go
So I've been thinking about this yen problem and I've got an idea.
The dollar keeps falling against the Japanese yen, right?
It started at 360 yen to the dollar after World War II and now it's down to 88 yen to the dollar.
And each time the dollar falls we say, surely it can't go any further.
But it does.
So let's take the suspense out of this.
I say we let the dollar go to zero right now.
That's right.
Let's make $1 be worth no yen.
Think about it.
It will solve all our problems.
We won't be able to buy anything from Japan, so our $60 billion trade deficit with Tokyo will disappear.
Without that deficit, the dollar will again strengthen and be the darling of international markets.
So forget this blather from the Treasury about how we don't want the dollar to weaken further against the yen.
Our battle cry should be: "Only 88 Yen To Go Before Zero."


Miss Teen-Ager As Queen of Smarts
Make no mistake, Heather Hegedus is a pretty girl.
In a world of untucked flannel shirts, dirty Converse sneakers and bored expressions, she stands out in the halls of a tiny high school north of Boston in her color-coordinated outfits and smart shoes.
Her legs are covered in nude hose, her smile tinted with pink gloss.


Parisian Color Blackout
The gathering of the fashion world in Paris last week for the fall collections looked like a convention of crows -- store buyers, reporters, photographers, private clients and hangers-on slipcovered themselves in black.
A coat-check line looked like blackbirds on a picket fence.
A woman in a Mariot Chanet cape of padded velvet brought to mind an inky Aubrey Beardsley drawing.
Even the tourists at the Eiffel Tower wore black.
The newest look combined Commes des Garcons' matching jacket, skirt or dress, and trousers (left and bottom right).
For most, the idea was to mix textures, like a leather coat and a cashmere tunic over satin slim trousers (right).
The fashion world's uniform was Prada's all-weather coat in shiny black nylon (middle right) that puts a gloss on the silhouette.


No Headline
"My waiting rooms don't have French Provincial furniture. They have strollers and crying babies eating crackers. We speak for these people, and what the legislators in Washington have said is that they don't want to hear from us or these people anymore." JOHN ANTHONY BONINA, a lawyer on Court Street in downtown Brooklyn.  [ 42:4. ]


Coming Soon: Swatch Watch, the Sequel
SWATCH COLLECTORS, TAKE note: The frenzy is back.
The boldly graphic watches that were hot collectibles in the late 80's are attracting crowds again.
And now the draw is several new lines of watches: one by hip-hop artists, another by famous film directors and a third to mark next year's Olympics in Atlanta.
There's even a new museum.
The Swiss watch maker SMH International introduced the Swatch quartz watch in 1983.
The watches took off when the designs, taken from motifs in art, food and fashion, made them irresistible to the public and collectors alike.
By the end of the decade, 80 million Swatches had been sold around the world.
But with recession in the early 90's, they had slipped out of the spotlight.


CLINTON OBJECTS TO KEY ELEMENTS OF WELFARE BILL
President Clinton today denounced major elements of the welfare bill approved on Friday by the House of Representatives, and Speaker Newt Gingrich acknowledged that he would have to negotiate with Mr.
Clinton on the legislation.
Indeed, the bill, which would make the most profound changes in welfare programs since the New Deal, faces serious obstacles in the Senate.
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York, the ranking Democrat on the Finance Committee, denounced the bill as "a Draconian measure" and in an interview today said he was appalled by some of it.


California Acting on Affirmative Action
While the rest of the country mostly talks of doing something about affirmative action programs, opponents and proponents of such plans in California are moving rapidly to action.
Legislative bills have been drawn.
Petitions are being readied.
Fund-raising appeals have been mailed.
Political consultants are being hired.
Television advertisements are being filmed.
Grass-roots coalitions are forming and holding rallies.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
The hero of James Thayer's absorbing new novel, WHITE STAR (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22), is a former Marine sniper named Owen Gray.
Gray was America's best shot in Vietnam.
Now he is an assistant district attorney in New York.
He is divorced and lives with three adopted children, twin Korean girls and a Vietnamese boy.
He loses a big case against a gangster.
Immediately after the trial, the gangster, with Gray standing near him, is talking to the press when he is killed by a sniper's bullet.
The police ask Gray to help in the investigation.
He is able to pinpoint the room that the sniper used.
But there are no other clues.


More From Mars
Guests at a New Hampshire inn who hear something about Martians invading New Jersey shouldn't take the radio bulletin as seriously as many people did in 1939.
It's just a replay of Orson Welles's original broadcast of "War of the Worlds" that can be heard at the Inn at Maplewood Farm in Hillsborough, a half-hour west of Concord.
The inn's owners are entertaining guests with rebroadcasts of the voices of Fred Allen, "The Shadow" and "Fibber McGee and Molly" on the innkeepers' vintage radios.
The broadcasts use a low-power transmitter whose signal can be picked up only at the inn (thus no chance of panic in New Jersey).


Corrections
An article last Sunday about opposition to a plan to open a Union Square branch of House of Blues, the national restaurant-nightclub chain, misidentified the artist who has been criticized for recording the "Cop Killer" album.
It is Ice-T, not Public Enemy.


UMass's Backcourt Gets Even Thinner
The Massachusetts backcourt has taken its share of hits during the national collegiate tournament, mostly from skeptics, who consider it the soft spot in an otherwise solid team.
But the latest blow is not verbal, but physical, and the ramifications could affect UMass's chances of reaching the Final Four in Seattle.
The starting guard Edgar Padilla will not be available for today's East Regional final when second-seeded Massachusetts (29-4) meets fourth-seeded Oklahoma State (26-9) at 2:40 P.M. in Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The sophomore guard will be sidelined by a sprained left foot suffered in Friday's semifinal victory over Tulsa.
The absence of Padilla, who averaged 7.1 points in 21 minutes per game, is a critical loss for UMass, already without its best guard, Mike Williams, who was suspended in mid-February for breaking team rules.
With Padilla out, the starting point guard Derek Kellogg will play close to 40 minutes.
Carmelo Travieso will start in Padilla's spot, while Dana Dingle will also see time at the off-guard position.


Child Welfare System, Under Fire, Staggers On; Guardians in Court
To the Editor:
"Bad Bargain for Children" (editorial, March 21) makes important points about how the removal of minimal protections will hurt children already harmed by abuse.


A Glorious Fusion of East and West
ORIENTAL and Occidental fuse beautifully at Baang Cafe and Bar, just south of Exit 5 of Interstate 95 in Riverside.
The culinary core is Chinese, with Japanese and Thai touches; the ingredients a mix in which some Western elements shine.
The results are so so fresh, so inventive and full of real flavor that you may never return to the banality of so many Chinese restaurants.
The decor at Baang (which means to tie together in Chinese) jumps and vibrates with colors and an eclecticism that reminded us of Wolfgang Puck's Chinoise on Main in Santa Monica.
David Rockwell, the New York architect responsible for Vong, Monkey Bar and Planet Hollywood, has transformed a tiny roadside spot into a spacious, high-ceilinged explosion of light and color.


Haiti Struggles With Both Criminals and Vigilantes
Only a week before responsibility for maintaining security here is to shift from the United States to the United Nations, the Government is struggling to contain a sudden surge in crime and street violence.
Frustration over the crime wave, which has included slayings of political figures as well as robberies and break-ins, has led to vigilante attacks against suspected lawbreakers.
Since early March, vigilantes have lynched more than a score of suspected criminals and would have killed several others if foreign troops had not intervened.


Vealpolitik
Lobster, Dover sole and veal, once the triumvirate of elegant dining, fell on hard times, politically and socially, in the early 1980's.
Dover sole was a casualty of nativism.
Its large meaty flake and delicate flavor (enhanced with a drizzle of mustard sauce) all but vanished for a time from fancy tables as foreign fish competed with local varieties.


Clinton Gives Warning
With just eight days left before the scheduled start of replacement baseball, PRESIDENT CLINTON said yesterday he still hoped for a settlement that could bring back the striking major leaguers.
Clinton said he thought replacement players would stain the game and predicted Little League teams would attract more interest than replacements.
He said that if there isn't a settlement soon, interest in baseball could drop to the level of soccer.


To the Builder of a Megamall, Art and History Sell
THE horse family, called "Horses at Play" and poised to frolic in the unfinished fountain, was dusty.
So were the eight-foot bronze "Knot" outside the entrance to Neiman Marcus and the life-size bronze figures of children on a bench in the pedestrian walkway.
But on this sunny morning in early March before the official opening of The Westchester, no amount of dust could trouble Jeremiah W. O'Connor Jr., chairman of the O'Connor Group, developers of the new 12-acre megamall here.
The $250 million mall was on time and on budget, 95 percent leased and expected to boost the treasuries of the city, county and state, not to mention the company itself.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
2-COUNTY ART EXHIBIT
Eighty-three prestigious works of art have been selected from 32 private collectors in Westchester and Fairfield Counties to make up the exhibition opening today at the Neuberger Museum of Art at Purchase College.
"Crossing State Lines," 20th-century art from the contiguous areas, will remain on view through June 18.
The roster of artists reads like a Who's Who in contemporary painting, photography, ceramics, sculpture and other mediums: a mobile by Alexander Calder, an assemblage by Romare Bearden, sculptures by Alberto Giacometti and George Segal, paintings by Fernand Leger and Helen Frankenthaler, glass sculpture by Dale Chihuly and one of Red Grooms's caricaturesque paintings.


'The English -- Are They Human?'
To the Editor:
In the course of reviewing William Gass's novel "The Tunnel" (Feb. 26), Robert Kelly has occasion to mention "the Vorticist novelist and painter Wyndham Lewis" and quite rightly rejects any notion that Lewis "really doubted that the Jews were human."


Know When to Prune, When to Wait
Finish pruning deciduous trees and shrubs before new growth begins.
Hold off on pruning spring-blooming shrubs until after they have bloomed.
Take down soil hilled up around the roses, and prune the roses severely to encourage sturdy new growth.
Plant new deciduous trees and shrubs as soon as ground is workable.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
CRAFTS CONFERENCE
"Crafts -- The Journey," a full-day conference following the craft movement from the 1960's to the present and looking ahead, will be held on Saturday at Montclair State University.
The conference is a continuation of the "Making Connections" conferences previously sponsored by the New Jersey State Council on the Arts, which is lending its support to this event, sponsored by the university and the Peters Valley Craft Center of Layton.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
EDISON  Inventing the Century. By Neil Baldwin. Hyperion, $27.95.


Beware the Portfolio in the Gray Flannel Suit
SOME people compare them to research scientists, others to riverboat gamblers.
But in fact, mutual fund managers are a lot like the judges of a beauty contest, picking the stocks they think are Most Attractive and Most Likely to Succeed.
If an award were given for Miss Popularity, the winner right now would be (the envelope, please) General Electric.
That's the stock that shows up in the most portfolios of general stock funds, according to Morningstar Inc., which found G.E. in almost 30 percent of such funds.


The Top Half
Shirts
The cleaner your choices, the better you look.
But when all else fails, remember that white shirts are the "Cats" of accessories -- they are now and forever.
As for collars, there are four popular types available, but you're foolish to get caught up in this multiple choice.


Traveling Light
To the Editor: I read Robert Eisner's article with a smile.
My friends have come to call me "Queen of the Disposables."


THE TRASHING OF PROFESSIONALISM
Before talk radio became a big-time power broker in the trashing of professionalism, there were opinion polls elevated to headline stature by the pandering media themselves -- as if such polls are ever more than immediately meaningful, and not always even then.
I think too of the serious faces and sound-bite musings of the street people happily caught off guard by a TV crew or rookie reporter for the nightly news or local daily.
We common folk have been willingly flattered into thinking an opinion in itself matters.
Menand's (and Adam Smith's) argument for more and greater professionalization could be used for legalizing, even dignifying, the so-called oldest profession.
Also, for keeping government out of the N.E.A., since politicians have no authority when it comes to judging art.


F.Y.I.
Scoping Out Shoes
Q.
In the 1940's my mother took my brothers and me to a shoe store for special orthopedic shoes on Third Avenue.
I was very young, but I remember they had a huge rectangular box, which we climbed up on.
There was a "viewer" somewhat like binoculars.
We looked down and we could see the bones in our feet.
What was the box called?


Bookshelf
GOING WHERE I'M COMING FROM: Memoirs of American Youth.
Edited by Anne Mazer.
Persea.
Cloth, $15.95.
Paper, $6.95. (Ages 12 and up) Here is an excellent selection of autobiographical sketches by 14 writers whose families came from as many different cultures.
A fine companion to the editor's earlier anthology, "America Street."


Creative Zoning for the 'Chateau Country'
A secluded mansion in the heart of this wealthy Brandywine Valley community is undergoing a $1 million conversion to an office building under a recent land-use amendment that allows significant properties to be used as commercial space while retaining residential zoning.
The zoning change, passed late last year by the New Castle County Council, seeks to deal creatively with the plethora of great estates that have come on the market in the last five years.


Big Bang


HUSH OF SUICIDE
I would like to thank Jennifer Farbar for her support of those of us who suffer so deeply in life to feel that ending it is the only source of peace (Hers: "Hush of Suicide," March 5).
I am very slowly grappling with deep clinical depression which, during my 37 years, has kept suicide hanging, like a carrot in front of me, like the brass ring, a short stretch away, as my prize.
I cannot fault my dear friends and family who point out, in deep frustration, all that I have to live for, who cannot allow the threat of my despair to touch them too closely.
What they will never be able to do is to fully allow me my choice -- and, like release from terminal illness or escape from any other crushing weight, it is my choice, socio-cultural-religious taboos notwithstanding.


Pavin Overcomes Water And Wind to Gain Tie
The greens are turning blue.
Golfers are turning red.
Knuckles are getting white.
Suddenly, it's as though the United States Golf Association flag went up outside the futuristic clubhouse here at the T.P.C. at Sawgrass and the Players Championship turned into a United States Open -- complete with palm trees, alligators and corporate sky boxes.
On a day when par was once again a very good score, that is exactly what Corey Pavin shot to maintain a share of the lead.
He scratched, scrapped and putted his way around the golf course in 72 strokes and is tied for the lead at a five-under-par 211 with Bernhard Langer, who shot 71.


Oven Does the Trick for Impromptu Dining
OFTEN on weekends I find myself putting together an impromptu lunch or dinner for which the food is bought at the last minute.
As a result, I have to keep it simple.
One solution is to cook as much as possible in the oven.
The other day I came across an interesting recipe by the celebrated French chef Joel Robuchon: just the sort of thing I had in mind -- a pork loin roasted with fresh sage leaves over several different kinds of vegetables.
It sounded delicious, but the recipe had an enormous amount of fat in it.


The Match Game
Lucky you.
One-button jackets are back.
Oh, and so are ones with two buttons, three buttons, four, five, as well as double-breasted ones with six, eight and ten buttons.
Store windows are featuring suits with wide lapels, narrow ones and none, as unencumbered as cardigans, alongside the revived silhouette that includes shoulder pads.
Some of the coolest ties out are almost four inches wide, but there are plenty of just-as-nice ones that are barely two inches across.
Have you seen all those shirt-collar shapes?
And pants legs are so wide, except when they're so narrow.
But that's because you can't rely on one width to look as good with work shoes as with sandals or cowboy boots or brogues or those new high-cut English lace-ups.
Most interesting of all is that if things around town progress as they usually do -- big companies setting precedents for smaller ones -- pretty soon your company may not care which, and what combination, of these items you select to wear to work.
Isn't that great?
Bet you're thrilled.


All About The Irish, Mensa, Peddlers, Alarms; In Central Park, the Perils Of One-Direction Running
To the Editor:
A Feb. 26 letter that addressed the dangerous traffic patterns of Central Park's runners, bicyclists and rollerbladers suggested that everybody travel unidirectionally.
For runners training repeatedly on a slanted surface, the failure to change direction would make their feet, ankles, knees and hips susceptible to misalignment and overuse injuries.
FIONA BAYLY  Manhattan


Word for Word / Congressional Record; Speaking for Themselves, House Members Talk Welfare
WHEN she was 30 and had three small children, Lynn Woolsey's husband walked out and refused to pay child support.
For a brief time, she was on welfare.
Now 57, Ms.
Woolsey is a Democratic Congresswoman from California.
She recalled her experience last week when she pleaded with her colleagues to reject Republican legislation to scrap the Federal program of Aid to Families With Dependent Children.
Representative John Ensign, 36, a freshman Republican from Nevada, is an ardent proponent of the legislation, H.R.4, which was approved Friday on a party-line vote.
Seeking to undo 60 years of social welfare policy, H.R. 4 would turn A.F.D.C. and other programs for the poor over to the states and would reduce spending for them.
Mr.
Ensign, who was reared by a single mother who refused welfare, also spoke from experience.


Gail Parenteau, Matthew Brief
Gail Parenteau, a daughter of Peggy and Allan F. Maldaver of Sarasota, Fla., was married last evening to Matthew Jay Brief, the son of William and Rhoda Brief of Woodmere, L.I.
Rabbi Robert I. Summers officiated at the Players Club in New York.
Mrs.
Brief is a public relations specialist in New York.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


All About The Irish, Mensa, Peddlers, Alarms; They Call the Parade Irish, But It's Really All-American
To the Editor:
Irish New Yorkers have known for years that St.
Patrick's Day has become nothing more than amateur night out.
That's why we celebrate at private parties in homes or clubs, with family and friends.


Winning Is Only Way to Be a Winner
Several days before Bill Koch gathered our America's Cup team into the weight room and jolted us by replacing one of our team members with a man from his winning 1992 crew, we had listened to another speech.
A string of accomplished female athletes have come through our program to offer words of inspiration.
This time, it was a local San Diego woman, who was one of the first Olympic synchronized swimmers and who now works as one of the few female boxing officials in the country.
She prefaced her pep talk by saying she usually introduced herself as an Olympic swimmer and only admits to the synchronized part when pressed because she wants to be taken seriously.
Then she talked about struggle and the enormous challenge facing our team -- competing at the pinnacle of our sport, having a crew with no experience because women had not been considered viable America's Cup sailors.


I'd Like to Thank. . .
From: Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences
To: All of Tomorrow's Oscar Winners
Here is your customized acceptance speech.
The Academy has prepared it for delivery by all winners to cut the length of the ceremonies and boost TV ratings.
Have your studio head, spiritual guide or manager choose from among the many options below to create a speech that best packages the real you -- in less than four minutes.


Soil's the Key, and the Time to Test Is Now
Everything smells good at this time of year.
The air has bouyancy, grasses are greening, buds are swelling, crocus are perfuming the air.
These signs indicate that life underground is going strong.
The earth is pungent and even the birds are singing a new song.
While all this sort of rhapsodic feeling is fine to express, it should also remind gardeners that it is time to know their soils.
Soil test time is here.
And the sooner the task is completed, the better, for the pressure is on at the laboratories that do the testing.


Soil's the Key, and the Time to Test Is Now
Everything smells good at this time of year.
The air has bouyancy, grasses are greening, buds are swelling, crocus are perfuming the air.
These signs indicate that life underground is going strong.
The earth is pungent and even the birds are singing a new song.
While all this sort of rhapsodic feeling is fine to express, it should also remind gardeners that it is time to know their soils.
Soil test time is here.
And the sooner the task is completed, the better, for the pressure is on at the laboratories that do the testing.


Streetscapes/1 Broadway; A 1922 Facade That Hides Another From the 1880's
LAST month the New York Landmarks Conservancy gave one of its annual Lucy G. Moses Preservation Awards to the office building at 1 Broadway for the careful restoration of its 1922 limestone exterior.
What the Conservancy has honored is really two buildings, because the 1922 facade conceals the 1880's skyscraper facade put up by Cyrus W. Field, famous for laying the first Atlantic cable two decades before.


Special Interests' Special Weapon
They look like grass-roots movements but are actually campaigns manufactured by special interests.
They are becoming an increasingly popular way to try to influence Congress -- so popular, in fact, that there is a new name for them in Washington.
They are called "Astroturf."
Unlike traditional lobbying efforts, which seek to sway politicians directly through office visits, position papers and campaign contributions, Astroturf efforts seek to influence them indirectly by changing the climate of public opinion, largely through television advertising.
At a time when there is growing distrust of anything emanating from official Washington, Astroturf campaigns have the advantage of offering at least a semblance of populism.


States Trying to Save Routes Cut by Amtrak
Since Amtrak's announcement of service cuts in December, several states have been negotiating with the railroad to use state and local money and save some of the routes that were originally targeted for elimination.
While the Montrealer train from New York to Montreal via Vermont will stop operating next month, a new service, the Vermonter, is scheduled to offer daily service between Washington and St.
Albans, Vt., with bus service to Montreal.


Berenice Bramson, 65, a Soprano, Is Dead
Berenice Bramson, a soprano who received critical acclaim throughout her career, died on Thursday at her home in Katonah, N.Y.
She was 65.
The cause was breast cancer, her family said.


Despite a New Plan For Cooling It Off, Cybersex Stays Hot
Amateur Action, a computer bulletin board service that advertises itself as "the nastiest place on earth!," was still open for business yesterday despite the conviction of its owners last year on charges of transmitting obscene material over computer networks.
The only change appears to be a warning that greets all callers:
"Amateur Action B.B.S. is for the private use of the citizens of the United States! Use by law enforcement agents, postal inspectors and informants is prohibited!"


UNCLE BOB
If Senator Dole reminds your "admiring Washington Democrat" of the "mean old guy in the murder mystery" who turns out not to be the killer after all, he must be misremembering Tyrone Power in "Witness for the Prosecution," an actor who here not only looks like Dole but plays a suspect named Vole.
In the first half of the story, you suspect he did it.
During the trial, you begin to think maybe he didn't.
By the time the trial is over, the jury has found him not guilty.
But before he can leave the courtroom we realize that he owes his freedom not to his innocence but the curmudgeonly charm of Charles Laughton as his attorney and the clever but false testimony of Marlene Dietrich as his wife.
Only then do we realize that we were fools.


QUESTIONS FOR: Stevie Wonder
Q: What do you do wrong?
A: Someone told me once, "You write some great melodies and, you know, great chords, but you should cut writing the lyrics out." And they were serious.


The Missing Link Between a Home and Its Property Tax
THIS time of year, every red-blooded American is poring over income tax forms, trying to wring out every last deduction and tax credit.
Yet the intense scrutiny that most people bring to the income tax has been curiously absent when it comes to paying property taxes.
Put off by the arcane details, the vast majority of homeowners submit meekly to the local tax authorities.
That is slowly beginning to change.
As real estate markets have declined in recent years, especially in the Northeast and California, homeowners have begun asking more questions about their property tax bills.
Some people have challenged assessments of their homes' value that did not decline as rapidly as the housing market, and along the way have won reductions in their assessments that translate into hundreds or thousands of dollars saved a year.


A Suspect Story of Success
The franchising industry says franchises have a 95 percent success rate.
That sounds terrific, especially since four out of five independent businesses fail within five years.
But the figure comes from a survey done by the Commerce Department in 1988 that has serious flaws, according to Tim Bates, an economics professor at Wayne State University in Detroit.
Dr.
Bates said that the survey was conducted by mail and that weak franchisers simply didn't return their questionnaires.
"There's no question that the franchise industry has overhyped its success rate," he said.


Springtime Fashions in Paris
A week of shows and receptions, from the spectacular to the intimate, from pink confetti to kosher salt, March 15 to 21.


A Different Approach To Workers' Compensation
To the Editor:
Rebecca Shafer Bruce's suggestions ("Workers' Comp: Ripe for Cost Cutting," Viewpoints, March 12) contradict the successful experience of the Rhode Island Workers' Compensation Advisory Council.


So Much for P.C. At the Whitney
IN 1993, the Whitney Museum of American Art's Biennial was criticized by many people for being too "politically correct." But the opening of the 1995 Biennial on Tuesday night was anything but -- jars of cigarettes were set out next to the taro chips on the bars in the museum's garden.
Is the Whitney actually encouraging smoking?


ON THE MAP: The Disgusted Fans' Guide to Foreign Baseball
In Mudville (the United States), it's either minor league ball or replacement players.
But people do play baseball in other countries, and fans who happen to be traveling, say to Italy or France, could always take in a game.
Above are schedules (courtesy of Baseball America) and rankings of the level of play by Omar Minaya, director of scouting for the Texas Rangers.
The categories are those used in the minor leagues, in order of increasing quality: Rookie, Class A, Class AA and Class AAA.


Graf Easily Beats Date For Third Title of 1995
On an otherwise hot and hazy afternoon, the defending champion Steffi Graf turned a cold shoulder on an opponent with a sore shoulder and captured her third title of 1995 with a businesslike 6-1, 6-4 defeat of Kimiko Date of Japan in the final of the Lipton Championships.
The victory left the second-ranked Graf six-tenths of a computer point behind top-ranked Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, and the 25-year-old German's $205,000 winner's check nudged her career earnings beyond the $15 million mark, making her second in income only to Martina Navratilova.


AMERICANS IN IRAQ GIVEN 8-YEAR TERM
An Iraqi court today sentenced two Americans to eight years in prison after convicting them on charges of entering the country illegally, the White House said.
The Americans were arrested on March 13 near the Kuwaiti border.
The swiftness and severity of their punishment prompted strong condemnation from the Clinton Administration, which had warned only on Friday that Iraq could serve no purpose in holding the men.


Susan Kramer, Paul Danziger
Susan Lynn Kramer, a daughter of Jane and Howard Kramer of Rye, N.Y., is to be married today to Paul Danziger, a son of Avril and Dr.
Julius Danziger of Houston.
Rabbi Norton Shargel is to perform the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride, 25, is to graduate in June from the Northwestern University School of Medicine and to begin a residency in the Baylor College of Medicine pediatric program at Texas Children's Hospital in Houston.
She graduated summa cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is a senior vice president of Paine Webber in New York.
Her mother is a clinical social worker at Jewish Family Services in Greenwich, Conn.


Credit Rating
To the Editor:  The article about movie titles "It's Right on the Tip of Your Tongue"  [ March 5 ]  explored a subject that many who have worked in the industry have tussled with, too.


Three Funds That Won't 'Break Buck'
Money market funds aim to maintain a constant share price of $1 and to pay out any earnings to shareholders.
But these funds are not insured by the Government, and their shares can fall below $1, creating a loss for shareholders or "breaking the buck" in industry parlance.
In a recent survey of nearly two dozen fund companies, only three pledged to defend a $1 share price in their money market funds, said Money Market Insight, a newsletter in Ashland, Mass.
USAA, United Services and Charles Schwab &amp; Company said they would do whatever was necessary to avoid breaking the buck.
Alliance Capital and Twentieth Century refused to make such a pledge, even though both injected money into their funds after they sustained losses because of the bankruptcy of Orange County, Calif.


No Getting Bubblehead's Number
Meet Bubblehead, the nearly 200-foot-tall voluptuous blonde with ruby lips and cerulean eyes hovering on the wall at 315 Park Avenue South, between 23d and 24th Streets.
The towering vamp is there for a very serious purpose but, thanks to a little design flub, she just flummoxes people.
"The first thing that popped into my head was that this was something pornographic," said Linda Smith, an office manager who works nearby.
"It took me a couple of weeks to figure it out."


Art, Setting and the Architecture of the Heart
EVER SINCE THE GUGGENHEIM Museum opened in 1959, critics have said that the building is a terrible place to show paintings.
Some have suggested that it would be best to take away the art and leave the museum as a monument to its architect, Frank Lloyd Wright.
It's true that Wright's design often doesn't display art to excellent advantage.
But occasionally a show comes along in which art and architecture reinforce each other, creating the unified experience Wright envisioned.
For me, the Guggenheim's current retrospective of paintings by Ross Bleckner is such a show.
I found the whole experience very moving, not least because it prompted me to reflect on how a viewer's personal history and emotions effect the response to visual art.
The show dredged up a memory from my adolescence, when I imagined that I faced a choice.
It seemed to me that there were people who let themselves feel things, and others who didn't, and I wanted to belong to the first group.
Did I really have a choice?
Or was I just discovering who I was?
Suffice it to say that I was born in Philadelphia and grew up in a social milieu where inhibition was mistaken for character.


In the New 'New Jersey'
New Jersey, the new weekly section that begins next Sunday, will include new columns and features, expanded calendars of events, a page devoted to Atlantic City, an on-line forum called Chatter and a new opinion page, Soapbox.
Here is how to get in touch with the editors, submit material for the new section and join the electronic forum.
GETTING IN TOUCH The general address is Sunday New Jersey Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
For information about the section, call (212) 556-5281.
Faxes may be sent to (212) 556-7661.
The E-mail address is jersey @nytimes.com.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
2-COUNTY ART EXHIBIT
Eighty-three prestigious works of art have been selected from 32 private collectors in Westchester and Fairfield Counties to make up the exhibition opening today at the Neuberger Museum of Art at Purchase College.
"Crossing State Lines," 20th-century art from the contiguous areas, will remain on view through June 18.
The roster of artists reads like a Who's Who in contemporary painting, photography, ceramics, sculpture and other mediums: a mobile by Alexander Calder, an assemblage by Romare Bearden, sculptures by Alberto Giacometti and George Segal, paintings by Fernand Leger and Helen Frankenthaler, glass sculpture by Dale Chihuly and one of Red Grooms's caricaturesque paintings.


An Awards Group Chooses Finalists
The Magazine Publishers of America has named 25 finalists to compete for the 1994 M.P.A.
Kelly Awards for creative excellence in magazine advertising.


INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY: Sound Bytes; From Mao to Multimedia To the Magic School Bus
AS a little girl growing up in China, Yee-Ping Wu was hand-picked from thousands of talented children to fulfill an official role as a representative of Chinese youth.
By age seven she was giving piano performances to world leaders like Khrushchev and Tito, and to her own country's leader, Mao Zedong.
In 1970 her family fled China during the Cultural Revolution to come to New York City, where Ms.
Wu, then 16, enrolled at the Juilliard School of Music.


A Merry Meeting of Two Powerful Women


The Swing Vote Has Dim View Of Both Parties
Fifteen years ago this bedroom community of stucco houses and strip malls was little more than scrub land.
Today it is ground zero in the battle for the American electorate.
The judgments of independent-minded voters like those that largely make up this middle-class enclave 75 miles east on the freeways from Los Angeles could determine whether Republicans or Democrats win control of the White House and Congress next year.
The concentration of voters with no deep political roots or traditions explains why pollsters from both parties have been converging here.
They are trying to figure out what the people want.


296 Arrested as Police Raid Cockfight in Bronx
Heavily armed police officers and agents of the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals crashed into an old movie theater in the Bronx late Saturday night, seized 296 people and scores of caged and bloody roosters and shut down what had been billed as a national championship cockfight.
The raid -- the largest in the 129-year history of the A.S.P.C.A. -- followed two months of undercover investigations that tracked preparations for an event that the authorities said had kicked off the 1995 cockfighting season in New York City and brought hundreds of spectators and fighting cocks from all over New York State, as well as New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Virginia and Puerto Rico.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press; News organizations see a threat to their independence in an avalanche of subpoenas.
IS responding to subpoenas by lawyers a necessary cost of business for news organizations?
Lawyers are issuing so many subpoenas to obtain information from news organizations that the demands may be interfering with news gathering across the country, according to a recent study.
The study, released this month by the Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press, found that in 1993 more than half of the news organizations that responded to a survey had been targets of subpoenas seeking such things as unpublished photographs, reporters' notes and testimony from journalists.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  First Victory for Bowen  As Nancy Lopez and Tammie Green self-destructed and Laura Davies failed to gain any ground over the final few holes, Nanci Bowen, who had never won an L.P.G.A. tournament of any kind, shot a two-under-par 70 to win the Nabisco Dinah Shore in Rancho Mirage, Calif., the first of the women's major championships.
Bowen, 27, finished three-under par for the tournament, one shot in front of Susie Redman.
Playing in the group in front of Lopez, Green and Davies, Bowen hit into trees along the fairway and bogeyed the final hole.
She then watched and waited to see if her lead held up.
Lopez's 74 left her two shots behind Bowen.
Green, who began the day two shots in front of Lopez and was tied with Bowen for the lead at three under on No. 16, dropped back to par for the tournament, tying Colleen Walker for seventh. (AP) N.B.A.
Scott Lifts Magic  The reserve Dennis Scott hit four 3-pointers and scored 18 of his 32 points in the second quarter as the Orlando Magic won its fourth straight game, beating the visiting Golden State Warriors, 132-98, yesterday.
The Atlantic Division leaders got 38 of their 40 second-quarter points from the bench.
Shaquille O'Neal scored 24 points and grabbed 12 rebounds before resting the final 10 minutes. (AP) N.H.L.
Blackhawks Prevail  Sergei Krivokrasov scored two goals and added an assist as the host Chicago Blackhawks won their fifth straight, beating Anaheim, 5-2, yesterday.
Chicago moved within 2 points of first-place Detroit in the Central Division of the Western Conference. (AP) PANTHERS 2, PITTSBURGH 0: Pittsburgh was held scoreless in a regular-season game for the first time in two years as Florida, led by goaltender John Vanbiesbrouck, beat the visiting Penguins.
The Penguins -- the league's top scoring team -- had managed at least one goal since losing to Boston, 7-0, Jan. 14, 1993. (AP)
WHALERS 4, CAPITALS 3: Geoff Sanderson scored on a breakaway with 2 minutes 44 seconds left in overtime, lifting Hartford to its third straight victory, over host Washington. (AP) FLYERS 3, SABRES 1: Philadelphia goalie Dominic Roussel turned away 23 of 24 shots as the host Flyers defeated Buffalo.
Roussel, who is 5-0-0 in his last five starts, helped the Flyers thwart Buffalo on all six of its power-play opportunities. (AP)
BLUES 5, OILERS 1: Brendan Shanahan scored twice and Curtis Joseph had an easy night in goal, facing a season-low 16 shots, as St.
Louis beat visiting Edmonton. (AP)
YACHT RACING  Boat Takes On Water  The Stars &amp; Stripes yacht began taking on water yesterday in the middle of its race against Young America yesterday in America's Cup racing.
Dennis Conner and his crew were able to pump out as much as 55 gallons a minute to keep the yacht from going down.
The situation was serious enough to stop Conner's sailboat from further racing, and to insure Young America of the victory point it needed to clinch a place in the Citizen Cup defenders finals.
It appeared that the leak was caused by unknown damage in or around the yacht's keel attachment.
AUTO RACING Schumacher Wins  Michael Schumacher, the defending champion, outlasted Damon Hill and David Coulthard of the Williams-Renault team and won the Brazilian Grand Prix in Sao Paulo yesterday.
The German took the lead in the 30th lap when Hill spun out on a curve after his gearbox broke, then beat Coulthard in a 41-lap duel in the Formula One season opener.
Schumacher, in a Benetton-Renault, completed the 71 laps around the twisting 2,637-mile Interlagos circuit in 1 hour 38 minutes 34.154 seconds, beating Coulthard by more than 8 seconds. (AP) MARTIN TAKES TRANSOUTH: Sterling Marlin won the TranSouth 400 in Darlington, S.C.
The pole-sitter, Jeff Gordon, dominated the race until he was taken out by a crash -- leaving only Dale Earnhardt to battle Marlin.
Earnhardt finished second. (AP) HORSE RACING  An Upset at Aqueduct  Lucky Lavender Gal upset heavily favored Stormy Blues by five lengths in the $75,000-added Cicada Stakes at Aqueduct yesterday.
Dancin Renee was another three-quarters of a length back in third in the field of seven 3-year-old fillies.
Lucky Lavender Gal's time for seven furlongs was 1:232/5 .
Lucky Lavender Gal, sent off at 27-1, returned $57.50, $9.70 and $5.70 for $2 across the board.
Stormy Blues paid $2.50 and $2.30, and Dancin Renee was $2.90. (AP)


A Rookie From Minors Lifts Net's Playoff Hopes
Chris Childs does not want Kenny Anderson's job; he is content with his own.
And as the Nets continue to search for the back door to the post-season, they seem to have found something even more tangible along the way.
"I wouldn't mind being the backup point guard here, if that's what it takes to stay around the league," said Childs, the 27-year-old rookie who last season was playing his fifth season in the Continental Basketball Association.


Corrections
Because of a computer error, an article yesterday about President Clinton's position on the House welfare bill included two scrambled paragraphs in some copies.
The first paragraph should have read:
"President Clinton today denounced major elements of the welfare bill approved on Friday by the House of Representatives, and Speaker Newt Gingrich acknowledged that he would have to negotiate with Mr. Clinton on the legislation."


Self Takes Its Own Route To the On-Line Newsstand
Publishers of women's magazines have been scrambling to find an on-line niche, despite the fact that surveys show that only 20 percent of the 5.2 million subscribers to the top commercial on-line services are women.
Many of the magazines, including Elle and Women's Day, have chosen to team with large providers like America Online to draw women into cyberspace.
But Self, which aims at educated women with high incomes, has decided to bypass the big services in favor of an experimental in-house approach to building an interactive presence.


Razorbacks and Cowboys Complete a Big Country's Final Four
Arkansas gave its cardiologist a day off today.
The Razorbacks called it an afternoon after only 40 minutes of basketball (usually it's a minimum of 45), deciding, once and for all, that overtime is overrated.
Their coach, Nolan Richardson, had no use for his terry-cloth towel, but he could have lent it to Virginia.
The Cavaliers might have got their wish -- Arkansas walked the ball up much of the afternoon -- but the Razorbacks have a weapon for every day of the week and finally experienced a final buzzer without hands over their eyes.


Somber Young Life and Somber Art in Budapest
"A Light-Sensitive Story" is a small, deliberate film that takes the details of a single mother's daily life and slyly spins them into a cosmic world view.
The Hungarian director Pal Erdoss depicts his heroine in a precise, straightforward style.
Juli is a freelance photographer in her late 20's, scrambling to make some money and sort out her private life.
Most of the time she lives with her boyfriend, a student named Csaba, in a rented room.
Her much-loved 7-year-old son, Peti, lives in an apartment with Juli's mother.
Her professional identity is even more scattered, because no one wants her work.
In deft scenes, Mr.
Erdoss presents Juli's life as both average and filled with complications.
Wearing jeans and looking totally ordinary, Juli stops tourists on the street in Budapest and tries to sell them photographs, with no success.
When she takes somber, realistic pictures of people lined up outside the unemployment office, a newspaper editor tells her he is interested only in glitzy, escapist photos.
Mr.
Erdoss works in the social background lightly, making Juli a mere observer to one of the strongest scenes: a woman at the unemployment office, desperate for work, gets hysterical at a clerk who remains chillingly impassive.


Political Memo; Line-Item Veto Would Begin Voyage Into a Vast Unknown
The line-item veto, once dismissed by political professionals as another of Ronald Reagan's weird California nostrums, stands on the verge of becoming law.
If the House and Senate can agree on the final text of a bill, President Clinton has promised to sign it, and there seems to be a fighting chance that it would survive the court tests that appear to be inevitable.
But would it really act as a brake on Federal spending, as its proponents claim?
Would it really shift power, in a more than symbolic fashion, from Congress to the White House, as constitutional traditionalists argue?
And perhaps more important, would it have major effects that the sponsors have never imagined?


Labor Board to Seek Injunction Against Baseball Club Owners
One week before the scheduled start of the baseball season, the National Labor Relations Board yesterday authorized its general counsel to seek an injunction in Federal court that could send striking players back to work as early as this week.
Daniel Silverman, director of the board's New York office, said he would initiate the effort for an injunction in United States District Court in Manhattan today and would ask the judge, once one is assigned, to handle the case expeditiously.


Tough Issues for Republicans
In the home stretch of their first 100 days, House Republicans will face battles on term limits and tax cuts, as the Senate seems ready to block earlier victories.
Page B7.


POP
A Bit of Everything From a Versatile Musician  Pat Metheny, Guitarist Beacon Theater


The State of the State's Revenue
Will the state have enough money to pay its bills?
State Treasurer Brian W. Clymer will testify on Wednesday before a joint meeting of the Senate and Assembly appropriations committees, which are reviewing Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's proposed $16 billion budget for 1995-96.
The session, at 10 A.M. in the State House annex, will address anticipated tax revenue.


Honoring Slain Men, Montclair Also Mourns for Itself
They came by the thousands today, by car, on foot, on bicycles, on skates, pushing babies in strollers and pulling them in little red wagons, filling the plaza before the Watchung Post Office to say goodbye to four men killed in their midst and to confront together the fear that it might easily have been any of them instead.
If an entire community can suddenly discover mortality, Montclair did last week, after two clerks and three customers at its tiny post office were shot in a robbery on Tuesday, all but one fatally.
And then a 29-year-old town worker who grew up here and once worked with the clerks was charged with the murders.


A Play About the Sexes With Sitcom Leanings
There's a moment in his one-man show, "Rob Becker's Defending the Caveman," which opened last night at the Helen Hayes Theater, when Mr.
Becker makes an observation that verges on being astute.
A man, he says, can become so involved while watching television that he virtually becomes one with the physical set.
Mr.
Becker doesn't go on to suggest that if the man were not thus playing his part, the entire television equation would collapse.
He doesn't ask whether the television image would even exist if the man were not watching it.
Or, for that matter, whether it would exist if a woman were not watching it.
Mr.
Becker's thoughts don't often recognize philosophical conundrums.


A Tribute to the Best in Business
Six years ago, Michael R. Cunningham of Tewksbury was an independent printing broker and thought he would like to start his own printing business.
He started in a warehouse with 11 workers.
Today, Cunningham Graphics employs 215 people and has annual sales of $25 million.
The United States Small Business Administration will honor him today as the New Jersey Small Business Person of the year.


Oklahoma State and Arkansas Complete Final Four


Danny Apolinar, 61; Wrote Rock Musical
Danny Apolinar, a composer and nightclub performer and a writer of "Your Own Thing," a seminal rock musical, died on Thursday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 61.
The cause was kidney failure, said his companion, John Britton.


Bach, Beethoven and Bartok In the Hands of Andras Schiff
It seemed almost as if Andras Schiff wanted to dispense with the intermission during his remarkable piano recital on Friday night at Carnegie Hall.
For although the second half was devoted to Beethoven's daunting "Hammerklavier" Sonata, the entire program was constructed to reach a climax with this magisterial work.
Its first half was built out of alternating pieces by Bach and Bartok, the sequence gradually increasing in intensity and monumentality as Mr.
Schiff shifted from one stylistic foot to the other.
He did not even leave the stage between pieces, and leaped daringly into Bach's Chromatic Fantasy and Fugue, treating it almost like the final movement of the preceding performance of Bartok's Opus 14 Suite.
The dances and dissonances of each composer's music seemed to lead directly toward the dances and dissonances of the Beethoven sonata.
Mr.
Schiff impatiently rushed to the keyboard after intermission, as if denied fulfillment too long.


METRO DIGEST
SHORT CUTS SUSPECTED ON PIPELINE
The $695 million Iroquois pipeline is the Northeast's most bountiful source of energy in decades, winding 375 miles from the Canadian border across the heart of New York through western Connecticut and into central Long Island, delivering fuel to heat 2.7 million homes.
But four years after the project was completed, Federal prosecutors, landowners and several of the very contractors who built the pipeline are questioning whether a rushed job took short cuts with safety, creating a time bomb somewhere along the pipeline.
A1.
POLICE ARREST 296 AT A COCKFIGHT
Heavily armed police officers and agents of the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals crashed into an old movie theater in the Bronx, seized 296 people and scores of caged and bloody roosters and shut down what had been billed as a national championship cockfight.
The raid -- the largest in the 129-year history of the A.S.P.C.A. -- followed two months of undercover investigations that tracked preparations for an event that had kicked off the 1995 cockfighting season in New York City and brought hundreds of spectators and fighting cocks from all over New York State, as well as New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Virginia and Puerto Rico.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  QUESTIONS ARISE IN A YOUTH'S DEATH
The police said 16-year-old Yong Xin Huang was shot and killed during a struggle with an officer on Friday when the officer's gun accidently discharged.
But a friend of Mr.
Huang said that the teen-ager did not resist and that the shooting was not accidental.
The two starkly different versions emerged as the police and the family struggled to find out what really happened Friday morning in Sheepshead Bay, Brooklyn.
One thing both agreed on was that Mr.
Huang was carrying a carbon dioxide-powered Grossman Air Pistol, which resembles a real weapon, outside a friend's house.
B3.
BOY, 7, IS STRUCK AND KILLED IN CAR CRASH
Seven white candles burned at the front stoop of 192 Nagle Avenue in the Inwood section of Manhattan.
They marked the spot where Varness Vargas, 7, died when an Oldsmobile station wagon smashed into two parked cars, jumped a curb and struck the boy early Saturday night.
The police still have an incomplete picture of the events that ended with the boy's death.
B4.
REGION  A SHOWDOWN ON LOBBYING BILL
A two-year campaign by business and construction trade groups to undercut the lobbying activities of a student-based advocacy organization is heading for a showdown.
A bill to change the way Rutgers University students contribute to the organization, the New Jersey Public Interest Research Group, is in position for a vote in the Senate.
Its sponsor predicts that the vote there will be as close as the one in the State Assembly, which recently approved the measure.
B5.
CASTING NETS FOR SURPLUS FUNDS
New Jersey's boarding house rental assistance fund has $20 million in its account but few applicants for the boarding house improvements it supports, so Governor Whitman will divert half the money to her new urban housing program.
She has also grabbed $50 million from the state's unemployment insurance fund that had been destined for a health insurance program that still has not been put into place.
And the Governor is looking hungrily at the $125 million reserve that the Hackensack Meadowlands Development Commission draws on to maintain the giant, inactive landfill there.
B5.
CHEMICAL FIRE ERUPTS IN WAREHOUSE
A chemical fire spewing hazardous fumes in a warehouse in Hackensack, N.J., forced several dozen people from their homes Saturday night and burned for more than 24 hours before firefighters extinguished it, officials said.
The fire began around 7 P.M. in a one-story warehouse at the CWD Transport Company, a trucking concern at 55 Devoe Street.
More than 60 firefighters battled the blaze, and 16 suffered minor injuries and smoke inhalation.
B4.
BODY MAY BE LINKED TO PAROLED KILLER
A badly decomposed body discovered yesterday in Rockland County is believed to be another victim of a paroled murderer who has been charged with killing one woman and raping another since his release.
B5.
Chronicle B4


Sex-Related Business
The Giuliani administration and the City Council have agreed on strict new zoning rules for sex-related businesses, hoping to reduce their number and concentration.
The proposed rules will limit such businesses to parts of mid-Manhattan and manufacturing areas in the other boroughs.
The number of adult establishments in New York City increased 35 percent between 1984 and the end of 1993, and they began to spread away from Times Square to neighborhoods like Chelsea and Forest Hills, Queens.
The growth is largely attributed to the increasing popularity of upscale topless bars and adult video stores.
According to Adult Video News, a trade magazine, adult videos accounted for about 28 percent of the total video market in 1994.


Making Good Psychiatric Care Cost-Effective
To the Editor:
Your condemnation of Gov.
George E. Pataki's "flipflop" on mental health funding (editorial, March 22) is premature.
If that flipflop produces more effective organization of mental health services, centered on the principle of continuity of care, that condemnation will have been wrong.


Medals Not a Measure Of U.S. Performance
The Pan American Games concluded yesterday with mixed results for the United States, which accumulated an unprecedented 424 medals but also was an unprecedented failure in the national pastime, baseball.
Sandra Baldwin of the United States Olympic Committee, leader of the 750-athlete American delegation, said that the $4 million tab was "money well spent."


INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY: A 'Killer App,' Indeed; What's Hot? Software That Rubs Out Software
Personal computer software these days, when it isn't glitzy entertainment filled with video clips and rich musical scores, is so-called productivity software that will balance your checkbook, correct your spelling, design your new house, even coach you in the bedroom.
Software is abundant, making life in the information age abundantly better, right?
So why is one of the biggest hits in the business -- selling more copies last year than business titles like Microsoft Word, ahead of best-selling games like SimCity 2000 and right behind Doom II and Myst -- a humble, no-frills program that gets rid of software?
Because computers are still so hard to use that dumping a program you no longer want or need can take hours, if you can figure out how to do it.
That's why.


Audit of District Raises Questions
The mastermind behind the Grand Central, 34th Street and Bryant Park business improvement districts is about to create another.
But the new district is in Jersey City, and it has raised questions about management and financial control.
Part of an audit shows that money from two of the New York districts was used to help set up the one in Jersey City.
The audit comes as top managers of the New York districts are about to sign a contract to run the one in Jersey City, too.
Article, page B3.


U.S. Copters Are a Target in Colombia
Flying American-made Huey helicopters through deep canyons and over the 7,000-foot-high ridges of the Andes here, pilots of Colombia's antidrug police must keep a lookout for more than the splash of red opium poppies.
With United States aid, Colombia is attempting to eradicate its burgeoning opium and coca leaf crops.
But soldiers recently intercepted a radio message from a drug trafficker to a guerrilla commander: a $200,000 bounty for every eradication plane or helicopter shot down.


Corrections
A headline yesterday with an article about New York City's preparations to deal with a possible poison-gas attack by terrorists misstated the timing of an emergency drill.
As the article noted, the drill took place more than a year ago, not after the attack in Tokyo last week.


House G.O.P. to Face the Divisive Issues
Heading into the home stretch of their first 100 days in power, House Republicans will be facing their toughest, most divisive issues this week and next, while Senate Republicans prepare to undo some measures already passed by the House.
For the new majority in the House, already splintered over abortion during last week's bruising debate on welfare, upcoming votes on term limits and tax cuts will be even more fractious, sorely testing the discipline that has held the party together through its remarkable first 80 days.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:  MONDAY  Dollar Gen Corp Summit Pptys Inc Unocal Corp TUESDAY  Allmerica Ppty&amp;Cas Cos Mobil Corp WEDNESDAY  Hayes Wheels Intl Morrison Restaurants THURSDAY  Clarcor Inc Valero Energy Corp


Tuition Is Only Part Of the Aid Formula
To the Editor:
Your report on financial aid budgets at private colleges and universities (news article, March 22) left a false impression that we have only two sources of funding for needy students: endowment specifically restricted to financial aid and tuition payments.
Thus your Robin Hood principle -- when the endowments run out we take from the well-off Peters to pay for the needy Pauls.
But your premise is not true.


Treasury Scheduling Auctions For Bills and Notes This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financing this week includes bills and notes beginning with today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
Tomorrow the Treasury will auction two-year notes, followed by five-year notes on Wednesday and a one-year bill on Thursday.
At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 5.64 percent while the six-month issue was 5.80 percent.
In when-issued trading, the two-year note was offered at a price to yield 6.63 percent, and the five-year note at 6.91 percent.
The rate for the one-year bill was 5.89 percent.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Percussion's Many Facets In Works of Then and Now  New Jersey Percussion Ensemble Miller Theater


7 European Union Nations Form a Passport-Free Zone
In a move that showed the limits as much as the extent of their common purpose, 7 of the 15 European Union members formally dismantled border controls between their countries today -- meaning that travelers will be able to journey between them without showing passports.
The German Foreign Minister, Klaus Kinkel, called the move a "precursor to complete freedom of movement in all of Europe," part of the broader vision of a single Europe with a single currency that is advanced by advocates of European integration.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Line-Item Veto's Impact On Spending Is Debated
Will the line-item veto act as a brake on Federal spending, as its proponents say?
Will it shift power from Congress to the White House, as Constitutional traditionalists argue?


Sad Promiscuity, as the Sun Hides Behind the Moon
Jeremy Podeswa's "Eclipse" is a daisy chain of a film depicting a string of sexual encounters in Toronto.
That city is presented as being in a libidinous lather over the imminence of a solar eclipse.
Between trysts, the film offers eclipse-related thoughts from various seers, attesting to the event's yin-yangness and to the idea that "a world without light is a reminder of just how fragile and precarious our existence really is." Eclipses are the favored pretentious film metaphor of the moment.
There are fancier ones in "Farinelli" and "Dolores Claiborne" than the one seen here.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the owners of the Harlem apartment building that collapsed last week misstated the given name of the lawyer of Morris Wolfson, one of the men.
He is Benjamin Brafman, not Bernard Brafman.


USAir Pilot Pact May Cut Costs
Breaking a yearlong deadlock with its pilots, USAir said Saturday that it had reached an agreement that could help it drastically cut costs.
USAir, the nation's sixth-largest carrier, based in Arlington, Va., did not disclose details of the agreement, nor did the pilots union, the Air Line Pilots Association.
The airline's statement suggested, however, that the agreement included wage and work-rule concessions from the pilots in exchange for "financial returns and governance participation," most likely referring to stock in the company and representation on USAir's board.


Desecration Applies to Sacraments, Senators, Not to the Flag
To the Editor:
In "Conservatives Revive Bill on Protecting Flag" (news article, March 22), you state: "The Senators said the flag was a unique symbol of American freedom that unified the country. And as long as it was illegal to desecrate Federal currency and Federal property, they said, it should also be a crime to desecrate the flag."


No Ruffles and Flourishes
Come opening day next week -- if there is one -- don't expect to see any military brass at major league ball parks.
The Pentagon earlier this month issued orders to all military personnel not to take sides in the ongoing baseball strike.
Specifically, that means no military bands or choral groups belting out the national anthem or ceremonial color guards marching through manicured outfields if replacement baseball takes place.


Essay; You Lucky Seven
Like Lucy in the comic-strip Peanuts, who dispenses wisdom to all comers under the sign "Psychiatric Help -- 5," I offer herewith invaluable political-guru service to the seven Republican Presidential candidates for the price of a single newspaper.
To Phil Gramm: With Pat Buchanan slicing into your hard-right support, you cannot make it by reminding us of your triumph last year over Hillaryhealth, by out-grinching Gingrich, or by singing "Younger Than Doletime." A fresh, substantive appeal is needed.


Clinton to Urge A Rights Code For Businesses Dealing Abroad
In its latest attempt to win back the good will of human rights groups disappointed by President Clinton's decision last year to extend trade benefits to China without tying them to human rights concerns, the White House will announce on Monday a voluntary code of human rights principles for American companies operating abroad.
After protracted argument within the Administration, Mr.
Clinton decided last spring to bow to business interests who contended that the Administration's annual review of China's human rights performance was costing the United States billions in business in the world's most dynamic emerging market.


At Home Abroad; A Garrison State?
Joel Greenberg is an Israeli journalist who works as a reporter in the Jerusalem bureau of The New York Times.
The other day he was at Israel's military headquarters in Hebron, in the occupied West Bank.
He encountered something that stayed in his mind.
In his words:
"Eight Palestinian detainees were being held in a temporary holding room just inside the gate of the military compound. The room was about 4 yards by 4, and it had a large window with iron bars. We talked to the prisoners through the bars, and we could smell a powerful stench coming out of the room.


INSIDE
Turks in Germany Split
Just as divisions and fear are fragmenting Turkey, they are spreading among Turks in Germany, to the extent that some say they are setting up self-defense units.
Page A6.
Shooting Victims Mourned
Thousands filled the plaza before the Montclair, N.J., post office to say goodbye to four men killed there and to face the fear that it might easily have been any of them.
Page B1.
Black Seeks Nomination
Alan Keyes, a conservative who served in the Reagan Administration, announced he was seeking thePresidential nomination.
Page A8.
Corporate Code of Conduct
Seeking the good will of human rights groups, the White House plans a voluntary code of principles for U.S. companies abroad.
Page D1.


Who Got Tobacco Industry Donations
A study by Common Cause released last week analyzes political contributions from the tobacco industry, from 1985 through 1994.
Twelve tobacco companies and lobbying groups, along with their executives, gave $16.7 million to political action committees, which in turn gave to individual members and the two political parties.
The amounts contributed by the tobacco industry are not out of line with contributions from other industries.
For example, regional phone companies and the long-distance phone companies made nearly $20 million in political contributions in the 10 years ending in 1993, another Common Cause study found last year.
STEPHEN ENGELBERG.


U.S.-Russian Intersection: The Romance Is Gone
After three months of squabbling over the war in Chechnya, the expansion of NATO and the plans by Moscow to build nuclear reactors in Iran, Russia's Foreign Minister stated the obvious last week when he said the post-cold-war honeymoon between Russia and the United States "has come to an end."
With President Clinton now planning to meet in May with President Boris N. Yeltsin in Moscow, Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev and Secretary of State Warren Christopher suggested that relations between the two countries should evolve into something new and utterly unromantic.


Don't Mess With PCS Primeco's Mr. Schmitt
The gavel may have fallen on the Federal Government's recent auction of new wireless communications licenses, but George F. Schmitt still sounds as though he is locked in a high-stakes bidding war.
Mr.
Schmitt is the president and chief executive of PCS Primeco L.P., which aims to be a power player in the emerging business of personal communications services, or P.C.S.
Backing PCS Primeco are Nynex, Bell Atlantic, US West and Airtouch Communications, a cellular company spun off last year by Pacific Telesis.


New Main Library Opens in Denver


Patents; Foreign Artists Whose Work Is the Public Domain in the U.S. will get their protection back.
WANT to send shudders down the spines of inventors, designers and creative artists everywhere?
Just utter two words: "public domain." That vast category refers to ideas or works that belong to the masses -- usually because a patent application was not filed on time, or because a trademark or copyright lapsed.
They can no longer be claimed by an individual, even one who can prove authorship.
No exceptions.
Well, there is one.
Beginning next January, foreign creative artists like French composers, Asian film makers, Brazilian writers and others who have copyrights at home but whose work has fallen into the United States public domain will get their protection back under new Library of Congress rules.


Stopping the Yellowstone Mine
Congress is in a mood to abandon the preservation of America's ecological heritage.
It is therefore imperative that the Clinton Administration muster its resolve and its executive powers to block at least one monumental and irreversible environmental catastrophe.
This disaster-in-waiting is a proposed gold mine in the upper reaches of Montana's Henderson Mountain, less than three miles from Yellowstone National Park.
The mine and its lethal wastes threaten not only the original crown jewel of the national park system, but one of the most beautiful and fragile wilderness areas in the country.
So grave are those risks that this page suggested last year that Congress appropriate the necessary funds, about $35 million, to compensate Noranda Inc., the Canadian conglomerate that owns the site, for its exploratory expenses and then ask the company to go away.


Troubleshooter Walks a Tightrope; P.S. 64's Chief Is Given 5 Months to Rescue Failing School
With all the touching, talking and soothing, the gesticulating and the restless dashing about, Public School 64's new boss, Felix Polanco, seemed like an anxious conductor whose orchestra was threatening dissonance at any moment.
It was no accident that at a contentious parents' meeting last month, the Bronx school's chief administrator cried out, with some desperation, "Harmony! Harmony!" It has become his daily preoccupation -- and a utopian one indeed -- at one of the city's worst schools.


Minds Behind the Product
The personal computer industry has been built by hackers with an entrepreneurial bent, technically adept people able to translate an obsession into a business opportunity.
The people behind Uninstaller are no exception.
Tim O'Pry, the 39-year-old president of Microhelp, wrote much of the code for the best-selling version 2 of the program.
After developing a penchant for computers in high school in the early 1970's, he dropped out of Georgia Tech, and went on to hone his high-tech skills in the Air Force as a code-breaker at the National Security Agency in Fort Meade, Md., analyzing coded messages from Soviet fighter jets.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a proposal to let Iraq sell $1 billion worth of oil every 90 days misstated the previous United Nations policy.
Under earlier resolutions, Iraq would have been permitted to sell only a total of $1.6 billion in oil.


Ice Follies: Odd Goal And Punch Off Bench
Claude Lemieux knew what to do when he saw the teen-aged goatee of Brett Lindros leaning over the Devils' bench late in this afternoon's game at the Coliseum.
Moments earlier, Lemieux said, he had been put out of the game with a charley horse when the Islander rookie thrust his knee into Lemieux's leg and rammed him into the boards.


W. B. Doner Adds A Heileman Account
The G. Heileman Brewing Company in Rosemont, Ill., has expanded its relationship with W. B. Doner &amp; Company in Baltimore by awarding the agency responsibilities for its Henry Weinhard's beer brand.
The account, with billings estimated at $10 million, was previously handled by the Richards Group in Dallas.
Doner, which already handles advertising for Heileman brands like Colt 45 and Mickey's with billings estimated at $7 million, was awarded the Weinhard's family of beers account on Friday without a review.


What to Expect This Week
HOUSE -- Starting tomorrow, the House takes up the proposed constitutional amendment to limit the number of terms that members of Congress may serve.
Debate should continue until Wednesday, when a vote is planned.


Punish Only the Guilty
To the Editor:
Re "Mr. Dole's Transparent Tactics" (editorial, March 21): You are reacting to a problem with demands for gun control.


Dream Shot Clock Has 3 Minutes to Spare
"They call it 15 minutes of fame. I've used about 12 minutes up." -- William Gates, a subject of "Hoop Dreams"
William Gates will be decked out in his basketball uniform tonight, not a tuxedo.


How Picasso Helped Art While Helping Himself
MAKING MODERNISM Picasso and the Creation of the Market for 20th-Century Art  By Michael C. FitzGerald  Illustrated. 314 pages.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $27.50.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Existing-Home Sales . . .
Feb.
Tuesday  Consumer Confidence . . .
March  Wednesday  New-Home Sales . . .
Feb.
Prices of New Homes . . .
Feb.
Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Factory Orders . . .
Feb.
G.D.P. 4th Qtr. . . .
Revised


A Tussle Over Photos
Cameras in court?
It is an old controversy, but Hoboken has given it a different wrinkle.
As Judge Ross London of Municipal Court tells it, Mayor Anthony Russo barged into his chambers on Feb. 22 and began taking photographs of the judge and City Councilman Michael Schaffer in private conversation.


Equity Issues For This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
ACT Manufacturing Inc., Hudson, Mass., an initial public offering of 2.6 million shares.
Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons.


Carjacking Victim Goes Home
Two weeks after she was shot in a carjacking in her driveway, Sheila Gillespie returned home over the weekend, bothered by headaches and still unable to see with her left eye.


Kabul Journal; A Widowed Land, Picked Clean by Fruitless Wars
Bibi Gul is a 35-year-old widow who lost her husband, a driver, when an artillery shell hit their home in the southern suburbs of Kabul last year.
She has no job, and five children under the age of 6.
They share an unheated upper room with 10 other people, sleeping on mats spread out on the bare concrete floor.
At lunchtime the other day, Mrs.
Gul had other indignities on her mind.
From shortly after dawn, she had been out begging, part of an army of indigent war widows who are a common sight in most villages and towns in Afghanistan.


Improvising With Rhythm, Melody, Rhyme and Meaning
There is a small but active trade in videos of the Puerto Rican singer Gilberto Santa Rosa's live performances.
Mr.
Santa Rosa, 32, is perhaps his generation's finest salsa singer, an extraordinarily gifted improviser who can stretch his pieces out for half an hour, singing in rhymed couplets or playing with the decima tradition of poetry.
His phrases can be percussive or clear and glassy, and when he improvises he brings together rhythm, melody, rhyme and meaning.
And for all his knowledge of the salsa tradition, he sells huge numbers of albums.
Mr.
Santa Rosa performed at a sold-out show called "The Man and His Music" at Carnegie Hall on Thursday night, and if the music never quite elevated the event to the feel of a good party, it was still an occasion, with salsa's reigning figures in the audience.
It was broadcast live in Puerto Rico and recorded for an album.


Microsoft Sues Apple Computer
Microsoft filed a counterclaim on Friday in response to a suit by Apple Computer that accuses Intel and Microsoft of misappropriating technology vital to multimedia software.
On Feb. 9, Apple added Microsoft and Intel to a lawsuit it had filed against the San Francisco Canyon Company.
Apple has contended that without its permission, San Francisco Canyon had given Intel, the chip maker, and Microsoft, the software publisher, software that had originally been developed for Apple.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7  UNLIKELY LOVE IN GUATEMALA
The relationship between Jennifer Harbury, an American lawyer, and Efrain Bamaca Velasquez, a Guatemalan guerrilla, was improbable but passionate, and, in the end, marked by tragedy.
A1


Cable Ratings at High, Aided by Simpson Trial
Pumped up in part by television viewers' fascination with the O. J. Simpson murder trial, first-quarter ratings for the nation's 36 basic cable networks were the highest of any quarter in cable television history, according to A. C. Nielsen figures supplied by analysts at Turner Broadcasting System.
The quarter ends today, and Nielsen will not release its final figures until later this week.
But the calculations by Turner will be very close to the final numbers, said Jack Loftus, vice president for communications at Nielsen Media Research.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a proposal to let Iraq sell $1 billion worth of oil every 90 days misstated the previous United Nations policy.
Under earlier resolutions, Iraq would have been permitted to sell only a total of $1.6 billion in oil.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; For Art News, all things beautiful include more consumer ads on its pages.
ATTRACTING a significant amount of consumer advertising to a publication geared to a specific market is every publisher's dream, but one that is rarely fulfilled.
Nevertheless, good publishers are good salesmen -- and good salesmen do not quit.
Milton Esterow, editor and publisher of Art News, has long been pitching for more consumer, or general, advertising to go along with the substantial art advertising that has traditionally run in his magazine.
And this year, he expects the efforts to pay off.


Wolves Leave Pens at Yellowstone and Appear to Celebrate
Six wolves that biologists hope will form the core of a thriving wolf population in Yellowstone National Park have finally left their enclosure and are venturing into the snow-covered Lamar Valley, becoming the park's first free-roaming wolves in more than half a century.
The Crystal Bench pen was opened on Tuesday, but the wolves did not venture out until Friday, when an infrared beam across the opening was broken, sending a signal on park service radios.


Nigeria's Military Misruler
Nigeria, the most populous country in sub-Saharan Africa, has been ruled by soldiers for 25 of its 35 years as an independent country.
Its military regimes have tended to be corrupt and authoritarian, its civilian regimes merely corrupt.
But never before has it had a government as ruinous and oppressive as that of Gen.
Sani Abacha, the present military dictator.
Since seizing power in November 1993, General Abacha has been systematically destroying Nigeria's institutions and persecuting its most prominent citizens for the sole purpose of perpetuating himself in power.


It Was a Good Year for UConn, but . . .
The season ended the way nearly all but the very best ones do.
It ended abruptly, with someone else's celebration going on elsewhere, as the players sat quietly in a small stark room far from home with a door that held a painful reminder.
Once the Connecticut Huskies passed through, their lives on the other side would never be quite the same.
"Right now, at this point, I'll take 20 more minutes," Donny Marshall said, "even on the practice floor, to be in the same uniform with these guys."


Stanford Has Height to Test UConn
The Connecticut women's basketball team will play Stanford Saturday in Minneapolis in the Final Four of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, but don't ask the UConn coach or his best player for a detailed scouting report.
They were too tired last Saturday night to watch their next opponent on television.
After Connecticut's 67-63 comeback victory over Virginia in the East Regional final, Coach Geno Auriemma and his players watched on television as the UConn men's team lost to U.C.L.A.
Auriemma went home, had friends over, watched parts of the other N.C.A.A. women's games on television and fell asleep during the midnight telecast of Stanford's 69-58 victory over Purdue in the West Regional final.


Oscar's Glory Is Fleeting. Ask One Who Knows.
Nineteen years ago, Louise Fletcher won the Academy Award for best actress for her frightening, riveting performance as the monstrous Nurse Ratched in "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest." On Monday night, Ms.
Fletcher plans to sit in her apartment watching the Oscar ceremonies with a group of friends, and wishing, somehow, that she could give some advice to the winners.
"Just enjoy it; it'll make you wonderfully happy for a night," she said.
"But don't expect that it'll do anything for your career."


DANCE
Two Role Debuts In 'Dead Warriors'  Dance Theater of Harlem Brooklyn Academy of Music


Boy, 7, Killed As Car Driver Loses Control
Seven white candles burned at the front stoop of 192 Nagle Avenue in the Inwood section of Manhattan yesterday.
They marked the spot where Varness Vargas, 7, died when an Oldsmobile Suburban smashed into two parked cars, jumped a curb and struck the boy early Saturday night.
The police still have an incomplete picture of the events that ended with the boy's death and with injuries to two other people.
But after the accident, the police charged the Oldsmobile's driver, Juan Abreu, a 43-year-old maintenance man who lives across the street, with drunken driving and criminally negligent homicide, said a police spokesman, Sgt.
Hugh Barry.


POP
A Latin Lover In Updated Macho Mode  Jon Secada Radio City Music Hall


CHRONICLE
EDDIE VEDDER, the lead singer of the rock band Pearl Jam, was carried about 250 feet off the coast of New Zealand by a riptide on Saturday, but he made it back to shore with the help of some lifeguards.
Mr.
Vedder was swimming in rough surf with TIM FINN, a New Zealand rock musician formerly of Split Enz and Crowded House, when the incident occurred, The Associated Press reported.
Pearl Jam is on a tour that includes Asia and Australia.


Compaq Dabbling in Software for Home PC's
The Compaq Computer Corporation, the nation's leading personal computer company, has joined the many companies dabbling in multimedia software for home computer users.
A year ago, a Compaq official confirmed on Friday, the company quietly set up its software unit in San Mateo, Calif.
The Compaq official offered no details of the software group's work.
But the company's software unit appears to be a modest investment so far, with about a dozen programmers, said one industry executive familiar with Compaq's fledgling efforts.


Hearing Set on 'Megan's Law'
A hearing has been set for April 6 on challenges brought by eight sex offenders against "Megan's Law," which requires them to register with the police after release from prison and allows the authorities to notify the community in some circumstances.


Filipinos Crowd Funeral Route of Executed Maid
The funeral of a Filipino maid turned into a raucous demonstration today against the Singaporean Government for executing her and against the Philippine Government for its seeming indifference to the plight of millions of Filipinos forced by poverty to work overseas.
Tens of thousands of people lined the funeral route in the city of San Pablo, 55 miles southeast of Manila, to catch a glimpse of the flag-draped coffin of Flor Contemplacion, 42, the mother of four who has been transformed into a national martyr since March 17, when she was executed.


Black Conservative Enters Race for G.O.P. Nomination
Alan L. Keyes, a passionately partisan black conservative who held several State Department posts in the Reagan Administration, jumped into the 1996 Presidential contest today, the first of his race to seek the Republican nomination in modern political times.
He vowed to turn the contest into a wide-open debate advocating family values and opposing abortion, an issue many other Republicans would just as soon leave on the back burner.


Budget Planners Cast Nets For Surplus Special Funds
New Jersey's boarding house rental assistance fund has $20 million in its account but few applicants for the boarding house improvements it supports, so Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman will divert half the money to her new urban housing program.
She has also grabbed $50 million from the state's unemployment insurance fund that had been destined for a health insurance program that still has not been put into place.


Disputing the Account by Police, a Friend Says Slain Youth Did Not Resist Officers
The police said 16-year-old Yong Xin Huang was shot and killed during a struggle with an officer on Friday when the officer's gun accidently discharged.
Yesterday, a friend of Mr.
Huang said that the teen-ager did not resist and that the shooting was not accidental.


DANCE
Women's Bodies Afloat In a Stream of Patterns  Nancy Meehan St. Mark's Church


A Clinton and a Bhutto Share a Joke in Pakistan
Hillary Rodham Clinton, admired and attacked as a strong woman in her own country, came to Pakistan today to admire and consult with another one: Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, who greeted the First Lady at a luncheon for prominent women with a sisterly joke on the perils of power.
"The First Lady does not know it, but according to newspapers in Pakistan, Mr. Asif Zardari is de facto prime minister of the country," Ms.
Bhutto said, referring to her husband, who is often painted as a sinister threat behind the throne and who had met Mrs.
Clinton's plane on her arrival in a driving rain 12 hours earlier.
"He says, 'Only the First Lady can appreciate it's not true.' "


Eazy-E, 31, Founder Of 'Gangsta' Rap
The rap artist Eazy-E, a founder of the influential "gansta" rap group N.W.A., died yesterday at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles after being hospitalized in late February with AIDS.
He was 31.
He died at 6:35 P.M. of AIDS-related pneumonia, said a spokeswoman for the hospital.


Chemical Fire at a Warehouse Spews Fumes
A chemical fire spewing hazardous fumes at a warehouse forced several dozen people from their homes Saturday night and burned for more than 24 hours before firefighters extinguished it, officials said.
The fire began around 7 P.M. in a one-story warehouse at the CWD Transport Company, a trucking concern at 55 Devoe Street.
More than 60 firefighters battled the blaze, and 16 suffered minor injuries and smoke inhalation, said Joe Thornton, deputy chief of the Hackensack Fire Department.


When Going Gets Tough, Janzen Gets a Championship
On a course that was so hard it gave him flashbacks to Baltusrol and his United States Open victory there, and paired with the very same man he defeated on that oppressively hot Sunday in June two years ago, Lee Janzen summoned all the memories today.
Throughout a long and arduous afternoon at the T.P.C. at Sawgrass, he never lost his composure, he never wavered and he almost never missed a putt that he had to make.
Twenty-five feet for par to keep his lead at the 14th hole?
No problem.
Five feet for par at the 18th hole to stave off any last-minute heroics by his pursuers?
Nothing but the bottom of the cup.


Inflation Adjustment Defeats Real Cuts
To the Editor:
"Mr. Kasich's Numbers" (editorial, March 20), concerning the House Budget Committee's proposal to help pay for tax relief, perpetuated the myth that all discretionary spending must automatically increase by the rate of inflation and if it doesn't is classified as a spending cut.
We reject this "Inside the Beltway" approach to spending taxpayers' money and are prepared to offer real and honest budget cuts to the American people.


Accounts
*
Harvey Electronics, Secaucus, N.J., to J. Richard Smith Advertising, Melville, L.I., to handle the retail chain's account, previously at Manhattan Marketing Ensemble, New York.
The billings were estimated at $1.5 million. *
Perugina Brands of America, Saddle Brook, N.J., to Taylor-Gordon &amp; Co., New York, to handle advertising for the After Eight chocolate mint brand, previously inactive.
Taylor-Gordon, which also handles advertising for Perugina chocolates, was awarded the After Eight assignment without a review.
The billings have not been determined. *
Hanes Distribution N.V., Ghent, Belgium, to TBWA International, Brussels, as the first agency to handle its pan-European account for the casual clothing line.
The billings have not been determined. *
Cyrix Corp., Richardson, Tex., to Rizzuti Marketing and Media Group, Carrollton, Tex., to handle consumer advertising for the computer company, previously handled by Priscaro &amp; Hukari, San Mateo, Calif.
The billings were estimated at $1 million. *
Allina Health System, Minneapolis, to Martin/Williams Advertising, Minneapolis, as the first agency to handle the account of the health care company.
The billings were not determined. *
Donaudy Munch Muro, Melville, L.I., was awarded three accounts with combined billings estimated at $2 million: Micro Vision Software, Commack, L.I., to handle its account, previously at Welch &amp; Nehlen Advertising, Garden City, L.I.; Surfside 3, Lindenhurst, L.I., to handle the boat dealership's account, previously at Topline, Ronkonkoma, L.I., and Swezey's Department Stores, Patchogue, L.I., as the first agency to handle its account.


U.S., Chrysler Reported Near Deal on Safety
The Chrysler Corporation is close to agreeing with the Federal Government to strengthen the rear door latches on millions of its mini-vans, while still maintaining that the old latches are sufficient, people with knowledge of the negotiations said today.
The action, they said, would not take the form of a safety recall, which would require Chrysler to acknowledge a safety defect, but rather of a voluntary service program.


Bridge
As a curtain-raiser to the Spring National Championships, which begin Friday in Phoenix, the American Contract Bridge League will conduct opening ceremonies on Thursday evening for its Bridge Hall of Fame.
The hall will automatically include nine great players from bygone days who were honored three decades ago by Bridge World Magazine for a hall of fame that is defunct.
They are Ely Culbertson, Charles Goren, Oswald Jacoby, Sidney Lenz, Howard Schenken, Sidney Silodor, Harold Vanderbilt, Waldemar Von Zedtwitz and Milton Work.


Body Found in Rockland May Be Linked to a Paroled Killer
A badly decomposed body discovered yesterday in Rockland County is believed to be another victim of a paroled murderer who has been charged with killing one woman and raping another since his release, the police said.
The suspect, Reginald McFadden, 41, is also expected to be indicted today in the murder of a Long Island man whose body was found earlier this month in Rockland County a few miles from where the police found the body yesterday.
And the authorities said yesterday that they believe more bodies may be found in connection with the investigation.


Agassi Emerges Triumphant This Time by Turning the Tables on Sampras
They embody a study in contrasts, Pete Sampras the classicist and Andre Agassi the iconoclast, but when their Lipton Championships final came down to a sudden-death third-set tie breaker this afternoon, they were a symphony of squeaking sneakers, smoking racquets and baggy shorts aflutter in the tropical breeze.
Nobody else competes better.


People
*
Richard Rapp was named president at Genova Hartwick Juliano, Greenwich, Conn., succeeding Philip L. Juliano, who left to join the Clarion Business Communications division of Clarion Marketing Communications, Greenwich, as executive vice president and managing director.
Mr.
Rapp was previously senior vice president and managing partner at Sterling Group, New York. *
Victoria Murphy Hudson and Jesus Ramirez were named president and executive creative director, respectively, at Cartel Creativo, San Antonio, a new agency specializing in advertising aimed at Spanish-speaking consumers.
The pair opened Cartel after leaving Inventiva Inc., San Antonio, where Ms.
Murphy Hudson was vice president and operations director and Mr.
Ramirez was vice president and creative director.


Kodak Ready To Spotlight Digital Photos
The chairman of the Eastman Kodak Company is scheduled to lay out the company's strategy for digital photography tomorrow, an event that is expected to include announcements of new cameras, printers and alliances with telephone companies that would allow pictures to be transmitted around the world within hours of being taken.
George M. C. Fisher, who took over as chairman of Kodak in December 1993, has said the company will focus on the business of imaging, through its traditional film and with increasing emphasis on electronic pictures.
The company, based in Rochester, sold almost all of its nonphotographic operations last year.


Italian Monopoly Faces New World
In reaching out to the International Business Machines Corporation, Italy's state-owned telecommunications company is a bit like a sheep looking for a shepherd to fight off yapping wolves.
Societa Finanziaria Telefonica per Azioni, known in business circles as Stet, gives few details of the talks it began last month about possible cooperative ventures with I.B.M..
But the fact that there are talks is significant for a company that has long prided itself on its independence, and profited from monopoly status.


Second Trial in 1983 Slaying
Years ago, Nicole DeCombe told relatives and friends again and again that she feared that her abusive boyfriend might someday kill her.
Prosecutors say that is just what happened in January 1983.
They say Jose Machado, then 23, stabbed his 22-year-old girlfriend more than 20 times.
Today, after years of jousting between prosecution and defense, Mr.
Machado will go on trial for the second time for murder.


Joseph Needham, China Scholar From Britain, Dies at 94
Joseph Needham, an extraordinarily prolific British biochemist and scientific historian who spent decades researching, writing and editing a monumental history of scientific development in China, died on Friday.
He was 94 years old and lived in Cambridge.
His death was announced yesterday by Gonville and Caius College at Cambridge University, with which he was associated for 70 years.
The cause of death was not announced.


Debating the Death Penalty Law
New Jersey's death penalty law will be the subject of a public hearing on Wednesday, and some of the issues to be discussed boil down to one question: If we have it on the books, why don't we use it?
Officially, the death penalty was reinstated in New Jersey in 1982, but no one has been put to death since 1963.
Some lawmakers want to change that, which is one reason for the hearing by the Assembly's Judiciary, Law and Public Safety Committee in the State House annex at 3:30 P.M.


'Nightline,' at 15, Is Now Stronger Than Ever
While most of the attention surrounding late-night network television in the last 18 months has centered on the showdown between David Letterman on CBS and Jay Leno on NBC, a 15-year-old ABC News program, "Nightline," has experienced a surge in growth that has put it in the strongest competitive position in its history.
More viewers than ever are watching network television in the late-night hours, largely because of the addition of Mr.
Letterman and his hit "Late Show" on CBS.
Mr.
Letterman moved immediately to the top of the late-night ratings when he switched from NBC in 1993, and tonight he reaps one of the benefits of that status as he serves for the first time as host of the Academy Awards ceremony on ABC.


Today's TV Listings
Television and radio news, listings and advertising appear today on pages B8-9.


Oscar, Oscar, Everywhere, Relevant or Not
Tonight, it's silly time all over again.
Like the Super Bowl, the annual Academy Awards ceremony is an event that feeds on itself as everybody tries to get a slice of the blockbuster-audience pie.
The weeks-long hoopla sells papers and magazines and television shows.
And like the Super Bowl, the show can be a bummer.
But who cares?
There's always the tantalizing possibility of finding something to equal the memorably tacky 1989 salute to Snow White that starred Rob Lowe as the Prince.
Television tie-in strategies continue right down to tonight's ABC-at-9 Oscars wire and, at least in one case, beyond.
Sticking with a trusty lead-in, ABC has its usual "Barbara Walters Special" at 8, this time offering interviews with Liam Neeson, Jim Carrey and Michael Douglas, none of whom have much to do with this year's nominations but, well, they are leading men.
Most of the peripheral action, however, can be found on cable, including E!'s two-hour live coverage of celebrity arrivals, beginning at 7.


Humanities Endowment Makes Grants
The National Endowment for the Humanities has awarded 584 grants, totaling $21.3 million, for the second quarter of the 1995 fiscal year.
The largest single grant, $900,400, went to the New York Center for Urban Folk Culture in Manhattan for the production of a 10-hour documentary film by Ric Burns on the history of New York City.
Institutions in New York State received grants totaling $3.7 million.
The Alternative Media Information Center in Manhattan was given $750,400 for a documentary film on the social reformer Margaret Sanger and a second grant of $125,000 to pay for three scripts and treatments for a six-part documentary on the American family.
The Isaac in America Foundation in Manhattan was awarded $635,400 to support the production of a pilot program and scripts for a documentary television series on American Jewish history from colonial times to the present.


CURSE OF THE OSCAR
Louis Fletcher is not the only Academy Award-winner whose Oscar failed to give her a career boost.
Luise Rainer, against her will, of course, was the first to live the Oscar curse.
Luise Rainer, who won back-to-back best actress awards, in 1936 for "The Great Ziegfeld" and the next year for "The Good Earth," said some years later, "Nothing worse could have happened to me." in 1941, she left the film industry, saying of her Oscar-winning movies, "All I can see is the pain in my eyes."


Messier Is Fine; Rangers Far From It
In Ranger terms these days, here is what passes for good news: Mark Messier went to the hospital yesterday.
X-rays on his left hand proved negative.
He has a bruised thumb, the team announced, but no broken bones as a result of a slash late last week.
The team captain will probably play in the next game, which isn't until Thursday night, when the Rangers face the Quebec Nordiques at Madison Square Garden.


Razorbacks and Cowboys Complete a Big Country's Final Four
If ever a team appeared ripe for the picking, it was the Oklahoma State Cowboys at halftime of their East Regional final against Massachusetts this afternoon at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Through a grueling 20 minutes, the fourth-seeded Cowboys had limited second-seeded UMass to 28.6 percent shooting from the field and had contained Marcus Camby and Lou Roe to a combined 9 first-half points.
It was Coach Eddie Sutton's brand of basketball at its best, except for two problems.


The Rebel and the Lawyer: Unlikely Love in Guatemala
Theirs was the most improbable of intimacies.
The first time they touched was in an awkward dance in a rebel camp on the slope of a volcano, he, blushing furiously with a machete still slung over one shoulder, she, nervous, too, but laughing anyway and unwilling to pull back.
Their shadows dusted the barren ground by firelight as the soldiers clapped and urged them on, two dancers, a spark of something.
Jennifer Harbury was 39 when she first saw Efrain Bamaca Velasquez.
She was a lawyer working on a book about the women in Guatemala's rebel army, following an idiosyncratic path that led her deeper and deeper inside a well-hidden, war-hardened society of guerrilla fighters.
She had traveled from Texas to Mexico City to the jungles of western Guatemala in her research.
She was there to tell their story.
She made no pretense of objectivity.
She did not see gray and did not want to.


Market Place; Workers' compensation insurers in California face problems.
CHANGES in the California workers' compensation laws have been a mixed blessing for insurance companies that sell the policies to employers.
For 18 months after the revisions in mid-1993, insurers and employers alike benefited from the sharp drop in claims, particularly the fraudulent variety.
But as is often the case in insurance, the good times attracted more insurers who promptly cut prices.
On average, prices have dropped more than 30 percent, and some insurers now say that some companies are not collecting enough premiums to pay the claims they will eventually face.


Editorial Notebook; Budget Rites of Spring
Outside the granite columns, arches and towers of the New York State Capitol, rain-soaked protesters were rallying the other day in opposition to Gov.
George Pataki's proposed budget cuts.
Inside, lobbyists from Buffalo to Montauk were working the polished corridors to make their deals.
The sodden jeering of "We say fight back!" from the Rev.
Al Sharpton and followers was answered by the musical inspiration from a high school band in the nearby Legislative Office Building, playing songs from "Les Miserables."
From many of the groups, the message was essentially the same: Yes, yes, cutting the budget is a good idea and a demand of the times.
But if you look at our program, you'll see that these cuts are destructive, and really, there should be enough money in a $62 billion budget for just this little item to be restored.


Marbury Bids Stylish Farewell To Lincoln
When Stephon Marbury swished a pro-range 3-pointer, threw a slick pass or drove the lane for a layup in the New York State Federation Class A championship on Saturday, one thought kept looming in his mind: The game would be his last in a storied career at Brooklyn's Lincoln High School.
That "was something that I was thinking about a lot," said Marbury, standing in a hotel corridor before taking a late-night drive back to Coney Island.
"It hasn't hit me yet."


A Day of Flag-Waving And Festivities


Chicago Journal; On Rails In a Road, A Last Trip For a Relic
Not much can stop traffic, and bring neighbors and strangers together in this hard-nosed city like the sight of a midnight black, 1943, 330-ton, 121-foot locomotive, being pulled inch by inch through streets and a lakefront park over portable railroad tracks.
"I've never seen anything like this and I've been on the job 10 years," Greg Doig, a police officer, said on Saturday as he directed traffic away from the largest steam locomotive in Illinois, the Santa Fe 2903, which was parked for the moment in the middle of 51st Street, on the city's South Side.


Making Good Psychiatric Care Cost-Effective; Costly Dental Cuts
To the Editor:
We applaud "The Albany Budget Games Begin" (editorial, March 15) and would like to supplement your observations by focusing on the proposed elimination of adult dental Medicaid services.
This shortsighted proposal is economically unsound and destructive to the health of the neediest segment of our population.


Sports of The Times; Coach Eddie Sutton Simply Keeps Going
THEY passed in the corridor, purely by accident.
John Calipari turned toward Eddie Sutton and said, "Go get 'em." Those three little words could not have been easy to articulate.
Calipari, still slick, still only 36, but looking a trifle peaked, was not going to the Final Four.
Sutton, grizzled and 59, was not only going to the Final Four, he was going back.


Knicks Regain Mason but Lose the Game
Anthony Mason returned tonight, but the Knicks' outside shooting touch disappeared.
Sunk by a horrible third quarter, in which the Knicks tied their season low for a period (12 points), New York fell to the Seattle SuperSonics, 93-82, at the Tacoma Dome.


Bonn Fears Turks' Strife Will Spread
A wave of firebombings of Turkish mosques, travel agencies and cultural centers has confronted Germany with a perilous spillover of Turkey's own deepening divisions, raising fears that they could spawn a new backlash among Germans.
Some two million Turks live in Germany, splintered along the same notions of identity that are increasingly dividing Turkey's 60 million people into camps of Alawites, Islamic fundamentalists, secularists and Kurdish separatists.


The Executive Computer
IN the personal computer industry's latest attempt to close the ease-of-use gap that separates most PC's from the Macintosh, a consortium led by the Intel Corporation and the Microsoft Corporation disclosed a plan last week to make plugging peripherals into the back of the computer as easy as plugging a lamp into an outlet.
This latest salvo in the long battle over ease of use is called the universal serial bus, and while today it exists only on paper, like so many other industry promises, many people say this is one project that will work -- and catch on fast.


Grey Division Starts An Interactive Unit
The Western division of Grey Advertising has formed an interactive unit called Grey Interactive West.
The division, with 13 employees, will operate out of Grey's Los Angeles and San Francisco offices.
Fred Walti, 40, was named to head the group as executive vice president; he will be based in Los Angeles.
For the last year and a half, Mr.
Walti had been a consultant; before that he was general manager of BBDO San Francisco.
Grey Interactive opens with its first client, U S West Inc.'s Interactive Video Enterprises unit in San Ramon, Calif.
The billings were not disclosed.


CHRONICLE
It's not that the older and younger generations necessarily have different ideas about where the women's movement is going, but whatever those thoughts might be, the two age groups have rarely joined forces to discuss them.
The Columbia University School of International and Public Affairs and the Ms.
Foundation are hoping to remedy that with a conference, Envisioning the Next Women's Policy Agenda: An Intergenerational Discussion, today at the Kellogg Conference Center at the school.
The idea originated with AMY RUTKIN, the 25-year-old president of the largest student organization in the international affairs school.
Ms.
Rutkin said she thought that young emerging feminist leaders should take an active role "because it will be time soon for a change of hands, but at the same time we have much to learn from our seasoned feminist foremothers."


Showdown Near on Bill to Stop Automatic Financing of Student Lobbying Group
A two-year campaign by business and construction trade groups to undercut the lobbying activities of a nettlesome student-based advocacy organization is heading for a showdown.
A bill to change the way Rutgers University students contribute to the organization, the New Jersey Public Interest Research Group, is in position for a vote in the Senate on Thursday.
Its sponsor predicts the vote there will be as close as the one in the State Assembly, which recently approved the measure.


Creator of Business Zones Is Under Fire
Daniel F. Biederman, the mastermind behind the Grand Central, 34th Street and Bryant Park business improvement districts, is about to create another.
But this district is in Jersey City, and it has raised questions about the management and financial controls of the districts in New York.
Part of an audit of the Grand Central and 34th Street districts says that money from them was used to help set up the district in Jersey City.
The audit is being prepared as Mr.
Biederman and other top managers of the New York City improvement districts are about to sign a contract to run the one in Jersey City, too.


Getting Ready to Play Fake Games for Real
The Mets and Florida Marlins plan to play baseball next Sunday night in Miami.
But lest anyone out there thinks that will mark the beginning of business as usual for baseball, heed the lament uttered by Joe McIlvaine a week before the sport is to tentatively raise the curtain on the 1995 season.
"Eight days to go and never have teams been so ill-prepared," the Mets' general manager said late Saturday while watching his replacement Mets lose to Houston in yet another ersatz exhibition game.


How to Tell the Brain From a Computer
To the Editor:
The hypnothesis put forward in "How the Brain Might Work: A New Theory of Consciousness" (Science Times, March 21) sounds reasonable but is not.


Political Memo; City Sending Mixed Views To Albany On Budget
It is here in the corridors of the Capitol, not at City Hall, that the first battle over New York City's next budget is being fought, with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and City Council members lobbying in earnest on the city's behalf.
But rather than working together, the Mayor and the Council are for the first time lobbying at cross-purposes.
The Mayor wants the state to scale back Medicaid and welfare so the city won't have to pay a matching share for these programs; the Council, in turn, says such cuts would be dangerous and ultimately more costly.
The result for confused state lawmakers has been a series of conflicting signals that legislators say could undermine the city's effort to balance its budget.


Hazard Underground: A special report.; 375 Miles of Suspected Short Cuts Fuel Fears of Northeast Pipeline
To sell hundreds of New York and Connecticut landowners on the idea of a high-pressure gas pipeline passing across their properties, Iroquois Gas Transmission Systems promised "a pipeline of exceptional safety" and pledged to take dozens of expensive measures to avert a calamity.
That's why Neil Baumann of Schoharie, N.Y., was startled in 1991 to see a crew dumping tons of large rocks back into the 1,000-foot trench splitting his farmland.
The Iroquois company had assured him -- and government officials -- that rocks larger than 18 inches would not be used in refilling the trench after the pipeline had been laid.
Rock, after all, can scratch or dent a pipe's steel wall and heighten the potential for an explosion.


TESTS TO ASSESS RISKS FOR CANCER RAISING QUESTIONS
With a speed so rapid that many medical experts are taken aback, genetic tests that can tell if a person is likely to get cancer are entering the marketplace.
Those in favor of testing say people have a right to know if they are at increased risk, and it would be unethical to deny them that knowledge.
They say that people who harbor cancer genes may be helped by undergoing frequent screening for cancer so they could get early treatment.


Bus in Chinatown Held Up for $12,500
Three men posing as passengers on a bus headed from Chinatown in Manhattan to the casinos in Atlantic City pulled out pistols early yesterday morning and robbed 18 passengers of $12,500, the police said.
The bus, operated by the Lucky Strike Travel Company, was parked at the corner of West Broadway and Worth Street about 1:15 A.M. when the men stood up and announced the robbery, said Officer Arek Tarih, a spokesman for the Police Department.


U.S. Vows to Press Hard On Iraq to Free Americans
The White House sought to step up pressure on Iraq today by pledging to be "very firm" with Iraq and to press diplomatic efforts to win the release of two Americans imprisoned for illegally entering the country.
Two Republican presidential candidates, Senator Richard Lugar of Indiana and Patrick Buchanan, said that the United States should consider using its military to force the release of the two men.


DANCE
Simply Isadora Duncan, As She Was in the Beginning  Lori Belilove and Company Isadora Duncan Foundation  for Contemporary Dance


No Headline
"We get older and the executives get younger. You have to keep proving yourself. I'm not bitter. It's just the truth." -- LOUISE FLETCHER, who won the best-actress Oscar 19 years ago.  [ C11:1 ]


In Shrine of Japan Cult, Police Find Laboratory
Hundreds of riot police officers combed a religious sect's training center today, focusing on a three-story building that believers say is one of the organization's most holy sites.
The authorities say it contains a sophisticated chemical laboratory capable of producing large quantities of nerve gas.
In the snow-covered village where the sect had its main complex, near the foot of Mount Fuji, the police also pored over a building where the group's members reportedly were confined in crates if they tried to quit.
The police there found large numbers of syringes and other medical equipment, which the authorities believe were used to drug dissident cult members, news reports said.


Mr. Exon's Foolish Farewell
Senator James Exon has already announced his retirement, but rather than going harmlessly, he has decided to leave behind one truly bad idea that will cause mischief for years to come.
The Senate Commerce Committee, eager to share in the foolishness, voted last week without hearings or argument for Senator Exon's plan to outlaw "indecency" in communications by computer.
The Senate censors are in a headlong rush to purge uncharted universes of on-line networks of material unsuitable for young people.
In their hurry, they approved legal language so broad that it would limit all adult computer users to material suitable for children.


What's the Big Trend? It's No Trend
Trends in fashion are a bit like the aroma of good food, drawing women to the table: once there they may pass over the very pungent goodies that attracted them for more palatable and familiar fare.
The Big Trend has been the hook to lure women into stores, the device to make them think their current wardrobes are lacking.


Off the Road but Still on the Air
Has Howard Stern had his 15 minutes of fame on Route 295 here?
On Saturday, three young men were seen carrying off the small metal sign marking the Howard Stern Rest Stop.
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman said yesterday that she did not plan to replace the plaque, which bears a caricature of the so-called shock jock of radio peeking from an outhouse.
"We'd be replacing it every week," she said.
The sign, which cost the State Republican Committee $1,000, was put up only last week in fulfillment of a campaign promise by Mrs.
Whitman to Mr.
Stern, who endorsed her candidacy in 1993.
LAWRENCE VAN GELDER


Market Place; Equifax's expansion in medical data is seen as a healthy move.
AFTER Equifax Inc. announced a deal earlier this month with the AT&amp;T Corporation to provide expanded services by the consumer data agency's budding health care information unit, Equifax's stock edged up to a high of $33.50 a share.
It has remained near there, as many analysts continue to rate it a buy.
The deal's goal: to bring together electronic bill auditing, physician profiling, instant access to research projects and other services at a single source.
It further diversifies Equifax, all under the general strategy of offering decision-support information to businesses about consumer financial transactions.
Wall Street is predicting higher earnings this year and next.


George Names an Editor
Eric Etheridge, executive editor of The New York Observer and a former senior editor at Rolling Stone, will be the editor of George, a political magazine being introduced in September, the magazine's editor in chief, John F. Kennedy Jr., announced on Friday.
George is jointly owned by by Hachette Filipacchi Magazines and Random Ventures, a company owned by the magazine's co-founders, Mr.
Kennedy and Michael Berman.
Mr.
Kennedy said Matt Berman, art director of Metropolitan Home, would be the art director of George.
The Bermans are not related.


CHRONICLE
GARSON KANIN, the Academy-Award winning director and writer, put the cherry on the cake for last night's Oscar party at the Manhattan apartment of SONYA HAMLIN, a trial commentator on Fox's "O. J. Today" television show.
Mr.
Kanin sent over the 1968 Oscar won by his wife, Ruth Gordon, who died in 1985; she won as best supporting actress, in the film "Rosemary's Baby."
Mr.
Kanin and his present wife, MARIAN SELDES, the actress starring in Edward Albee's Pulitzer Prize-winning "Three Tall Women" Off Broadway, were lunching with Ms.
Hamlin last week, when talk turned to the Academy Awards.


Agra Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Musing at the Meer


Drug Tests Not Final
The middle-distance runners LYUBOV KREMLYOVA of Russia and VIOLETA BECLEA of Romania competed at the world indoor championships weeks after failing drug tests, the International Amateur Athletic Federation confirmed yesterday.
Kremlyova won the bronze medal and Beclea was fourth in the women's 1,500 meters at the world indoor meet March 12 at Barcelona, Spain.


Sharper Image Corp.(SHRP,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Drivers File Appeal
Both the Williams and Benetton Formula One teams have lodged appeals after disqualifications for using illegal fuel wiped out their 1-2 finish Sunday at the Brazilian Grand Prix.


T. G. Gradnauer, 54, Teacher of the Deaf
Thomas George Gradnauer, an advocate for and teacher of the deaf, died on Sunday at his home in Ewing, N.J.
He was 54.
The cause was complications from brain cancer and a stroke, his family said.


By Design; Sybaritic Slips
"Your slip is showing" is no longer a cause for embarrassment, but a nod to fashion savvy.
For several months now, models and young fashion editors have been seen at parties wearing satin slips from a chic little Paris boutique called Sabbia Rosa.
Now, Bloomingdale's is importing a dozen or more slip styles for a shop of their own on the fourth floor of the Lexington Avenue store.
The most dresslike style has broad shoulder straps and a self-tie in back.


Envirodyne Industries reports earnings for Year to Dec 29


God, You Imperfect, Conflicted Fella, You
GOD A Biography  By Jack Miles  446 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $27.50.
"You cannot plumb the depths of the human heart," reads a passage in the Apocrypha, "nor find out what a man is thinking; how do you expect to search out God, who made all these things, and find out His mind or comprehend His thoughts?"


Kaneb Services Inc.(KAB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


How Do You Stop Agonizing Pain In an Arm That No Longer Exists? A Scientist Does It With Mirrors
THE third time he lost his left arm, Derek Steen yelped with joy.
He could not believe his good fortune.
The problem began 10 years ago when Mr.
Steen crashed his motorcycle, tearing all the nerves that attached his left arm to his spine.
The arm was hopelessly paralyzed, bound in a sling.
He lost his arm a second time, so to speak, one year later when, deemed useless and getting in the way, the limb was amputated.


Leucadia National Corp.(LUK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball
MLB -- Named Carolyn Taylor director of special events. American League


Eagle Food Centers Inc. reports earnings for Year to Jan 28


Maple Leaf Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


WELFARE BILL GETS KEY ENDORSEMENT BY G.O.P. SENATORS
Senate Republicans today embraced a central element of the House-passed welfare bill, deflating the hopes of Democrats who are seeking major changes to preserve the current Federal guarantee of cash assistance for poor people.
The chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, Bob Packwood, said he and other Senate Republicans supported a provision of the House bill that would replace the current program with lump sum grants that states could use as they wished to assist low-income people.


Turning Up The Sound And the Beat
Veruca Salt was slightly defensive at the Academy on Friday night.
Nina Gordon and Louise Post -- its guitarists, singers and songwriters -- formed Veruca Salt in Chicago in 1993 and had a hit single, "Seether," and a major-label contract by the end of 1994.
The band arrived in the wake of the Breeders, who use a similar combination of breezy voices and muscular guitars, and its fast ascent drew suspicion from an alternative-rock scene that's both wary and jealous of commercial success.
"I hope we're worth the hype," Ms.
Post said as the set ended.
By then, her band had blasted away Breeders comparisons by bringing out Veruca Salt's hard-rock foundations.
Unlike many alternative rockers, Veruca Salt revels in brute force.
In slow stomps like "Spiderman '79" and rockers like "All Hail Me," Steve Lack, on bass, and Jim Shapiro, on drums, turned up their instruments and united in a bludgeoning beat, linking Veruca Salt to performers like AC/DC, Joan Jett and Suzi Quatro.


In Praise of Greedy Lawyers
Tort reform, a rallying cry of the Republican revolution, has hit upon a scapegoat with unlikely mass appeal.
Contingency-fee lawyers, blamed as the root evil of our litigious society, have been socked with the "Attorneys Accountability Act," one of three legal reform bills passed by the House this month.
The Senate is scheduled to begin debating its own, related bills next week.
The act's key provision -- which compels the losing party to pay some of the other's legal fees in a category of lawsuits that almost exclusively involves corporate defendants -- would devastate the plaintiff trade by inhibiting the Davids from going after the Goliaths and their high-powered counsel.


Pacers Put Reeling Nets In Precarious Position
Basic basketball, Chris Morris called it.
Reggie Miller would pop off a screen and square his feet for a jump shot.
Rik Smits would bend his knees and post up his 7-foot-4-inch frame like a lighthouse.
Picks.
Inside position.
Basic basketball.
The Nets learned another hard lesson tonight at Market Square Arena.
Miller nailed 5 of 10 3-pointers and scored 25 points.
Smits reached high for rebounds, grabbing 12, and scored 24 points.
Indiana beat New Jersey, 98-87, in a game the Pacers led by 21 points in the first half and never let the Nets back in.


New York Democrats See 'Nightmare' in Republican Welfare Bill
The welfare bill passed in the House last week would push more than half of all New York City children receiving Aid to Families with Dependent Children off the welfare rolls and would cost city residents $6 billion in aid over the next five years, according to New York Democrats.
There are 540,000 children now receiving benefits, according to a report by Representative Carolyn B. Maloney, Democrat of Manhattan.
The report, based on numbers provided by the Department of Health and Human Services, said more than 280,000 of the children would be denied aid by the legislation's provisions placing a five-year limit on welfare and disqualifying children born to mothers already receiving benefits or to unwed mothers under 18.


Sports of The Times; Jordan's Killer Eyes On Knicks
IT'S Michael Jordan's favorite word now.
It also drifts in and out of conversations all over the National Basketball Association about him.
The word is "challenge."


Mother Nature Didn't Devastate Fisheries
To the Editor:
You report March 22 that Gov.
William F. Weld of Massachusetts will ask President Clinton to declare his state's commercial fisheries a natural disaster.
While no one would dispute the magnitude of the crisis, the devastation of Georges Bank, off Cape Cod, is not attributable to the "uncontrollable forces of nature."


In 6-Day Offensive, Algerians Step Up War on the Rebels
Algeria's special forces have killed between 300 and 600 Islamic militants in the last six days, creating the biggest military engagement in three years of strife between the two sides and suggesting that the rebels' military sophistication is increasing even as their losses are widening.
In the latest backlash by the militants, Mohammed Abderrahmani, the executive editor of Algeria's oldest daily newspaper, was shot to death today in his car at a traffic light in a suburb of Algiers.


Clarcor Inc.(CLC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 4


Winnie Mandela Out of Cabinet For Defying Presidential Orders
After weeks of anguish over a decision many fear will bitterly divide black South Africa, President Nelson Mandela today expelled his estranged wife, Winnie, from his Government for insubordination.
Officials said Mrs.
Mandela was dismissed as a deputy Cabinet minister for sowing division with her persistent attacks on the Government, and for her defiance of presidential orders.
Aides said police charges of bribe-taking and influence-peddling, while unproven, had helped turn the President against his wife.


Chess
Viswanathan Anand of India has defeated Gata Kamsky of Brooklyn to become the challenger who will face Gary Kasparov for the Professional Chess Association's world championship.
The two will meet in a title match, starting on Sept. 10, in Cologne, Germany.
The 20-year-old Kamsky is not out of title competition altogether, however.
At a time and place still uncertain, he is to play Anatoly Karpov for the International Chess Federation's champsionship.


2 California Health Care Providers Agree to a $1.8 Billion Merger
Two big California health maintenance organizations, Wellpoint Health Networks and Health Systems International have agreed to a $1.8 billion stock swap that would create the biggest stockholder-owned H.M.O. in the lucrative California market and the fifth largest in the country, people close to the deal said yesterday.
The companies said Wellpoint was "in discussions" to buy Health Systems.
Health Systems stockholders would receive 1.09 shares of Wellpoint common stock for each Health Systems share and a proportionate share of $1.2 billion in cash.


Robinson 40 Pace Spurs' 8th in Row
Spurs 114, Pistons 93
David Robinson had 40 points and 12 rebounds last night to lead visiting San Antonio past the Detroit Pistons, 114-93, for the Spurs' eighth straight victory.
Sean Elliott added 29 points for the Spurs.
Allan Houston scored 24 points for the Pistons, who lost for the eighth time in 10 games.


Gunman Kills Gucci Heir And Escapes
The scion of the Gucci leather goods and fashion dynasty was shot dead outside his downtown Milan office this morning by a well-dressed gunman using a silencer pistol, the police said.
Maurizio Gucci, who two years ago sold out his 50 percent share of the family empire, was shot twice from behind, and then twice in the face at close range.
His assailant, described as being in his 40's and dressed in a beige jacket and tie, also wounded the building's doorman before jumping into a waiting car.


'Forrest Gump' Triumphs With 6 Academy Awards
"Forrest Gump," the runaway hit about a simple soul caught up in the most turbulent events of postwar America, triumphed last night at the 67th Academy Awards, sweeping all three major awards for which it was nominated, including best picture.
Robert Zemeckis won the Oscar for best director, and Tom Hanks was named best actor for his performance in the title role.
The sweep represented a vote for traditional Hollywood values as the feel-good film triumphed over the rawer, more experimental "Pulp Fiction," which won only one award.
The other nominees for best picture, "Four Weddings and a Funeral," "Quiz Show" and "The Shawshank Redemtion," were shut out.


Yesterday in Washington
REGULATORY OVERHAUL -- The Senate took up a proposal that would let Congress review and possibly overturn any new rule a Government agency issued.
The proposal would considerably increase the influence of Congress over the fine details of the laws it passed.
Offered by Senate moderates as an alternative to a yearlong freeze on most new Federal regulations, the proposal could come to a vote as early as today.


Impressive Reports, To Stay And to Go
YOU are showing the first-quarter sales surge to the board of directors on the 21-inch monitor of a computer running Microsoft Windows 3.1.
Cheerfully colored words appear on the screen, remain long enough for even a director to read and slide off to be replaced with a bar chart, then a brief video of the C.E.O. with a snippet of upbeat melody.
One of the directors could not make it to the meeting today.
No matter.
You send her a floppy disk with the presentation.
She can play it on her computer, even though she does not own a copy of the program it was created with.


TV Speeds Cases From Police to Prosecutor
In a cramped warren of offices at Queens Borough Hall in Kew Gardens, old ways bump up against the new in a little-known but crucial corner of the criminal justice system.
The old: Officer Robert Bachman and an assistant District Attorney, Joseph Scarglato, hunch together over a paper-strewn desk as the officer describes a burglary case that has brought him from the distant Rockaway peninsula.
It is the complaint room of the Queens District Attorney's office, and here, as at similar sites in all the boroughs, police officers who have made arrests turn over the cases to prosecutors.


Corrections
A picture caption on Friday about the four victims of the post office shootings in Montclair, N.J., reversed two names in some editions.
The bearded white man was Stanley Scott Walensky; the mustached white man was Robert Leslie.
The two other victims were correctly identified: George Lomago was the clean-shaven white man and Ernest Spruill was the black man with a mustache.


Price of Independence; A Disabled Man's Quest to Be Free
He is confined to a wheelchair.
He cannot speak or write.
He needs help eating, dressing and going to the bathroom.
Yet Donald Jantzen wants to leave home.
And in trying to do so, the 44-year-old Mr.
Jantzen, who has cerebral palsy, embarked on a legal odyssey that he cannot now halt.
He sued his family to obtain control over his substantial financial assets, framing his case with such vehement charges of mismanagement and physical abuse that a county judge has rebuffed all of Mr.
Jantzen's subsequent attempts to call it off.


Q&amp;A
Foaming Cola
Q.  What makes a cola foam up when you put a pretzel in it?


Chrysler Plans To Replace Van Latches
The Chrysler Corporation said today that it would replace the rear door latches of all the mini-vans it built before late last summer, up to 4.5 million vehicles in North America.
Chrysler said the move was calculated to salvage the company's image for safety-consciousness, rather than to fix an actual safety defect.
Chrysler said that under an agreement negotiated during the last two weeks with Federal regulators, it would alert the owners of the mini-vans through letters and a national advertising campaign.
The affected vehicles are 1984 through 1994 models of the Chrysler Town and Country, Dodge Caravan and Plymouth Voyager mini-vans.
There will be no charge for the repair.


River Blindness Disease Has 2d Devastating Side
The skin disease associated with river blindness, the debilitating parasitic affliction that affects millions of people in tropical Africa, has more serious consequences than previously believed and should be attacked as a separate health problem, a new study has found.
The study showed that the intense, unrelieved itching and disfiguring lesions associated with onchocerciasis, or river blindness, have been largely unrecognized burdens on the afflicted population, resulting in social ostracism and widespread psychological problems.


Stocks Set New Marks Amid Questions on Durability of the Rally
Stocks hit record levels once again yesterday, even as analysts questioned whether the rally could last.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 18.67 points, to 4,157.34, the eighth record in the last 12 sessions.
But just five stocks accounted for all of the gains: Boeing, J. P. Morgan, American Express, International Business Machines and Caterpillar.
The Dow was flat much of the day, surging in the last half-hour of trading.


Entergy Corp.(ETR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


It's Natives vs. Newcomers Down in the Worm World
AS the ground warms up across North America, billions of earthworms are uncoiling from the little balls of dormancy in which they have spent the winter and are once again renewing the vitality of forest, field and garden.
But for such a familiar creature, the earthworm has in many ways been an object of mystery to scientists.
Only now, for instance, is it becoming fully evident that in a continent-wide ecological revolution, earthworm species from Europe and Asia are taking over North American soil with potentially serious but still unclear consequences.


On My Mind; The Limp Noodle
At least this much can be said about a new human rights initiative of the Clinton Administration: There are people in the Government who understood and argued that it was an embarrassing piece of hypocrisy, saying much, meaning nothing, fooling nobody.
They were overruled by higher authorities in the White House and National Economic Council, who actually still believe that the President can restore his reputation as a human rights leader with funny-house mirrors and without putting pressure on Communist China or its American business lobby.


Lazard Freres Units Form New Partnership
The three Lazard Freres partnerships have banded together to form a new partnership, Lazard Capital Markets, to enhance their financing and trading operations in Europe and in emerging markets.
Damon Mezzacappa, a senior partner and head of capital markets for Lazard Freres &amp; Company in New York, has been named executive chairman of the new partnership.
Jeremy Sillem, a general partner in the New York firm and managing director of Lazard Brothers &amp; Company in London, will be responsible for its day-to-day operations as chief executive.


Was It Fumes (or Faking)?
About two dozen students and teachers at Junior High School 210 in Woodhaven, Queens, may have thought they were suffering another attack yesterday of the noxious mace-like fumes that spread through the school last Friday.
Either that, or they wanted to get the day off, the authorities said.
Still, 21 people, mostly students, were examined after saying they had symptoms of noxious gas: itchy throats and watery eyes, Emergency Medical Service officials officials said.
Sixteen of them were taken to hospitals, where doctors looked them over, then released them.
Anxious parents descended on the school, wanting to see their children or take them home.


National Education Corp.(NEC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Brain Manages Happiness And Sadness in Different Centers
THE essence of emotion -- the rapture of happiness, the numbness of depression, the angst of anxiety -- is as evanescent as a spring rainbow.
It is hard enough for a poet to capture, let alone a neuroscientist.
Now brain researchers, in their own fashion, have begun to do so.
A major result emerging from the new research is that the brain does not have just a single emotional center, as has long been believed, but that different emotions involve different structures.
Another is that the brains of men and women seem to generate certain emotions with different patterns of activity.


Collapsed Building's Owners Are Facing a Criminal Inquiry
City housing officials yesterday temporarily withdrew criminal and civil contempt charges against the owners of a Harlem building that collapsed last week, to allow a criminal investigation by the Manhattan District Attorney to proceed.
Lawyers for the Department of Housing Preservation and Development withdrew the charges for 60 days at the request of District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau.
The District Attorney's office said it was concerned that if the housing agency's charges were resolved first, the landlords might argue that additional, more serious charges by the District Attorney in connection with the fatal collapse would constitute double jeopardy.


Albany Absolved on Funds For Yonkers Desegregation
A Federal judge harshly criticized New York State education officials today for failing to act to eliminate segregation in the Yonkers public schools in the 1960's and 1970's, but he ruled that the state would not have to pay for future desegregation efforts.
Yonkers school officials characterized the ruling by the judge, Leonard B. Sand of Federal District Court in Manhattan, as a significant setback.


Decipherers of Dead Sea Scrolls Turn to DNA Analysis for Help
DECIPHERING the Dead Sea Scrolls, which began with great excitement after their discovery in the Judean desert 50 years ago, has diminished to a tedious, seemingly endless task.
With about 15 complete or nearly complete scrolls having been translated, the leftovers are a heap of perhaps 10,000 thumbnail-sized fragments, scraps of parchment from some 800 other scrolls.
The edges of these bits are too decayed to allow them to be pieced together like a jigsaw puzzle.
And the writing on them is limited to a few characters per fragment, so they cannot be joined by meaning either.


Brooklyn Principal Accused Of Diverting School Funds
Last year, the Board of Education drew up plans to add sixth graders to Public School 128 in Brooklyn.
But the principal, Michael Miller, told school officials he did not have enough classroom space to accommodate all the pupils, and the board ended up spending at least $40,000 on two additional classrooms, prosecutors said yesterday.
But Mr.
Miller did have the space, the prosecutors said -- in two classrooms that he had earlier converted to a weight-lifting and exercise room for himself and the school's teachers and administrators.


Executive Changes
AT&amp;T CORP., New York, appointed Rodrigo Guerra president and chief executive of the Caribbean and Latin American unit, based in Miami.
BORDEN INC., Columbus, Ohio, named William H. Carter executive vice president and chief financial officer, succeeding James C. Van Meter, who resigned.


Redskins Re-sign Back
The Washington Redskins re-signed running back and kick return specialist BRIAN MITCHELL yesterday to a three-year deal worth $4.2 million, which includes a $1.5 million signing bonus.
Mitchell set or tied six team records in 1994 and also set an National Football League record for combined punt and kickoff return yardage with 1,930 yards.
Earlier yesterday, the Redskins lost a pair of free agents as guards RALEIGH McKENZIE and MARK SCHLERETH signed with Philadelphia and Denver, respectively. (AP)


Fairfield to Play Football in 1996
Fairfield University, which has never had a varsity football team, will begin playing Division I-AA football in the fall of 1996.
The new team will become the ninth member of the Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference, which includes St.
John's, Iona and St.
Peter's for football.
Like the Ivy and Patriot leagues, the M.A.A.C. does not offer football scholarships.


Patterns
Runway Models, Please Call
Booking top models for shows has increasingly become a last-minute crap shoot for designers, as models have blossomed into superstars and mini-conglomerates with unprecedented demands on their time.


Oxford Industries(OXM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 3


Rules of the Game Challenged
Does the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act of 1988 stack the deck in favor of casinos run by American Indian tribes?
Two New Jersey Congressmen say they think so, and they plan to introduce legislation to give the Federal Government and states more power to regulate the tribal gaming halls.
Currently, tribal casinos are untaxed and many are unregulated, said Representatives Robert G. Torricelli, Democrat of Englewood, and Frank A. LoBiondo, Republican of Vineland.
By contrast, New Jersey casinos pay taxes of about $800 million annually and are regulated by the state.
"All we're asking for here is a level playing field," Mr.
LoBiondo said at a news conference.


Gramm Sees Effort To Deny Him a Spot On New York Ballot
Senator Phil Gramm of Texas brought his fledgling Presidential campaign to Manhattan yesterday, saying he was optimistic about gathering support here even though virtually every Republican leader in New York State backs Senator Bob Dole.
Speaking to reporters before a fund-raising reception at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, Mr.
Gramm attacked Alfonse M. D'Amato, the state's Republican Senator, as the driving force behind the support in New York for Mr.
Dole, the Senate majority leader, and stressed that residents should have a voice, too.


The Game's First True Big Man; Kurland, 6-10 1/2, Led Oklahoma State's Predecessor to the 1945 Title
He was the first true big man of basketball, a Hall of Famer who won two national collegiate titles, two Olympic gold medals and became a legend not only in his home state but also around the world.
And now that another gentle giant is leading his alma mater to this year's Final Four, Bob Kurland is again surrounded by tall tales.
After all, it was Kurland's size (6 feet 10 1/2 inches, he says, "maybe 7 feet in the summer") that prompted the International Amateur Basketball Federation to propose (but never adopt) a size limit (6-4 3/4) for the "good of the game" before the 1948 Olympics and goaltending rules that are still in effect.
And when a Chinese player supposedly dribbled between Kurland's legs and scored a basket during a game at the 1948 Olympics, was it fact or fantasy?


Iraq's American Hostages
Iraq has handed down unjustifiable eight-year sentences for two Americans who trespassed on its territory.
Their imprisonment poses a delicate diplomatic problem for President Clinton.
Already Republican Presidential hopefuls have called for forceful action to free the men.
In coming weeks the easing of economic sanctions on Iraq will come before the United Nations Security Council.
Make too much of the two men's plight and Mr.
Clinton drops a bargaining chip into Saddam Hussein's pocket.
Make too little of it and the Republicans accuse him of letting two Americans rot in a Baghdad jail.
Either way, Mr.
Clinton's policy toward Iraqi sanctions is in some ways now held hostage, too.


All Tyson Wants Is Peace And Quiet
Mike Tyson was described yesterday as being agitated by all the activity around him since his release from prison last Saturday.
"He's a little put out by all the people in front of his house -- he feels like a prisoner," said the Rev.
Charles Williams, a Baptist minister who has known Tyson for some years and who visited him regularly at the prison outside of Indianapolis over the past three years.


Lessons for Congress in Seder
"Let all who are hungry come and partake."


A New Book Reveals Roosevelt's Bond With a Special Friend
Shortly after Margaret Lynch Suckley died in 1991 at 99, a friend sorting through her crumbling Victorian mansion on the Hudson River here found a small black suitcase under the bed, marked, simply, "M.L.S."
Inside the silk-lined suitcase, hundreds of letters and diary entries chronicled an affectionate, longstanding relationship between Miss Suckley and a distant cousin, a man she lovingly referred to as "M.F." or "My Franklin."


USAir Pilots Said to Agree To Furloughs
USAir's pilot union broke its deadlock with the airline over cost-cutting measures by agreeing to let the company furlough up to 300 pilots, people familiar with details of the negotiations said yesterday.
That furlough limit, representing 6 percent of USAir's total pilot work force, was a compromise between the union's earlier insistence that no pilots would be furloughed, while the company had initially demanded that it not be constrained by such a limit.
The airline expects that it will have 573 pilots more than it needs by the end of the year.


CHRONICLE
Representative ENID WALDHOLTZ, Republican of Utah, is expecting a baby in September.
Normally, that wouldn't be cause for comment, but when you're about to be only the second member of Congress to have a baby while in office, it's bound to attract attention.
The first was REPRESENTATIVE YVONNE BRAITHWAITE BURKE, Democrat of California, 20 years ago.


METRO DIGEST
COUNTY EXECUTIVES BREAK WITH PATAKI
New York's county executives, almost all of them Republicans and an important source of Republican power in the state, have broken ranks with Governor Pataki over his income tax-cutting plan, calling on him to slow down the cuts to avoid future increases in local property taxes.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  PLAN WOULD OUST MOB FROM FISH MARKET
The Giuliani administration, unveiling details of plans to rid the Fulton Fish Market of mobsters, asked the City Council for broad powers to determine who can do business and who can work there.
B3.
PRINCIPAL IS CHARGED WITH MISCONDUCT
The principal of a Brooklyn elementary school was indicted on charges of grand larceny, falsifying records and official misconduct.
He is accused of converting two classrooms to an exercise area for the staff while telling officials that pupils did not have enough space, prompting construction of additional classrooms.
B3.
WAS IT FUMES (OR FAKING)?
About two dozen students and teachers at a junior high school in Queens may or may not have thought they were suffering another attack of the noxious mace-like fumes that spread through the school last Friday.
B3.
TV SPEEDING CASES TO PROSECUTOR
In a cramped warren of offices at Queens Borough Hall in Kew Gardens, old ways bump up against the new in a little-known but crucial corner of the criminal justice system.
B4.
GRAMM SEEKS SUPPORT IN MANHATTAN
Senator Phil Gramm brought his fledgling Presidential campaign to Manhattan, saying he was optimistic about gathering support even though virtually every Republican leader in New York State backs Senator Bob Dole.
B4.
CRIMINAL INQUIRY IN COLLAPSE OF BUILDING
City housing officials temporarily withdrew criminal and civil contempt charges against the owners of a Harlem building that collapsed, to allow a criminal investigation by the Manhattan District Attorney to proceed.
B8.
CHANGE IN WELFARE WOULD BE COSTLY
The welfare bill passed in the House last week would push more than half of all New York City children receiving Aid to Families with Dependent Children off the welfare rolls and cost the city more than $6 billion over the next five years, New York Democrats said.
B9.
A Midwestern educator was selected as the new president of Hunter College.
B3.
REGION  WHITMAN MOVES TO STOP UPRISING
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey spent part of her first day back from a Florida vacation suppressing a small revolt against the timing of her next income tax cut.
B6.
JUDGE FAULTS STATE IN DESEGREGATION
A Federal judge harshly criticized New York State education officials for failing to eliminate segregation in the Yonkers public schools in the 1960's and 1970's, but he ruled that the state would not have to pay for future school desegregation efforts.
B6.
JUDGE PERMITS BRIDGEPORT CASINO VOTE
A Superior Court judge refused to block a citywide vote that will ask residents whether they want the Connecticut General Assembly to authorize a casino for Bridgeport.
B4.
Our Towns by Evelyn Nieves B6


And the Winners Are. . .
BEST ACTOR Tom Hanks who starred in "Forrest Gump" won the best actor award.
BEST ACTRESS Jessica Lange won best actress award for "Blue Sky".


INSIDE
Vacancy at Federal Reserve
John P. LaWare, known as an advocate for raising interest rates to fight inflation, said he would step down from the Federal Reserve Board, effective April 30.
Page D1.
Moves in Baseball Dispute
A Federal judge has scheduled a hearing Friday on a request by major league baseball players for an injunction that the players say would end their strike.
Page B15.
Chrysler to Replace Latches
Chrysler will replace the rear-door latches of millions of mini-vans under an unusual agreement with regulators.
The repaired mini-vans will not be counted in a national registry of recalled vehicles.
Page D1.


Ito Rules Simpson Guest To Be a 'Hostile' Witness
The Deputy District Attorney, Marcia Clark, persuaded Judge Lance A. Ito to declare Brian (Kato) Kaelin a hostile witness today, as opposing lawyers leaned on Mr.
Kaelin to present his imprecise and inarticulate memories about O. J. and Nicole Brown Simpson in the starkest, most partisan light possible.
Once again, but this time with court approval, Ms.
Clark tried to portray her own witness as tailoring parts of his testimony to help Mr.
Simpson.
At the same time, Ms.
Clark reminded jurors that Mr.
Kaelin could not account for Mr.
Simpson's whereabouts during the time last June 12 when, prosecutors say, he killed Mrs.
Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman.


Zofar Journal; Israel's Crops in Jordan's Fields? It Must Be Peace
With a small Jordanian flag on the windshield, Nissim Douek recently drove his dusty station wagon across the border to work his fields in territory that was handed back to Jordan under a peace treaty with Israel.
"It's a nice experiment," Mr.
Douek, an Israeli farmer, said as his entry pass was inspected by a Jordanian soldier at a checkpoint.
"No problem at all."


Rapping For Rhythm And Content
There are two difficulties that good rappers often have: one is performing their music in live settings, where prerecorded music and live raps don't always mix well.
The other is in communicating a message (all hip-hop says something about society, even sex-obsessed songs like "Baby Got Back") without being overbearing, underinformed or just plain obnoxious.
On Wednesday night during a sold-out performance at Tramps, Digable Planets and Spearhead managed to avoid these problems by playing with competent bands and rapping lyrics that valued form and rhythm as much as content.
Digable Planets were almost too successful in 1993: for the high-brow, their first album, "Reachin' (A New Refutation of Time and Space)," was named after a Jorge Luis Borges line.
For those after immediate pleasure, the beatnik jazz-style single "Rebirth of Slick (Cool Like Dat)" had some of the most memorable hooks of the year.
But at Tramps, Digable Planets set out to prove that they weren't one-hit wonders.
The group's three Brooklyn-based rappers, who perform using the names Doodlebug, Ladybug and Butterfly, performed mostly material from their second album, "Blowout Comb" (Pendulum/EMI), which looks to the Black Panthers and black-exploitation films of the past to find calls to revolution for the present.
Behind the rappers' laid-back, tag-team poetry of kitsch and resistance, a two-man horn section shaded the music with playing that was more atmospheric than jazzy, and a drummer, guitarist, bassist and keyboardist made sure the insect rappers had a solid foundation to wander over.


I.B.M. to Help Vatican Open Its Archives to the Computing Masses
The Vatican Library, founded in 1451 by Pope Nicholas V, housing 1.5 million books and 150,000 manuscripts, including the oldest known manuscript of the Bible, is visited by only 2,000 scholars a year.
But I.B.M., as part of a new business push announced yesterday, intends to help the Vatican open its archives to the computing masses.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  WINNIE MANDELA EXPELLED  After weeks of anguished deliberation, South Africa President Nelson Mandela expelled his estranged wife, Winnie, from his Government for insubordination.
A1


On Her Guatemalan Ranch, American Retraces Slaying
Five years ago, when an American innkeeper disappeared in Guatemala, his wife, Carole A. DeVine, visited the local army garrison and asked to speak to Col.
Julio Roberto Alpirez, the commander, hoping he could help her find her husband.
"Neither Colonel Alpirez nor any other officer would see me," Mrs.
DeVine said in an interview at her ranch in Guatemala's northern rain forest.
"I was turned away at the gate. They were very rude."


COUNTY OFFICIALS CHALLENGE PATAKI ON TAX-CUT PLAN
New York's county executives, almost all of them Republicans and an important source of Republican power in the state, have broken ranks with Gov.
George E. Pataki over his income tax-cutting plan, calling on him to slow down the cuts to avoid future increases in local property taxes.
With only four days left in the state's fiscal year, the county executives' efforts to alter Mr.
Pataki's plan underscores the Republican Governor's central political challenge: to create and sustain a coalition of Republicans and conservative Democrats who will support his proposal to make some of the deepest spending and tax cuts in memory.


Jamesway Corp.(JMY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Science Times E-Mail
Science Times has an electronic mail address for comments from readers about published articles and suggested areas of coverage:
scitimes@nytimes.com.


Employee Owners Still Need Leadership
To the Editor:
As an advocate of equity-based pay strategies, I would like to offer a counterpoint to the anti-employee ownership theme of your March 22 Business Day article on Kiwi Air.


U.S. Denies 2 Americans Entered Iraq As Saboteurs
The Clinton Administration today rejected assertions from Baghdad that two Americans being held prisoner there had crossed into Iraq as saboteurs or spies.
White House and State Department officials said again today that the two had strayed mistakenly and innocently into Iraq while trying to visit a friend south of the border in Kuwait and did not deserve the eight-year prison sentences an Iraqi court imposed on them on Saturday.


Nigeria Accused of a 2-Year War on Ethnic Group
Two years ago, when a handful of villages were destroyed and residents began fleeing a wave of killings in the oil-producing Niger River Delta country near this small town, the Government and refugees gave starkly different explanations of the violence.
For Nigeria's military authorities, the killings were an example of the kind of inter-ethnic hatred that has long afflicted the overcrowded farming and fishing lands of this region, and occasionally exploded in tribal violence.


Va. Tech and Marquette Advance to N.I.T. Final
At Sunday's National Invitation Tournament luncheon, Marquette Coach Mike Deane described his Golden Eagles as the worst-shooting team in the country.
Last night, after Marquette won a wild, come-from-behind 87-79 victory over Penn State in the semifinals of the National Invitation Tournament at Madison Square Garden, Deane revisited that theme.


Congoleum Corp.(CGM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Just Think of the Air as a Public Highway
To the Editor:
William Safire believes that the Administration's auction of broadband spectrum failed to fetch the "top dollar for our public property" taxpayers deserve (column, March 16).
But there are reasons why the sale of spectrum should not take place, now or ever.


Bolshoi's New Boss Outlines Future
The Bolshoi theater has become famous for serene and predictable performances of such time-worn ballet classics as "Swan Lake" and "Giselle." Backstage, Russia's best known and deeply troubled cultural institution is just as renowned for political intrigue, back-stabbing and titanic feuds.
So it was perhaps not surprising that the naming of a new artistic director last week did little to still the commotion behind the scenes.
Instead, the momentous decision spread the infighting beyond the Palladian columns of the Bolshoi to deep inside the already riven administration of President Boris N. Yeltsin.


Fed Governor to Step Down; Clinton Gets a 3d Vacancy
John P. LaWare, a Federal Reserve Board governor with a reputation for favoring higher interest rates and opposing the Clinton Administration's banking policies, announced his resignation today, to take effect April 30.
His departure gives President Clinton his third chance to fill a vacancy on the powerful board in less than a year.
The replacement of any single governor tends to have little effect on interest rate policy.
But the Administration's two appointees to the board have shown slightly more willingness than their Republican colleagues to discuss publicly the risks of higher unemployment posed by Federal Reserve efforts to fight inflation by pushing up interest rates.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY Lightning Tops Canadiens in Overtime Petr Klima scored on a breakaway 2 minutes 23 seconds into overtime last night, giving the Tampa Bay Lightning a 3-2 victory over the Montreal Canadiens, who lost their eighth straight road game.
Tampa Bay ended its five-game home losing streak.
Klima took a pass from Brian Bradley and skated in on Patrick Roy, faking to his backhand and sliding the puck inside the right post.
Mark Recchi scored his ninth and 10th goals for Montreal. (AP)


Pacific Bell, MCI to Expand Internet Service
The Internet is not just for computer companies any more.
Two powerful telephone carriers, MCI and Pacific Bell, disclosed plans yesterday to offer a broad range of Internet services to businesses and individuals.
The MCI Telecommunications Corporation said it planned to take advantage of its international networks and brand name to become a national Internet service provider, offering residential and business customers dial-up access to the Internet, as well as special consumer software for using the Internet service known as the World Wide Web.


A Viennese Pastry, Nutrition-Free
It is difficult to get too solemnly critical about a new production of "The Merry Widow" in which the lead soprano not only manages a respectable can-can in the third act (holding her own with characters named Lolo, Dodo, Jou-Jous and Frou-Frou), but rather winningly sinks to the floor in a slow split at its finale.
On Sunday afternoon at the New York City Opera, Jane Thorngren almost winked at the audience as she touched ground.
There were any number of pleasures to be taken in this production, if one adjusted standards and expectations.
Franz Lehar's melodic score from 1905 was exuberantly conducted by Eric Stern.
There were charms, too, in Robert Creighton's tap-dancing routine as Njegus, Baron Zeta's aide.


Beggars Can't Be Choosy, So They Choose PATH
JOEL B. has become a reverse commuter.
He used to ask for money on the subways in Manhattan.
Now he takes the PATH train to Hoboken and works the teeming masses here.
It's a liberating feeling.
At around 7:30 Monday morning, he stepped from a blissfully uncrowded platform at the World Trade Center to a blissfully uncrowded train.
He had a car all to himself.
"Like I owned it," he said.


Damage to Conner's Keel May Hurt Cup Hopes, Too
The fact that Dennis Conner doesn't know how to swim didn't help his peace of mind Sunday when his America's Cup yacht, Stars &amp; Stripes, started taking on water during a race with Young America.
But it was clear today that the boat had been in serious danger.
"I'm not joking when I say the boat could have sunk," said Paul Cayard, Conner's team strategist, tonight.


A Setback for Turner on Time Warner
Tele-Communications Inc. threw a wrench into Ted Turner's ambitions to own a broadcast network yesterday, saying it was no longer interested in buying Time Warner's stake in the Turner Broadcasting System.
"We couldn't come to an agreement on price," said Lela Cocoros, a spokeswoman for Tele-Communications.
Time Warner, which owns 19.4 percent of Turner Broadcasting, had been seeking $30 a share, or $1.6 billion, for its stake, according to an executive with knowledge of the discussions.
The executive added that the form of payment proved to be another hurdle, with Time Warner demanding all cash.


Corrections
A profile in Business Day on March 10 about Senator Larry Pressler referred imprecisely to his position on term limits.
The Senator said he supported legislation on term limits that would apply to himself and other incumbents.
But the legislation, which would limit senators to two terms or 12 years, would not count the time already served by Mr.
Pressler and other incumbents.


No Headline
"It's because happiness and sadness involve separate brain areas that we can have bittersweet moments, like when a child is leaving home for college and you're sad, but happy, too." -- DR.
MARK GEORGE, of the National Institute of Mental Health.  [ C1:2 ]


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.19
6.03
3.53
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.64
5.64
3.50
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.80
5.80
3.85
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.04
7.08
6.61
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.31
7.36
6.97
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.21
8.24
7.81
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.34
6.35
6.10
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 8


Bank Robberies Soaring Despite the Risks
One summer night here in 1934, the defiant John Dillinger watched his last picture show, "Manhattan Melodrama," before walking out of the Biograph Theater into a deadly hail of bullets -- an example of the perils of robbing banks for a living.
It remains a stacked-odds career, but bank robberies around the nation have more than doubled in the past decade, according to the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Here in Chicago, bank holdups have been soaring lately, to the record-setting pace of 51 so far this year.


Small Machines Make Big Strides
LITTLE computers are always compromises.
Subnotebook models, the size of a couple of computer magazines, have been as remarkable for what the manufacturers leave out as for what they put in.
But manufacturers keep finding new ways to break miniaturization's bounds.
The Omnibook 600C from the Hewlett-Packard Company weighs in at just under four pounds, the Digital Equipment Corporation's Hinote Ultra (not to be confused with the larger just plain Hinote) at about four and a quarter pounds and the Thinkpad 701 models from the International Business Machines Corporation at about four and a half pounds.
An external power transformer and a floppy disk drive typically add another a pound and a quarter.
With eight megabytes of RAM (random access memory), prices for units based on DX2/50 processors start at about $2,900 for the Omnibook, $3,600 for the Hinote and $4,100 for the Thinkpad.


World Ban On Libyan Oil Sought by U.S.
Officials said tonight that the Clinton Administration was seeking a worldwide oil embargo in an effort to force Libya to turn over two men who are wanted in connection with the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103, which went down over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988.
That step would add new teeth to the economic sanctions imposed by the United Nations on Libya, and would represent a significant toughening of American policy toward the Government of Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi.


Fire in Yonkers Commercial Strip


Corrections
A headline on Saturday about diplomatic developments regarding Croatia, Bosnia and Macedonia misstated a proposal by a five-nation group seeking a peaceful settlement of the conflicts in the region.
The draft resolution under consideration by the Security Council would reorganize the United Nations peacekeeping force in the region, but only in Croatia would it reduce the size.


Return of the Winners From Westwood
Welcome back to the U.C.L.A.
Invitational, and thanks for all your patience during our decade and a half of nagging scheduling difficulties.
As we commemorate this 20th anniversary of the last championship at the end of the Sam Gilbert Era, when benefactors were benefactors and the Bruins were on top, you have to admit that somewhere, deep down, you're glad U.C.L.A. will be in Seattle this Saturday.
O.K., maybe not glad.
But in the first Bruin Final Four appearance since 1980, when the rooting interest of neutrals will be determined by which team they dislike the least, the return of a group from Westwood is a good thing.


Women in Workplace
To the Editor:
Re "What Feminism Has Done in Workplace" (letter, March 24):


BUSINESS DIGEST
SmithKline Beecham Clears A Hurdle on Tagamet Sales An F.D.A. advisory committee recommended that a less potent form of the anti-ulcer drug Tagamet be sold for treating heartburn without a prescription.


Observer; Big Capitol Giveaway
There is an old Washington story about President Lyndon Johnson furious with Senator Frank Church of Idaho for opposing him on Vietnam.
"Who've you been talking to on this?" Johnson asks Church.
Church says Walter Lippmann, the magisterial newspaper columnist.
"Next time you want a dam in Idaho," Johnson tells Church, "ask Walter Lippmann for it."
Probably never happened.
Smart as he was about Congress, L.B.J. wasn't likely to treat one of its princes cruelly for the small satisfaction of uttering a crushing witticism.
Congress was different then from now.


President Goes on Offensive With Call for Spending Cuts
President Clinton opened an ambitious new political agenda today by proposing spending cuts to shrink the size of NASA and three other agencies beyond what his budget recommended seven weeks ago.
The further cuts would amount to $13.1 billion over the next five years, far short of what Congressional Republicans are preparing to recommend.
The President's proposal comes as he prepares for his most intensive schedule of domestic travel since the midterm elections last year.
He and his advisers used the announcement to call renewed attention to the differences between what they portrayed as their common-sense approach to paring spending and a wrongheaded Republican alternative.


In Hometowns, Spy Charges By Baghdad Are Rejected
This Iowa town was draped in yellow ribbons today in a gesture of support for its native son, William Barloon, who with another American, David Daliberti, has been sentenced to an eight-year prison term in Iraq after their puzzling foray into that country two weeks ago.
Nobody here could imagine any good reason for the two men to cross the Kuwaiti border, which is marked with a 10-foot-deep, 16-foot-wide trench.
Even so, friends and family of the two men, civilian workers for American defense contractors in Kuwait, scoff at the accusation by Iraq that the men were involved in underhanded activity.


Olbermann Puts His Serious Side on the Shelf
Keith Olbermann, ESPN's black-belt wiseacre and chief nasty boy, hates replacement baseball, detests those who may play it come opening day Sunday, and makes clear that he will mock, mock, mock, till the major leaguers return.
"It's a post-apocalyptic nuclear vision of baseball," he said.


Ezra Pound, Enigma In a Cage
On the night of Dec. 7, 1941, Ezra Pound was drinking with a couple of journalists at the Foreign Press Club in Rome when someone came in with the news that the Japanese had just bombed Pearl Harbor.
Pound at first did not believe it.
Someone turned on the radio behind the bar and as the three heard the news confirmed, all fell silent.
Pound stared into his drink and said, "My God, I'm a ruined man."
The prophetic realization, however, did not deter Pound from continuing his anti-American and anti-Semitic broadcasts over Italian radio.
Eighteen months later he was indicted for treason.
Arrested in 1945, he was incarcerated in Pisa while Washington tried to decide what to do with him.


Housing Voucher Test in Maryland Is Scuttled by a Political Firestorm
The theory was elegant, the outcome anything but.
The idea was that by scattering one or two poor families in large middle-income areas, they would disappear like salt crystals in a glass of water, quietly integrating themselves into communities where they would find more jobs, better schools and safer streets.


Lockout Doubt Builds Beyond Steinbrenner
George Steinbrenner swooped into the Yankees' spring training complex here today sounding extremely edgy about voting to lock out major leaguers if the National Labor Relations Board obtains an injunction that would prompt the players to scrap their strike.
"It's not like I'm after a lockout," Steinbrenner said sharply.


Debussy and Ravel, All Day and All Ways
Debussy and Ravel are as inseparable as any two composers in the whole binary firmament of music.
It becomes an interesting exercise to try to separate them.
There are, of course, historical, biographical and stylistic distinctions to be made.
There are also vagaries of taste: are you a Debussy person or a Ravel person?
A random telephone poll might favor Ravel by a slight margin.
Debussy takes historical precedence, but Ravel gets under the skin.
The diaphanous duo was celebrated at a Wall to Wall marathon at Symphony Space on Saturday.
The 13-hour event came in tandem with a new production of "Pelleas et Melisande" at the Metropolitan Opera, and it happened to fall on the 77th anniversary of Debussy's death.
There was no particular impetus for the commemoration of Ravel, but who needs an excuse to listen to Ravel?


Dr. James Coleman, 68, Dies; Work Helped to Foster Busing
Dr.
James S. Coleman, the renowned University of Chicago sociologist whose controversial studies laid much of the groundwork for and against the use of busing to desegregate schools in the 1960's and 1970's, and later helped shape American education policies by comparing public and private schools, died on Saturday at the University of Chicago Hospital.
He was 68.
Dr.
Coleman died of prostate cancer, said William Harms, a spokesman for the University of Chicago, where Dr.
Coleman had spent much of his career as a teacher, researcher and author.
Since 1973, he had been University Professor of Sociology.


Canadian Occidental Petroleum (CXY,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


North West Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Delay in Postal-Killings Case
A bail hearing for Christopher Green, 29, accused of fatally shooting four men and wounding another last week at a Montclair post office, was postponed yesterday.
The reason for the delay, at the request of Mr.
Green's court-appointed lawyer, was not given.
Mr.
Green's next court appearance is scheduled for tomorrow.
In East Orange, meanwhile, 400 people filled the Messiah Baptist Church for the funeral of Ernest Spruill, 56, the last of the four slain men to be buried.


Mayor Asks Broad Powers Over Fulton Fish Market
The Giuliani administration, unveiling details of plans to rid the Fulton Fish Market of mobsters and corruption, yesterday asked the City Council for broad powers to determine who can do business and who can work at the market.
The proposed legislation would give administration officials the power to license, regulate and investigate all business owners and employees at the market.
It would also give City Hall the right to fingerprint all vendors and workers as well as to conduct background investigations if any of them are suspected of being linked to organized crime.


Allen Officially a Saint
ERIC ALLEN, a Pro Bowl cornerback, is now a New Orleans Saint.
The Philadelphia Eagles informed the Saints yesterday that they would not match New Orleans's offer to Allen, reportedly worth more than $14 million.
Allen was designated as a transition player by the Eagles.


Car Makers Gaining Momentum in Brazil
Aiming to make Brazil a leading world car manufacturer by the end of the decade, the four biggest car makers in Brazil are doubling their investment, and new companies are planning to start assembly lines in this country.
In rapid succession over the last few weeks, Ford announced a $2 billion investment; General Motors, a $2 billion expansion, and Volkswagen, $3 billion.
Fiat said it intended to invest $1 billion in Brazil and $600 million in Argentina.
Fiat's operation in Brazil is the Italian company's largest and most profitable.


The Nets' Good Soldier, Williams Is Now Fed Up
In the middle of all the verbal grievances filed by their players this season -- and there have been many -- Jayson Williams was one of the few employees the Nets could count on not to complain about his job description.
When his job description included sitting quietly on the bench the past three weeks, the last of the good soldiers had had enough.


International Briefs; In Brief
*
MGM Grand Inc., the hotel-casino company, will buy the Diamond Beach Hotel and Casino in Darwin, Australia, for about $75 million, including the assumption of debt.
MGM said the resort, on 100 beachfront acres, includes a public casino, a private gaming operation and about 100 rooms.  *
Marks &amp; Spencer, Britain's biggest clothing retailer and the parent of Brooks Brothers, said yesterday that it planned to expand into Germany and China.


Garden's March Madness: Jordan in Town
It will have the drama of a playoff game and the glitter of a Hollywood premiere, with celebrities filling the courtside seats.
Tonight, Michael Jordan will be back at Madison Square Garden.
What else needs to be said?
The date has been circled on Knick fans' calendars since Jordan announced his return to basketball earlier this month.
No other player carries Jordan's aura, and no other opponent has given the Knicks as many heartaches during the 1990's.


Testing for Cancer Risks
Genetic tests that can tell if you are likely to get cancer are moving rapidly into the marketplace before there is a medical consensus on their value or how to use them.
The swift advance has understandably alarmed leading authorities on ethics and medicine.
But many people will no doubt feel, as we do, that any information that can give them a head start in fighting a dreaded disease is more a blessing than a cause for fear.
The tests, as described in an article in yesterday's Times by Gina Kolata, analyze blood or tissue samples for signs of mutated genes that can greatly increase an individual's risk of getting cancers that affect the breast, colon, thyroid, skin and brain.


Smithsonian Plans 150th Anniversary
The Smithsonian Institution announced plans yesterday for an elaborate celebration of its 150th anniversary in 1996, with activities that would be entirely financed by corporate sponsors rather than public money.
"We have entered an era in which the Smithsonian must rely more heavily on private support from individuals and corporations," said I. Michael Heyman, the secretary of the Smithsonian in Washington, "and this presents us with both challenges and great opportunities."


With All His Rainbows, Thurman's a Rainmaker
The Final Four nets might as well be chain-link, because Scotty Thurman still thinks he's at West Side Park.
He was a preteen one day when the 16-year-olds in Ruston, La., shouted, "Clear out," and shoved him the basketball.
"To test my manhood," he said.
The score was 11-11, the game was to 12, and Scotty Thurman let go with a rainbow that is still his patent a decade later.
"Swished it," he said. "And it's just stayed with me ever since."


ATCO Ltd. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Jury Still Out in Bribery Case
Jurors in the bribery trial of two Newark politicians did not reach a verdict yesterday in their first day of deliberations in Federal District Court.
The jurors asked for transcripts of testimony about a meeting at a restaurant during which, the prosecution contends, Councilman Gary Harris, one of the defendants, accepted a $3,000 cash bribe.
Mr.
Harris and the other defendant, former Councilman Ralph T. Grant Jr., are accused of accepting tens of thousands of dollars in return for helping a towing company try to obtain municipal contracts.


Why Use Credit Card When a Hand Will Do?
To the Editor:
You report (Business Day, March 21) that Visa International will introduce a plastic card embedded with a microchip that can store amounts of money and be used for small purchases.
ITN News has reported that such cards are used in Belgium and will soon be tried in Britain.


Coastal Healthcare Group Inc.(DR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Senate Offers Twist on Plan For Curbing Federal Rules
The Senate today debated a new twist on efforts to curb Federal regulations: a proposal to give Congress a quick opportunity to review and possibly overturn new rules as soon as they are issued by Government agencies.
Offered by Senate moderates as an alternative to a yearlong freeze on most new Federal regulations, an idea approved by the House last month, the proposal could come to a vote as early as Tuesday.


Bureaucracy Played Role in Building Cave-In
To the Editor:
Your March 22 news article on the collapse of a Harlem building juxtaposes the claims of tenants who saw signs indicating possible structural damage and a New York City Housing and Preservation Development official who minimizes the agency's failure to interpret these signs.


Gendis Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Hunter College Selects Midwestern Dean and Professor as Its New President
A Midwestern educator whose interests range from Italian culture to the financing of American political campaigns was selected yesterday as Hunter College's new president.
David A. Caputo is dean of the School of Liberal Arts at Purdue University in West Lafayette, Ind., where he is a professor of political science.


Nerve Gas in Tokyo Subway Attack Wasn't Developed by Nazis
To the Editor:
The release of the nerve gas sarin in the Tokyo subway system has unleashed another possible weapon for any terrorists, but segments of the press have credited (or blamed) the Nazis for development of sarin and its mate, tabun.
Such is incorrect, for tabun was publicized as early as 1902, as was sarin, and I. G. Farbenindustrie patented tabun in 1937 and sarin in 1938.


Skin Lesions Were Removed During President's Checkup
President Clinton had several precancerous skin lesions removed from his forehead and behind his ear during his annual medical checkup on Friday, the White House said yesterday.
The disclosure came when reporters, who noticed a red blotch on Mr.
Clinton's face, asked Michael D. McCurry, the White House press secretary, whether the President had bumped into something.
The White House made no mention of the lesions on Friday in its statement about the checkup.


Whitman Moves to Quell Uprising Against Tax Cut's Timing
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman spent part of her first day back from a Florida vacation suppressing a small revolt against the timing of her next income tax cut.
By the end of the day today, she had rallied legislative leaders for a counterattack against Robert E. Littell, the chairman of the Senate Budget Committee and the husband of Virginia N. Littell, who is being dumped by Mrs.
Whitman as head of the state Republican Party.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day yesterday about market trends over the last six months included an incorrect figure supplied by Salomon Brothers Inc. for the dividend yield of the Dow Jones industrial average on Friday.
The yield was 2.64 percent, not 0.03 percent.


Welfare Bill Is Attacked
More than 280,000 of the 540,000 children in New York City receiving welfare would be pushed off the roles under the House bill, a report by a Democrat says.
Page B9.


Injunction Hearing Set; Clubs Offer New Plan
In the most active day-night doubleheader baseball may see all year, a Federal judge yesterday scheduled a hearing for Friday on a request for an injunction that the players say would end their seven-and-a-half-month strike, and the owners last night presented the players union with a new proposal they believe should end the strike.
"We're very pleased the judge will have an opportunity to render a decision prior to the start of the season if she chooses to," said Daniel Silverman, director of the National Labor Relations Board's New York office, who filed the injunction request yesterday afternoon in United States District Court in Manhattan.


Court to Review Forfeiture in Drug Case
The Supreme Court said today it would decide whether criminal defendants who agree as part of guilty pleas to forfeit their property to the Government are entitled to procedural protections, including a jury trial on the amount to be forfeited.
The case, an appeal by a Wyoming man challenging the seizure of all his assets, including a retirement account and all personal property, is the latest chapter in the Court's examination of the Government's forfeiture authority.


Bally Sues to Remove Its Name from a Former Subsidiary
The Bally Entertainment Corporation, an operator of casinos and fitness centers, filed a lawsuit yesterday seeking to strip its former gaming-machine subsidiary of the Bally name, contending that the regulatory problems of Bally Gaming International Inc. had damaged its own well-known name.
In the lawsuit, which was filed in Federal District Court in Camden, N.J., Bally Entertainment said it wanted to end a licensing agreement and distance itself from Bally Gaming, which makes slot machines and other mechanized games of chance, because regulators and the public confuse the two companies.


Eazy-E, 31, Performer Who Put Gangster Rap on the Charts
Eric Wright, who as the rapper Eazy-E helped turn gangster rap into a commercial bonanza, died on Sunday night at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles.
He was 31 and lived in Los Angeles.
The cause was complications from AIDS, said his doctor, Dr. William Young.


Treasuries Extend a Rally On Slow Home Sales Data
Prices of Treasury securities rallied yesterday for a second consecutive session, helped by a report on home sales that confirmed the market's view of a slowing economy.
The advance came despite a weaker dollar.
A surge in the dollar helped set off the bond rally on Friday, but yesterday the dollar retreated against the German mark and other European currencies.


Building New Ballets Out of Restleness
One thing that makes Eliot Feld a valuable choreographer is his restlessness.
He never allows himself to fall into creative ruts.
Over the years, he has worked in an extraordinary variety of styles.
There was something to please or exasperate almost everyone in the three works that Feld Ballets/NY presented on Sunday afternoon at the Joyce Theater.
Mr.
Feld was at his most imaginative in "Aurora II," to recorded music by Steve Reich.
The set by Mark Mongold and Mr.
Feld is dominated by an inclined plane that, in effect, turns the stage into a hillside.
Seventeen dancers in running shoes come into view at the top of this hill, vanish from sight, reappear, slide down the slope, run back up it and slide down again.
Much of the time, they perform these activities individually or in small groups.
Yet there are also sequences in which they slide, balance and clamber in architecturally impressive formations.


Paroled Killer Is Suspected In 3 Deaths
Last fall, when Reginald McFadden was charged with the murder of an elderly Long Island woman and the rape of a second woman in Rockland County, the public stir reached far beyond those crimes.
At the time of those charges, Mr.
McFadden had been free from a Pennsylvania prison for just 92 days, thanks to the Governor of Pennsylvania, who had commuted the convict's life sentence for a 1969 murder.


Corrections
A map yesterday with an article about the dismantling of border controls by 7 of the 15 European Union members mislabeled Switzerland.
It is not a member of the European Union.


Blood Sport
Earlier this month, Rafael Sanchez was arrested as an organizer of a cockfighting competition in Bay Shore, L.I.
Though charged with felony cruelty, which can bring a fine of up to $25,000 and a prison sentence of up to four years, he paid only a $200 fine.
Last Saturday night Mr.
Sanchez was arrested again, this time in the Bronx, as a spectator at another fight.
Mr.
Sanchez's lenient treatment illustrates the frustration of those who are trying to eradicate the grisly practice of cockfighting.
New York's State Legislature passed toughened laws against it in 1984, but animal advocates say judges are loath to impose heavy penalties.


CHRONICLE
Three rare gold trinkets stolen on Friday evening from the National Geographic Society's museum in Washington were recovered last weekend.
One, a pre-Columbian vulture, dating to A.D. 1400, had been sold on Saturday to a pawnshop for $100.


Lemieux Set To Learn of Punch's Cost
The Devils' Claude Lemieux got even with Brett Lindros of the Islanders on Sunday, but today he'll have to explain his style of justice to Brian Burke, the National Hockey League's senior vice president and director of hockey operations.
Lemieux was called to the hearing with Burke for sucker-punching Lindros as Lindros leaned over the Devils' bench in the third period of the teams' 5-5 tie.


Alpine Lace Brands Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


A Dispute Over Hearing Aids
A man charged with sexually assaulting a 2-year-old girl maintains that any statement he made to officers should be suppressed because he wears hearing aids in both ears and no qualified interpreter was present.
The lawyer for the man, Bryan Rosolen, 37, of Kinnelon, said his client understands less than half of what is said to him.
But the Morris County Prosecutor, Leslie Wade, said that Mr.
Rosolen does not qualify as hearing-impaired under a 1984 state statute that says statements by such a person cannot be used against him unless an interpreter is present and the statement was made "knowingly, voluntarily and intelligently." Mr.
Roselon is free on $50,000 bail.


Canadians Cut the Nets Of Spain Ship
The Canadian Coast Guard has cut the nets of a Spanish trawler just outside Canada's territorial waters east of Newfoundland in a renewal of the battle with the European Union over North Atlantic fishing rights.
The action was announced late Sunday in Ottawa after a confrontation on the high seas involving five Canadian patrol vessels and a dozen Spanish trawlers.


Judge Permits Casino 'Poll' In Bridgeport
A Superior Court judge refused today to block a citywide vote on Tuesday that will ask residents whether they want the General Assembly to authorize a casino for Bridgeport.
In rejecting a request by casino opponents for an injunction blocking the vote, the judge, Bruce L. Levin, did not rule on their contention that the vote is an illegal referendum, or on the city's position that it is only a "private opinion poll" financed by a business group.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AST RESEARCH INC., Irvine, Calif., which makes hardware and software products for personal computers, will cut prices on its computer servers by as much as 22 percent in an effort to expand its share of the server market.
GENERAL MOTORS (EUROPE) A.G., Zurich, a subsidiary of General Motors, said its Adam Opel unit would invest about $181 million in the expansion of a Hungarian plant that makes engines and cylinder heads.


SOCCER REPORT
European Championship
Nineteen games will be staged throughout Europe tomorrow in attempts to qualify for the European Championship in England next year.
To accommodate Italy's national team, which played on Saturday, there were no First Division games in the Italian League on Sunday.
And because their 4-1 victory Saturday over Estonia failed to silence their critics, the Italians will head to Kiev for a key game against Ukraine in an uneasy frame of mind.


Southern Co.(SO,N) reports earnings for 12mos to Feb 28


Muckler to Pay Penalty For Striking a Sabre Fan
Buffalo Sabres Coach JOHN MUCKLER was suspended for three games and fined $10,000 yesterday by the National Hockey League for an altercation with a fan March 19 after a 6-1 loss to the Tampa Bay Lightning.
Muckler, who also serves as the team's general manager, will miss home games today against Quebec and Thursday against Ottawa as well as Saturday's game at the Islanders.


Blenheim Group PLC reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


New Look for S.R.O.'s: Decent Housing
As he has done dozens of times as partner of Brennan Beer Gorman, a Manhattan architectural firm, Henry Brennan traveled recently to one of his firm's recently completed projects to see firsthand the evolution from blueprint to bricks and mortar.
Moving from the building's glass-walled dining pavilion with its pyramidal skylight through corridors lit with the soft glow of moon-shaped sconces, he allowed himself prideful nods of approval as he toured the rose- and buff-colored brick building.


Arson Suspected in Boys' Deaths
"Help me! Help me!" Neighbors heard the screams, but firefighters were unable to save Juan Ponce, 4, or his brother Edwin, 20 months.
The Camden County Prosecutor, Edward F. Borden Jr., said the early-morning fire yesterday in the city-owned McGuire Apartments on Boyd Street had been deliberately set.
Two other children, the victims' sister and brother, leaped from second-floor bedrooms to escape the flames.
Lydia Ponce, 15, was hospitalized in stable condition, and her brother Antonio, 8, was in critical condition.


Altschiller in a Split With Liz Claiborne
Altschiller &amp; Company in New York and Liz Claiborne Inc. said yesterday that after eight years they had parted ways on the company's apparel and fragrance account, with billings estimated at $8 million.
The chairman and chief executive of Altschiller, David Altschiller, confirmed a report of the change this week in Adweek.
"Our desire is to pursue larger fragrance and fashion marketers," he said, "and their desire is to take more and more control of their marketing efforts."


Perahia Cancels Recital
The pianist Murray Perahia has canceled his May 2 Carnegie Hall recital because of illness.
It will not be rescheduled.
Ticketholders who used Carnegie Charge will receive automatic credit; others may receive refunds by taking tickets to the box office or by mailing them (before June 30) to Murray Perahia Refund, Carnegie Hall Box Office, 154 West 57th Street, New York, N.Y. 10019.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Volkswagen propels Arnold Fortuna from dark horse to hot shop.
VOLKSWAGEN OF AMERICA wrote a startling end to its review yesterday by selecting the dark horse among four finalist agencies to handle its North American account, with billings estimated at $90 million to $110 million.
Arnold Fortuna Lawner &amp; Cabot, a fast-growing shop in Boston that is well regarded at home but relatively unknown elsewhere, bested three far more familiar rivals: DDB Needham Worldwide in New York, which handles accounts for the company's German parent, Volkswagen A.G., in 37 countries; Deutsch Inc. in New York, which has created attention-getting campaigns for the metropolitan New York Pontiac dealers, and the Richards Group in Dallas, a contender in previous automotive account reviews.
A fifth finalist, Martin/Williams Advertising in Minneapolis, withdrew earlier this month.


As TV Sows Outrage, Guess What It Reaps
Although the producers of "The Jenny Jones Show" did not take credit for the murder of Scott Amedure after he revealed during a taping that he had a crush on Jonathan Schmitz, the event was a new peak for confrontation television: a small truth followed by the ultimate consequence.
Jenny Jones took the inconvenience of having one guest charged with killing another as an opportunity to tell her audience what a shock this "tragic incident" was to her and what a hard time she and her associates were having getting through it.
There she was, like one of her guests, reaching out for the sort of counseling that the performers on such shows are often given, like tips to barroom strippers.


Panel Backs Tagamet Use in Treatment of Heartburn
A panel of scientists recommended unanimously yesterday that the Food and Drug Administration allow a much less potent form of the ulcer drug Tagamet to be sold without prescription for the treatment of heartburn.
The favorable ruling by the advisory committee follows two unsucessful attempts by SmithKline Beecham P.L.C., the drug's manufacturer, to make Tagamet available as an over-the-counter drug.


Orange County Faces Future With Anxiety
Three months after risky investments collapsed and plunged Orange County into bankruptcy, residents here are suffering new anxieties about the future, an unusual turn for people living in one of the most comfortable counties in the nation.
The full pain of the county's fiscal crisis is still to come.
But people are already talking about fears of a future with fewer libraries, fire departments run by volunteers, parents filling in for teachers, coaches and janitors, and property values dragged down by the prospect of it all.


Edward Greif, 85; Led Publicity Firm
Edward L. Greif, a Manhattan public-relations executive who represented many religious organizations, died last Thursday at his home in Scarsdale, N.Y.
He was 85.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Mets Release 9 Replacements
Three days after offering their minor league players financial incentives to play regular-season replacement baseball, the Mets cut nine replacement players today, whittling their replacement roster to 19.


Fighting in Bosnia Draws U.N. Warning
The United Nations today threatened air strikes in Bosnia and international diplomats pleaded for peace as the Bosnian Government pursued a successful weeklong offensive and Bosnian Serb forces responded by shelling towns including Sarajevo.
Colum Murphy, a senior spokesman for the United Nations peacekeeping force in Bosnia, said in Sarajevo that "events are spinning out of control." He added that the deliberate targeting of civilians in so-called United Nations "safe areas" such as Tuzla and Sarajevo would "meet a resolute response from us, including the use of air power."


Andy Kaufman's Beloved Antics
The most original comedian of the last few decades is celebrated with appropriate zest in tonight's NBC special, "A Comedy Salute to Andy Kaufman." Kaufman was born in New York on Jan. 17, 1949.
He died of lung cancer on May 16, 1984.
Kaufman was perhaps best known for playing Latka Gravis, the immigrant mechanic on "Taxi." Based on the Foreign Man character Kaufman had developed for his stand-up routines, Latka was the embodiment of cunning innocence, warning his sometimes exasperated co-workers that they could not hit him because "I am weak and defenseless and cute." Latka eventually began a romance with a fellow immigrant named Simka, played to perfection by Carol Kane.
Over a candlelight dinner, Latka would tell her sweet nothings like, "That's what I like about you: you eat like a swine."


Wine Talk
IT doesn't take much to prompt an idea.
For Marcel Proust, the taste of a madeleine provided the inspiration for "Remembrance of Things Past."
For this brief essay, the impetus -- I won't call it inspiration -- was a bottle of sauvignon blanc from New Zealand: the 1994 vintage from the Cloudy Bay winery in the Marlborough district of the South Island.


Steinbrenner And Wilpon Wish for a Silver Lining
Before and after George Steinbrenner and Fred Wilpon met here for 90 minutes today, New York's two baseball owners tried bolstering their wish to return major league players to the field by trumpeting the owners' latest proposal as something too good for the union to turn down.
In repeatedly pushing the opinions of the moderate owners, Wilpon and Steinbrenner expressed cautious optimism that the real players would be back soon, that there would not be a lockout and that the unsavory possibility of a replacement season would be avoided.
Steinbrenner even ventured so far as to say that the scheduled replacement opener between the Florida Marlins and the Mets Sunday night should be delayed if negotiations are progressing.


For 6 Firms, a 'Negative' S.&amp; P. Outlook
The large borrowings that big Wall Street firms use to finance their businesses are likely to get more expensive in the coming months, making profits harder to come by.
That's the import of an unusual announcement yesterday from the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.
The rating agency in one move changed its credit ratings outlook for six major firms to "negative" from "stable," and cited "uncertainty about the future depth and duration of the earnings downturn currently affecting" these companies.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Ameritech Capital Funding, a unit of Ameritech Corp., Chicago, is selling $192.16 million of senior notes due in 2005 through Lehman Brothers.
The notes are priced at 99.915 to yield 7.512 percent.
The noncallable isssue is rated Aa2 by Moody's Investors Service Inc., AA+ by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and AA by Duff &amp; Phelps.


METRO DIGEST
PATAKI DROPS THREAT OF SHUTDOWN
Governor Pataki backed away from his repeated threat to close down New York's state government if a budget is not enacted by April 1, the start of the fiscal year.
Some legislators said the reversal would undercut the Governor's credibility as budget talks reach a crucial phase.
But Mr.
Pataki said it would be unfair to penalize innocent state workers for what he said was almost certain to become the state's 11th consecutive late budget.
A1.


Fuller (H.B.) (FULL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Showing Shostakovich's Ties To Bach and Beethoven
Pianists interested in exploring both the diversity and continuity of the repertory in a single stroke would do well to look at the program Christopher O'Riley played on Saturday evening at Washington Irving High School.
Before the intermission, four of Shostakovich's Preludes and Fugues were sandwiched between Mr.
O'Riley's own transcriptions of a Bach Sonata (BWV 529) and a Toccata and Fugue (BWV 538).
Shostakovich's debt to Bach is never far from the surface, yet these works spin off into harmonic worlds of their own.
Even some of the fugue subjects (particularly the extraordinarily long theme in Fugue No. 16) are outlandish by Bachian standards.
Beethoven's "Diabelli" Variations, which took up the second half of the concert, also has connections with Bach, and not only in the Fughetta and Fugue variations.
Yet a listener with the Shostakovich works still in his ears cannot help but see those pieces prefigured in, for example, the suspended time scale and harmonic daring in Variation 20, or the overt virtuosity in Variations 26 and 27.


Gingrich Asks Panel to Quash 'Malicious' Ethics Complaints
Facing a growing number of ethics complaints from his Democratic opponents, Speaker Newt Gingrich responded today with a spirited defense of a college course he has taught and a blistering attack on his critics.
He called the accusations against him "baseless and malicious" and urged the House ethics committee to dismiss them.
Representative Nancy L. Johnson, the Connecticut Republican whom Mr.
Gingrich chose to head the committee, said after its meeting today that the committee would draw up a list of questions for Mr.
Gingrich as well as an outline of the scope of the ethics inquiries.
She said the committee would not decide until May whether to appoint a special, nonpartisan counsel to investigate.


Vivra Inc.(V,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


In an Unofficial Referendum, Bridgeport Voters Show Overwhelming Support for a Casino
Residents voted overwhelmingly in support of a casino for Bridgeport today in an unofficial referendum, giving casino advocates the ammunition they wanted to win legislation in the General Assembly authorizing one.
In a citywide vote paid for by the Bridgeport Regional Business Council, a business group lobbying for a casino, 40 percent of Bridgeport's 54,429 voters cast ballots, more than in the city's last mayoral election.
With absentee ballots still to be counted, there were 17,989 votes in favor of a casino, and 2,953 against.


National Education Corp.(NEC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Welfare's Vital Core
The welfare system is at a turning point.
No longer are Republican politicians arguing over how best to improve a system that all agree needs improvement.
Instead, House and Senate Republicans have now agreed to eliminate the core principle of the system -- that assistance should be provided throughout the nation to all people poor enough to be "entitled" to it.
With one ill-considered legislative lurch, the Republicans would destroy the beacon that has guided the system humanely for more than half a century and would leave the poor to the mercies of state spending whims.
Welfare existed long before the Federal Government got into the act.
From the early 1900's, state governments helped poor mothers and the impoverished blind and elderly.
But these programs often excluded blacks, divorced mothers and other "undeserving" poor.
Once the Depression struck, many of the state programs went bankrupt -- driving President Roosevelt to push a Federal program of cash assistance through Congress.


Rams Given More Time
The Rams and the city of St.
Louis yesterday pushed back the deadline for filing antitrust lawsuits against the National Football League.
Under an agreement with the N.F.L., the Rams had until Friday to file litigation first and thus set the site for trial.
The agreement was moved backed to April 17 to give both parties more time to work out a deal.


The Budget: Back Room to Living Room
A working-class woman anguishes over her children's future, wondering whether she will ever be able to afford to send them to college.
A nurse returns home from work worried about a child she has treated in the operating room, and that the equipment that saved his life will soon be unavailable.


James G. Horsfall, Leading Plant Pathologist, 90
Dr.
James G. Horsfall, a plant pathologist whose discovery of organic fungicides changed the way the world's farmers combat blight and other fungus diseases, died on March 22 at his home in Hamden, Conn., not far from the Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station's Lockwood Farm, where he did much of his research.
He was 90 years old.
Until Dr.
Horsfall's research, initially at the Cornell experimental farm in Geneva, N.Y., and later at the Connecticut station in New Haven, the chief weapon against fungi had been sprays laced with copper, lead and other heavy metals.


New Sony President Hopes to Fill Missing Links in U.S.
The incoming president of the Sony Corporation said today that he hoped to move his company into the communications business, including possibly television broadcasting and on-line information services in the United States.
The executive, Nobuyuki Idei, said that moving into the distribution of movies, television shows, music, computer software and other forms of programming would fill in the missing link between Sony's two existing main businesses -- creating the programming and building the electronic boxes to play, or "consume," the programs.


A Russian Expatriate Adrift in Berlin
The most striking image in "Gorilla Bathes at Noon," Dusan Makavejev's whimsical cinematic collage set in present-day Berlin, is a gigantic statue of Lenin that stands as a ludicrous anachronism in the post-Communist era.
In one of the film's zanier scenes, Victor Borisovich (Svetozar Cvetkovic), an expatriate Russian soldier and the film's main character, impulsively hoists himself on ropes to the statue's head to wash its face.
Moments later, the police arrive and ensnare him in a net from which he protests, "Ich bin ein Berliner!"
Not long afterward, workers begin detaching the head of the statue from its body.
Lifted by crane, the severed head is lowered slowly onto a flatbed truck and carted off through the streets of Berlin.
So much for Communism and kitsch monuments exalting its heroes.


Personal Health; Underactive thyroids are treatable but often missed.
SIX to seven million Americans have thyroid glands that produce insufficient amounts of two hormones that affect virtually every organ of the body, from the heart and brain to the digestive tract and skin.
Unfortunately, about half of those with underactive thyroids do not know they have a definable and treatable problem.
If the condition is diagnosed and properly treated, affected individuals can lead normal, active lives.
But the millions who are unaware of their condition may be experiencing subtle and slowly worsening symptoms that are progressively debilitating but easily overlooked or mistaken for a host of other conditions, including the normal effects of aging or hypochondria.
Among other things, untreated hypothyroidism, as an underactive thyroid is called, can raise the risk of heart disease by causing high blood pressure and elevated cholesterol levels.


Eating Well
THE selling of the Mediterranean diet pyramid through articles and cookbooks is proceeding at a breathtaking pace.
Food writers who never liked the United States Agriculture Department's Food Guide Pyramid have embraced the Mediterranean version with gusto.
The primary difference between the two, and the one that endears the Mediterranean pyramid to food writers, is the recommendation that generous quantities of olive oil be used.
The Mediterranean pyramid is the creation of Oldways Preservation and Exchange Trust, a nonprofit group that holds conferences on food, culture and diet; the Harvard University School of Public Health, and the World Health Organization.
It is based on the fact that Mediterranean people have traditionally had very low rates for heart disease and certain types of cancer.


As a Lobbyist, King Hussein Finds It Cool on Capitol Hill
Lobbying may not come naturally to kings.
But King Hussein of Jordan is doing his best this week to charm, cajole, even embarrass Capitol Hill into making good on the Administration's promise to forgive his country's debt to the United States.
With Queen Noor, his American-born wife at his side, the King is spending the better part of three days calling on members of Congress who never before may have rubbed elbows with royalty, and calling them "Sir."


Giuliani Audience for Pete Wilson
With most of New York State's Republican leaders lined up behind Senator Bob Dole's Presidential campaign, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani planned to conduct his first meeting with a Presidential hopeful today -- not Mr.
Dole, but Gov.
Pete Wilson of California.
Mr.
Giuliani, who stunned other officials of his party last fall by endorsing New York's Democratic incumbent, Mario M. Cuomo, for governor, denied that his decision to grant his first audience to Mr.
Wilson had any significance or that the session was a sign he would ultimately part ways once again with the state Republican leadership.


Generation Gap for a Generation
Wu Nien-Jen's autobiographical film, "A Borrowed Life," is a reverie of the past that is so concentrated in its vision that after a while you begin to feel you are living in the shabby mining village in northern Taiwan where much of the story takes place.
The film, which runs nearly three hours, is not a conventional Bildungsroman in which a young man grows up and flees the nest on a journey of self-discovery.
Although Wen Jian, the film's observer, does exactly that, by the end of the movie we have learned almost nothing about him beyond the bare facts that he is educated, successful and married with a child.
Instead, the director fixes his attention on Wen Jian's father, Sega (Tsai Chen-nan) and creates a moving portrait of frustration and tenacity that the film implies echo the experience of an entire generation.


Port Chester Battles Plan To Cut Back Counseling
When Luis Marmol enrolled in Port Chester High School two years ago, he had just emigrated from Peru and spoke no English.
He was confused by his new surroundings, but a Spanish-speaking guidance counselor helped ease his transition to life in a suburban American high school.
"I'm glad I had someone to help me," Mr.
Marmol, now 18 and a junior, said.
"I'm shy. I needed someone to stand up for me."
Next year, new immigrants in the Port Chester school district may not be so lucky.


His Party Asks, Elect Clinton in '96?
When hundreds of thousands of prospective Democratic contributors opened their mailboxes in recent weeks, they spotted what might be taken for an envelope from the Republican Party.
Its message, in bold type, was, "Should President Clinton be re-elected?"'
But this was no mailing from Republicans.
It came from the Democratic National Committee.
And it was designed to encourage people to write checks to support the Democratic Party.
The letter asked recipients to answer the provocative question yes or no, using the stickers provided.


Robert Ruehrwein, Laser Pioneer, 79
Robert A. Ruehrwein, a research scientist who devised manufacturing processes used in developing the optoelectronics industry, died on March 10 in St.
Luke's Hospital in Chesterfield, Mo.
He was 79 and lived in Chesterfield.
The cause was lung cancer and pneumonia, said his wife, Mary Alice Ruehrwein.


Mandela Against Mandela; South African Cabinet Split Sets Up Political Test of Strength
The caller identified himself as a former anti-apartheid guerrilla, now a brigadier in South Africa's newly integrated army.
He had a warning for the white radio host who sounded so pleased about the dismissal of Winnie Mandela.
Enjoy your moment, the caller said, because when Mrs.
Mandela becomes President there will be no more pandering to whites, and carping critics will be silenced, as they are in Uganda and Kenya.


Editorial Notebook; Pulp Television
With their spiffy new technology, the magicians in Hollywood can do just about anything.
They can make Gary Sinise's legs disappear in "Forrest Gump." They can make Jim Carrey's eyes jitterbug in "The Mask." They can make dinosaurs out-act Jeff Goldblum in "Jurassic Park."
And yet they have failed once more to solve that most intractable problem: how to make the Academy Awards more entertaining than karaoke night at a podiatrists' convention.


AT LUNCH WITH: Bert Sugar; Attention, Fans: Amazing Facts! Fun Fictions!
BERT SUGAR?"
"In the back, on the left. In the hat."
The waitress pointed through the lunchtime crowd at O'Lunney's, an Irish bar and restaurant on West 44th Street, just off Fifth Avenue.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about a proposed acquisition of Health Systems International by Wellpoint Health Networks misstated a term of the deal.
Under the plan being discussed, the owners of stock in Wellpoint, not Health Systems, would receive $1.2 billion in cash.


Valve Is Cited in Acid Spill
A leaky valve appears to have been the cause of a spill of thousands of gallons of potentially lethal hydrochloric acid solution on Sunday at a chemical plant three blocks from a densely populated neighborhood.
The preliminary finding by the Hudson Regional Health Commission, an environmental enforcement agency, said no fumes had been detected outside the Henkel Corporation plant, which manufactures ingredients for beauty products.
The commission said the spill, from one of two 10,000-gallon tanks on the property, was contained.
Hydrochloric acid's gaseous form, hydrogen chloride, is a respiratory irritant.


A Martinique Band at Play With Mimicry and Mood
Dede Saint-Prix's show at Gould Hall on Saturday night rocked with mimicry.
Mr.
Saint-Prix sang drum figures.
The drums talked.
The bassist played rolling figures that caught the gait of a lazy animal walking down a road.
Mr.
Saint-Prix and a drummer, Rene Baubant, produced a ritualized version of a fight.
It was play turned into music.
Mr.
Saint-Prix is one of Martinique's finest band leaders, a singer, flutist and percussionist who has found a way to make peace between older traditions and the more modern zouk music from the French Antilles.
Leading a band of three drummers, a bassist and a keyboardist, Mr.
Saint-Prix sang old chants and new songs.
The percussionists, working with log drums called tibois, struck with wood sticks, along with a drum kit and a large wood-bodied drum, producing a light skrim of hard sounds.
Wood hit wood, the texture mitigated a bit by the sound of hands on skin.


Accounts
*
Balet &amp; Albert, New York, was awarded two accounts with combined billings estimated at $2 million: Food &amp; Wines of France, New York, previously at Lois/U.S.A., New York, and Atlanta Apparel Mart, Atlanta, previously in-house.


Algerian Editor Is Mourned


International Briefs; 8% Increase in Profits Reported by Ciba-Geigy
Ciba-Geigy A.G., the Swiss pharmaceuticals and chemicals company, reported yesterday that its profit for 1994 rose 8 percent, to 1.91 billion Swiss francs ($1.64 billion).
The results were stronger than expected.
Ciba-Geigy was the second of Switzerland's big three pharmaceutical companies to report results for the year.
Sandoz A.G. said last week that its 1994 net profit rose 2 percent.
Roche Holding will report results next month.


INSIDE
Jordanian King's Visit
King Hussein of Jordan has been doing his best to persuade Washington to keep a pledge to forgive his country's debt.
But he has found Congress less supportive than during his last visit.
Page A8.
Atomic Blasts, or Atomic Blasts?
The United States and three other nuclear powers negotiating a comprehensive ban on atomic testing would all allow tiny blasts.
But they disagree on the size that should be permitted.
Page A6.
Guatemala Killings
A Congressman has told the National Security Agency and Army to preserve records that might shed light on what the Government knew about Guatemala deaths.
Page A11.


Another Chapter In Cowboy Story
It's understandable how someone could get lost in the shadow of Oklahoma State center Bryant (Big Country) Reeves.
But Randy Rutherford doesn't mind being out of the spotlight.
In fact, he seems to prefer it.
"I'm kind of a secret," Rutherford, the Cowboys' senior guard, said recently.
"And that's O.K. with me. I really don't care how much exposure I get as long as we keep winning."


BUSINESS DIGEST
Bank of Tokyo to Merge With Mitsubishi Bank
The Bank of Tokyo and Mitsubishi Bank have agreed to a merge that would create the world's largest bank, with $819 billion in assets.
It would be about three times the size of Citicorp, the biggest banking company in the United States.
If the deal goes through, the new company, tentatively called the Tokyo Mitsubishi Bank, would combine two of the strongest banks in Japan.
Some experts say other mergers of Japanese banks may follow.
A1.


TPI Enterprises Inc.(TPIE,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


High Court Ruling Upholds Trademarking of a Color
The Supreme Court ruled unanimously today that color can be registered as a trademark when it distinguishes a particular product and serves no other function.
The decision, written by Justice Stephen G. Breyer, resolved a dispute among the lower Federal courts and upheld the longstanding position of the Patent and Trademark Office.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Theme of Avrett, Free: Johnnie Walker Black has 'more to explore.'
FAMILY values, traditional values, basic values.
It could be enough to drive you to drink.
So, ready for Scotch values?


Maple Leaf Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Atom Powers Want to Test Despite Treaty
Four of the world's main nuclear countries are locked in a dispute as they negotiate a comprehensive ban on nuclear testing: they all want to retain the right to conduct tiny blasts but disagree over the size that should be permitted.
The conflict stems from the little-known fact that arms designers can set off nuclear explosions that at their smallest are the equivalent of only a few pounds of TNT.
The blasts are useful in checking design calculations and the reliability of existing weapons.


Laughs and Shadows


Lobo Is Too Generous Distributing Her Passes
In the last two weeks, Rebecca Lobo has been named to four all-America teams in women's college basketball.
She was voted the Naismith Award Sunday as the player of the year and is favored to win the similar Kodak Award this week in Minneapolis, where she will lead unbeaten and top-ranked Connecticut against Stanford Saturday in the Final Four.
The 6-foot-4-inch senior plays high or low post.
She can rebound with the best of them.
She ranks second in the nation in blocked shots, averaging 3.6 a game this season.
She plays with fervor.


Congressman Seeks Intelligence Data on Slayings in Guatemala
A member of Congress told the National Security Agency and the United States Army tonight to secure records that might shed light on what the United States Government knew about the killings in Guatemala of an American citizen and a guerrilla married to an American lawyer.
Representative Robert G. Torricelli, Democrat of New Jersey, a member of the House intelligence committee, said he acted after he received an anonymous letter, apparently from inside the National Security Agency, which conducts global electronic-eavesdropping operations, that the agency had intercepted communications suggesting that both the Central Intelligence Agency and the Army were aware of the circumstances surrounding the killings at the time they occurred.


Blockbuster Music, Motorola Reviewing
Two large marketers have placed portions of their accounts in review.
The Motorola RISC Microprocessor unit of Motorola Inc. in Austin, Tex., said yesterday that it had begun a review on its Power PC computer chip account after seven years at BBDO San Francisco.
The billings were estimated at $8 million to $12 million.


If There Is a Lockout, Owners May Face Risks
If a Federal court judge rules in favor of the players, then the owners of the major league baseball teams would find themselves open to much greater risk opening the season next week with replacement players.
They could do it.
The regular players have said that if United States District Court Judge Sonia Sotomayor grants an injunction in their favor, they would be willing to end their strike.
The owners, who have said they do not want to play this season under the previous economic system, could them lock them out and field the replacement players.
But they would suddenly find themselves at risk of having to pay huge fines, if they lost a second round in the courts.


Food Notes
Sorbet Heads the List
Haagen-Dazs sorbets did so well in test markets in Chicago, Los Angeles, Seattle and San Diego last year that shortly after they were introduced they became No. 1 in sales in the country without even being available nationwide.
Now, they have come to the New York area and, like most Haagen-Dazs products, they are worth the indulgence.
The sorbets, which are lower in fat than the company's ice creams, come in raspberry, strawberry, lemon, mango and chocolate in pints for about $1.65.
Lusciously From Morocco
Dean &amp; DeLuca, 560 Broadway (at Prince Street), is importing Casablanca brand reasonably priced delicacies from Azrou in Morocco's Middle Atlas Mountains.
Included are sweetly smoky, salmonlike cold-smoked trout, $3 for a 3-ounce package; luscious hot-smoked trout, $2.25 for 3 ounces, and delicate trout roe, $4.25 for 1.75 ounces.
Phyllo With a Difference
Athens Foods, a manufacturer of phyllo in Cleveland, has introduced little tartlet shells made of phyllo that are low in fat and free of sodium.
They are properly crisp, and though they lack a buttery richness they can be warmed with a brushing of butter before being filled with hors d'oeuvre or dessert mixtures.
The frozen shells, 15 to a box, are about $1.75 in supermarkets and shops that sell phyllo.
Off the Menu  New on East 69th
Philippe Delgrange, the owner of Le Bilboquet, 25 East 63d Street, will open another restaurant in a few weeks at 19 East 69th Street with Bruno Gelormini, the manager of Le Bilboquet, and other partners.
The chef will be Lionel Deniaud, who worked at La Grenouille.
The name and menu are still to be decided.
Chefs on the Move
Giancarlo Quataldi, the chef who came from Ravenna, Italy, to cook at Amarcord, 7 East 59th Street, Pino Luongo's "Fellini esque 1950's dream" restaurant, has left.
For the time being Cesare Casella, who works at another of Mr.
Luongo's restaurants, is overseeing Amarcord's kitchen.
Celebrating Passover
More restaurants than ever are holding seders, some kosher, some not, to celebrate Passover, the Jewish holiday, which begins at sundown on April 14.
One of the longest-running restaurant seder traditions -- 78 years -- is at Lou G. Siegel, a glatt kosher restaurant at 209 West 38th Street.
Seders held on April 14 and 15 are $65 a person including gratuities.
Payment must be made in advance because the restaurant will not accept money on those nights.
For reservations: (212) 921-4433.
Another kosher seder will be held at Levana, 141 West 69th Street, on April 14 and 15, for $80 a person including gratuities.
For reservations, (212) 877-8457.
Here are some restaurants offering nonkosher seders:
SAMMY'S ROUMANIAN 157 Chrystie Street (at Delancey Street) will have an abbreviated service on April 14 and 15.
The first seating, at 6 P.M., has a complete $59.95 menu, not including tax and gratuities.
Children's meals are half price.
For the second seating, at 8:45 P.M., the dinner is a la carte, with a $10 charge for the seder plate and the service.
For reservations: (212) 673-0330.
CAPSOUTO FRERES 451 Washington Street (at Watts Street) will hold Sephardic-style nonkosher seders on April 14 and 15.
A donation of at least $75 to the American Joint Distribution Committee, which works in the resettlement of Jews, is required.
For reservations: (212) 966-4900.
SAVOY 70 Prince Street (at Crosby Street), will serve a nonkosher Mediterranean-style seder menu on April 14 and 15 for $65 plus tax and gratuities.
For reservations: (212) 219-8570.
CAFE CROCODILE 354 East 74th Street, will serve nonkosher seders with some Sephardic dishes on April 14 and 15 for $55, not including beverages, tax or gratuities.
Children's meals are half price.
For reservations: 212-249-6619.
CAMPAGNA 24 East 21st Street, is offering nonkosher Sephardic seders on April 15 and 16.
The seders are $65, not including beverages, tax and gratuities.
For reservations: (212) 460-0900.
ARCIMBOLDO 220 East 46th Street, is offering a nonkosher Roman Jewish seder menu, which it will serve for dinner throughout Passover, from April 14 to 22.
The cost, $40 a person, includes one glass of wine but not gratuities.
The restaurant is also serving Easter Sunday dinner starting at 11:30 A.M., with a similar Roman menu.
The cost is $40, not including wine or gratuities.
For reservations: (212) 972-4646.
Easter dinner at the JAMES BEARD FOUNDATION will feature an Irish menu prepared by Pat O'Sullivan, the chef at the Castleroy Park Hotel in Limerick, Ireland.
The seven-course dinner begins at 1 P.M.
It is $50 for members, $60 for nonmembers and $35 for children under 14.
Reservations can be made by calling (212) 627-2308.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A  Celtics Beat Heat  Dee Brown matched his career high with 41 points as the Boston Celtics overcame a 14-point third-quarter deficit and beat the host Miami Heat, 126-115, last night.
Dominique Wilkins added 19 points and increased his career total to 25,209 to move past Jerry West (25,192) into eighth place on the league's career scoring list. (AP)


Walker Out, Watters In
Yesterday, the Philadelphia Eagles released HERSCHEL WALKER, a two-time Pro Bowl selection and their most valuable player on offense the past two years, and introduced RICKY WATTERS, a 25-year-old running back who won a Super Bowl two months ago with San Francisco.
Watters's youth and championship ring made the difference to Coach RAY RHODES, who was the 49ers' defensive coordinator last season.
Rhodes said Walker, 33, would have had to compete for a roster spot if he accepted a pay cut and stayed with the team.
Walker said he would rather be released.


Women of Science And the Old Boys Club
"Discovering Women" is an effort by public television, powered by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the National Science Foundation, the Intel Foundation and other money-givers, to bring more women into a male-dominated field.
So if there is a teen-ager around the house with a bent toward science, this six-hour series offers a set of role models, one to a program: Melissa Franklin, physicist; Lynda Jordan, biochemist; Marcia McNutt, geophysicist; Patty Jo Watson, archeologist; Misha Mahowald, neuroscientist; Lydia Villa-Komaroff, molecular biologist.


CUNY Budget Protesters Didn't Stir Disorder
To the Editor:
As a faculty participant in the March 23 rally protesting proposed budget cuts for the City University of New York and the State University of New York, I beg to differ with New York City Deputy Police Commissioner Tom Kelly's assessment that students provoked the disturbance (news article, March 24).


Garden Falls Victim To Unstoppable Force
He went around Greg Anthony, through Anthony Bonner and over Patrick Ewing.
John Starks, though, took the worst of it.
Starks was again cast in the role of unsuspecting playground victim, the kid with the hand in the face, the forearm in the back, the one man who kept waiting for him to miss, while everyone stood around the asphalt in awe.
The last soul anyone could remember Michael Jordan treating this coldly on a basketball floor was seated at courtside.


Hanns Friedrichs, 68, Who Set Style of TV News in Germany
Hanns Joachim Friedrichs, a journalist who shaped the style of German television news for four decades, died at his home in Hamburg on Monday.
He was 68.
The cause was cancer, his family said.
Mr.
Friedrichs told Der Spiegel in its cover interview this week that he had learned only at the end of December that he had the disease.


Looking Like Mike Again, Jordan Beats Knicks
It was an incredible performance, even by Michael Jordan's standards.
It was a game that 100,000 people will probably swear they saw at Madison Square Garden.
And in the end it was Jordan who made one final remarkable play that gave the Chicago Bulls a victory.
Jordan's pass to Bill Wennington for an uncontested dunk with 3.1 seconds to play last night lifted the Bulls to a sensational 113-111 victory over the Knicks.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Mar. 24
Mar. 17
Mar. 25
1995
1995
1994
Gasoline production, daily
7.3
7.0
6.9
Distillate production, daily
3.3
3.2
3.1
Gasoline stocks
217.7
218.3
217.5
Distillate stocks
119.8
120.1
101.8
Crude imports, daily
6.2
6.4
5.8
Product imports, daily
1.5
1.3
1.9
Crude stocks
328.3
325.6
335.8
Crude production, daily
6.6
6.6
6.7
Refinery utilization (%)
89.6
89.8
86.2
Source: American Petroleum Institute


High Court to Decide Case on Drug Testing of School Athletes
The question of random drug testing reached the Supreme Court today for the first time, in an argument over whether the Constitution permits public schools to test student athletes for drug use without any particular reason for suspecting any individual student of wrongdoing.
The Justices appeared both sympathetic to the desire of a small Oregon school district to curb student drug use and skeptical of the position of an American Civil Liberties Union lawyer that urinalysis drug testing was so intrusive and degrading as to be flatly unconstitutional in the absence of individual suspicion.


Giant Food Inc.(GFSA,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 25


Oxford Industries(OXM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 3


Duckwall-Alco Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


A Longtime Theater Virtuoso Who Keeps Being Discovered
Every evening at the Cort Theater, Cherry Jones glides down a long staircase and becomes Catherine Sloper, the repressed title character in "The Heiress," a woman very much of her time, the 1850's.
Backstage in her dressing room before a recent performance, the actress is, unsurprisingly, the opposite of her character: vibrant, down to earth and filled with enthusiasm for the actor's life.
For 15 years, she has been a virtuosic theatrical professional, appearing on Broadway (a Tony nomination for "Our Country's Good"), Off Broadway and regional theater, but people keep discovering her.
She is not, of course, an overnight star.
Hard work and a long apprenticeship have nurtured her natural talent and have allowed her to keep her new success in perspective.
And she knows there are other actresses, including her friends J. Smith-Cameron and Hope Davis, who, with a breakthrough role, could "fly to the moon." For the moment, it is Ms.
Jones, at 38, who is on the moon, and enjoying every minute of it.


Bond Funds Reverse a Yearlong Course and Report a Rise in Investments
For the first time in a year, mutual fund investors are putting more money into American bond funds than they are taking out.
And with the stock market at record highs, they are adding more money to stock funds, though not at a record pace.
For bond funds, the drought was a long one.
When the bond market tumbled in early 1994, many fund investors took flight as well.
Last March, $7.3 billion was taken out of funds primarily devoted to fixed-income investments in the United States, and the outflows continued through this January, peaking at $10.1 billion in November.


Surveys Find Lack of Knowledge Limits Use of Morning-After Pill
Most gynecologists know about morning-after pills that can prevent unwanted pregnancies, but they seldom prescribe them because they wait for women to ask, a new survey finds.
And most women, a related survey shows, do not know enough about the pills to ask for them.
"I was surprised by how widespread the ignorance is about this," said Dr.
Mark D. Smith, executive vice president of the Kaiser Family Foundation of Menlo Park, Calif., which conducted the study with Louis Harris &amp; Associates.


Budget Battling: Tale of the Red Tape
Gov.
George E. Pataki and Senate leaders have reached a general agreement on revisions to Mr.
Pataki's initial budget proposal, but the Assembly has not signed on.
Here are some major issues under discussion: The Bottom Line


California Leader Visits a State Crucial for '96
Gov.
Pete Wilson of California took his "exploratory" Presidential campaign to New Hampshire today, looking over the state where the first 1996 primary will be held and getting looked over in return.
The two-hour visit by Mr.
Wilson, the newest and one of the most highly regarded Republican contenders, was as much ritual as anything.
There was the obligatory trek to the gold-domed Statehouse here, the obligatory hand shaking, the obligatory appearance before cameras and reporters so that the Wilson word could go forth, lest anyone has overlooked the fact that he is "thinking about" running.


House Republicans Reinvent WIC
To the Editor:
I am compelled to comment on Bob Herbert's "Formula for Tragedy" (column, March 25).


Teledyne Solicits Bids and Asks WHX to End Proxy Fight
Teledyne Inc., which last year rejected an unsolicited $1.2 billion takeover bid from the WHX Corporation, said yesterday that it was considering putting itself up for sale.
In a statement, Teledyne said that since the WHX bid was made it had received "expressions of interest" from other parties.
Teledyne also said that it had retained Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company to begin the process of soliciting offers from other companies.
The company, a Los Angeles-based conglomerate that makes products ranging from aircraft electronics to electric toothbrushes, also invited WHX to participate in the process.


Flag Symbolizes the Country We Share
To the Editor:
I take issue with the Rev.
George Campbell on the proper use of the word "desecrate" (letter, March 27).
Webster's Third New International Dictionary has this to say: "3: to treat (an object of veneration, reverent devotion, or admiration) irreverently or contemptuously often in a way to provoke outrage on the part of others." This would seem to cover the flag.


Sports of The Times; Jordan Hits Garden at Cruising Speed: 55
People were scouring the record books to find out when anyone had done in Madison Square Garden what Michael Jordan had done last night against the Knicks.
Like most points in a half, or most points in a game, or most points in . . . .
They were looking in the wrong place.
You don't find what Jordan did in the game in the record books.
You check memories, like the time in the Garden that Ol' Blue Eyes had the joint swinging, or the Stones had it rocking, or Gunther Gebel-Williams tamed his lions and mesmerized the crowd, or the first Ali-Frazier fight.


International Briefs; Renault Says Earnings Tripled During 1994
Renault S.A., the largest car and truck maker in France, said yesterday that its profit more than tripled in 1994, aided primarily by one-time items and buoyant sales of small cars.
Renault said net earnings jumped to 3.64 billion francs ($736 million) from 1.07 billion francs in 1993.
Revenue rose 5.2 percent, to 178.5 billion francs ($36 billion).
The latest earnings were bolstered by a one-time gain of 688 million francs ($139 million), most of which stemmed from the partial sale of shares in Renault's former partner, Volvo A.B.


P.R. Survey Reports Fee Income Gains
An annual public relations survey has reported that fee income for the 50 largest agencies rose 8.5 percent in 1994 from 1993.
The survey, which will appear in the 1995 O'Dwyer Directory of Public Relations Firms published by the J. R. O'Dwyer Company in New York, found that 24 of the top 50 agencies had fee-income gains of 10 percent or more in 1994; two suffered declines of 10 percent or more, and six had declines of between 5 and 9 percent.


Market Place; The S.E.C. says a broker helped friends and relatives be insiders.
IT'S nice work if you can get it.
You're a securities analyst with some influence in the markets.
You reach a positive or negative conclusion about a stock, tell your buddies and relatives, and then let the public know about your new position -- after your pals have already traded on the information first.
Even better, you get some real market-moving tidbit -- an unannounced merger, for instance -- and whisper that to your insider-trading gang.


Arrest in Missing-Teen Case
The search for 16-year-old Nicole Russo continues, but the hunt for the teen-ager charged with her murder has ended.
At Los Angeles International Airport early yesterday, F.B.I. agents and the police arrested Louis P. Urcinoli, 19, of Seaside Park.
He had been sought since March 17, four days after Ms.
Russo, a Brick High School student, was reported missing.
The police said that Mr.
Urcinoli killed his girlfriend of a few weeks in a Seaside Park motel.
Mr.
Urcinoli has said that he dropped her off in Brooklyn.
Her family is clinging to hope that she might still be alive.


How Five-Spice Powder Can Liven Up Shrimp
THIS quick and easy shrimp dish gets its flavor from Chinese five-spice powder, which consists of cinnamon, cloves, fennel seed, star anise and Sichuan peppercorns.
Steamed asparagus and dark, crusty bread are fine accompaniments.
Five-Spice Shrimp And Pasta
10 jumbo shrimp in their shells  1 teaspoon five-spice powder  Freshly ground black pepper to taste  1 large clove garlic  1 piece fresh or frozen ginger, large enough to yield 1 tablespoon coarsely grated
1/3 cup orange juice  1 tablespoon reduced-sodium soy sauce  1 tablespoon rice vinegar  1 teaspoon honey mustard  1/8 teaspoon hot pepper flakes
8 ounces fresh eggless linguine.
1. Peel shrimp and cut each one in four or five pieces.
2.
Mix the five-spice powder with black pepper to taste, and add shrimp, stirring well to coat.
3. Bring water for pasta to boil in covered pot.
4.
Mince garlic, and grate ginger coarsely.
Combine garlic and ginger in a small bowl with orange juice, soy sauce, vinegar, mustard and hot pepper flakes.
5.
Combine orange juice mixture and shrimp, and simmer in a pan on top of the stove for about 2 minutes, until shrimp is cooked but not tough.
6. Cook pasta. When it is done, drain, and mix with shrimp and sauce.
Yield: 2 servings
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 520 calories, 4 grams fat, 80 milligrams cholesterol, 615 milligrams sodium, 25 grams protein, 95 grams carbohydrate.


CHRONICLE
Another former couple, DONALD and IVANA TRUMP, will be seen together again by millions of people this weekend.
The occasion? To share a stuffed crust pizza.


Gallup Journal; Crossroads Where Old And New Coexist
Things were slow on Front Street, the doors of its trading posts and pawn shops and cafeterias rattling a little in the wind that blew in off the Navajo reservation 10 miles away.
Almost everybody seemed to be down at the flea market in a big field on the edge of town where the wind pelted the crowds of shoppers with fine, gray dust and carried with it the smell of hay and hot Navajo fry-bread.


Limited Inc. to Split Its Chains Into 3 Companies
Limited Inc. announced a plan yesterday to carve its specialty store chains and other operations into three companies that would let investors choose among some of its best-performing and worst-performing businesses.
Limited said it would retain direct control of Structure, Abercrombie &amp; Fitch and two other retail chains and lump some of its hottest stores, including Victoria's Secret and Bath and Body Works, into a new company with an estimated market value of $6 billion.


Mrs. Mandela and the Rule of Law
It could not have been an easy decision for Nelson Mandela, but the South African President was right and courageous to dismiss his estranged wife, Winnie, from the Government.
Her expulsion is an important step in the development of the new South Africa, making clear that lawlessness and racial divisiveness will not be tolerated in the highest councils.
There is no more vital lesson for Mr.
Mandela to drive home to a nation where the law was once the crude instrument of white oppression and its violation an act of justifiable defiance.
The new South Africa must rest on the rule of law and no one can be above it, no matter how great her past suffering, how elevated her position or how important her role in the struggle against apartheid.


North West Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Two Greek Brothers Surrounded by Enigma
Early in "Borderline" there is a telling image: an extreme close-up of a partly eaten apple with ants crawling over it.
Think of it as a warning.
When a film goes over the edge with such an arch, pretentious symbol, there's no turning back.
The apple sits on the grass and two little boys are tied by their wrists to a tree while their father sleeps.
Whether the boys are tied for punishment or safekeeping is one of the lesser mysteries of this intentionally enigmatic and unintentionally tired Greek film.
Set in a prettily photographed village, the story focuses on the boys as adults.
Stelios, the older brother, was an emotionally troubled soldier who drowned 11 years before, possibly a suicide.
His body was never found.
Yannis, the younger brother, is now a policeman who accidentally gets information that Stelios may be alive, possibly running guns under a false name.
The film reveals this information gradually, flashing back and forth in time as Yannis tracks down leads, reconsidering his own identity as he struggles to find the truth about his brother's.


Panel Vote Is Set on Repeal of a Federal Wage Act
Senate Republicans have scheduled a committee vote on Wednesday on legislation to repeal the Depression-era law that guarantees workers on Federal construction jobs the prevailing wage.
Officials of organized labor and one of their chief allies in the Senate, Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, said today that they would try to persuade the Republicans to amend the law, the Davis-Bacon Act, instead of repealing it.


Limousine Driver Deals a Blow to Simpson
The limousine driver who picked up O. J. Simpson on the evening of June 12 testified today that in three drives up and down Mr.
Simpson's block of North Rockingham Avenue, at a time when prosecutors say he killed two people and Mr.
Simpson insists he was home, the driver never saw Mr.
Simpson's white Ford Bronco parked on the street.
In a crucial assault on Mr.
Simpson's alibi, the driver, Allan Park, told the Deputy District Attorney, Marcia Clark, that he initially located Mr.
Simpson's house by following the house numbers painted on the curb, making him peculiarly attentive to what was parked there.
But neither when he first arrived at 10:22 nor in two subsequent trips by in the next 17 minutes did he see Mr.
Simpson's car.


Gingrich Acknowledges That Tax-Cut Plan Is in Trouble
Speaker Newt Gingrich said today that his party's five-year, $189 billion package of personal and business tax cuts was "in some trouble," but left murky how much.
Critics of the bill said it was a lot.
One, Representative Fred Upton, Republican of Michigan, said he and allies had enough votes to keep the tax bill from reaching a vote next week unless it was changed to make tax breaks contingent on reducing the deficit.


How About X Ratings On the Internet?
To the Editor:
Re your March 24 front-page article on a Senate panel's vote to ban smut in cyberspace: As an Internet provider, I share Senator Jim Exon's concern about shielding children from the porn that proliferates on the Internet.
Because of this concern, we offer a forum for teen-agers only that restricts their access to the Internet, as well as restricting adult access to the teen-age forum.


Homeless, 2 Die in a Fire
Two homeless people died yesterday morning in a trash fire beneath a parking-lot ramp in the East New York section of Brooklyn, a Fire Department spokesman said.
Firefighters, who arrived at 2:54 A.M., found the bodies of an unidentified man and woman on mattresses, said the spokesman, Firefighter Albert Washington.
The victims have not been identified, he added.


A.L. Pharma (ALO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Jeweler Describes Shooting
Jeffrey Wolf did not speak publicly for two weeks after his wife was shot and killed during a robbery in his Franklin Township jewelry store.
Mr.
Wolf had said that a robber shot his wife; the police said that Brenda Wolf was fatally wounded by her husband's .357-caliber Magnum.


Nets Pull In Evidence


Class Notes; California mother's lawsuit puts a personal spin on the debate over affirmative action.
"My name is Janice Camarena," begins the statement given by the 25-year-old woman from Crestline, Calif.
"I'm a student at San Bernardino Valley College. Getting an education is especially important for me. I'm a widowed mother of three young children who will depend upon me for food, support and shelter for many years to come."
What followed that arresting introduction, made at a news conference in California, was an accusation in the form of a lawsuit that Ms.
Camarena became a victim of racial discrimination when she was not allowed to take an English course at her junior college.
She is white, and the course was reserved for black students.


In America; A Tale of Two Citizens
Sarah Evans lives alone in a single-family house in Queens.
She is 69 years old and blind.
Her husband died five years ago.
She has spent several years struggling with congestive heart failure, diabetes, failing kidneys and periodic bursts of dangerously high blood pressure.
If she has found any of this daunting, she keeps it to herself.
"With all my medical problems, I am still A-O.K.," she says.
"I'm a private person, very independent. My home care attendant, she will go out and do the things that need sight. She'll pay my bills, do my laundry and shop. Now my nurse, she comes in once a week. She will check my medication for me and, most of all, keep an eye on that blood pressure, because it has a tendency to go crazy.


Officials Guilty of Taking Bribes
Two politicians were found guilty yesterday of accepting bribes in the continuing investigation of city government by Federal authorities.
After a five-week trial on the awarding of city towing contracts, a jury deliberated for eight hours before convicting Councilman Gary S. Harris and former Councilman Ralph T. Grant Jr.
Page A1.


North Korea Alone Stalls on Nuclear Reactor
To the Editor:
It was with no little surprise that I read "A Korean Reactor by Another Name" (editorial, March 23), on supplying nuclear reactors to North Korea.
I find it unbalanced for you, based on North Korean rhetoric, to portray Seoul as an obstacle to progress.
The Republic of Korea alone has offered to play a central role in financing as well as designing, manufacturing and constructing the reactors in North Korea.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BALL CORP., Muncie, Ind., which makes aluminum cans and glass containers, will build a plant to make plastic beverage bottles within a year, marking its entry into the plastic beverage bottles and food containers business.


Irving Shulman Is Dead at 81; Wrote of City Life's Tough Side
Irving Shulman, a novelist and screenwriter known as a chronicler of gritty urban life, died on March 23 at his home in Sherman Oaks, Calif.
He was 81.
The cause was not disclosed by his wife, Julia.


Barry's Jewelers Inc.(BARY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Consumer Optimism Hurts Treasury Prices
Prices of Treasury securities tumbled yesterday, hurt by a report showing consumer confidence was higher than expected.
The selloff gave back more than half of the gains of a two-day bond rally.
Prices fell after the Conference Board said consumer confidence in March rose to 101 from a revised 99.4 in February.
The report revived concerns that recent signs of an economic slowdown might be fleeting.


A Changing California Emerges From Recession
New evidence shows that three years after the rest of the country, California has finally pulled out of its brutal recession, with job growth and incomes rising swiftly.
There are even signs that the outflow of residents from the state has slowed sharply and may reverse in coming years.
But California's economy has changed considerably and has been humbled by the extraordinary growth of the late 1980's.


Corrections
A picture of Nigerian villagers yesterday, with an article about a wave of killings in an oil-producing region of Nigeria, carried an incorrect credit.
The picture was by Robert Grossman for The New York Times, not by Reuters.


2 Newark Politicians Convicted in Graft
Two prominent Newark politicians were found guilty of accepting tens of thousands of dollars in bribes.
The verdicts appear to add impetus to a wide-ranging Federal inquiry into the city government's dealing with private companies.
A jury in Federalo District Court in Newark convicted the defendants, Councilman Gary Harris and former Councilman Ralph T. Grant Jr., on all charges in a five-week trial that provided a glimpse of the kind of corruption that prosecutors maintain is rife in Newark.


A Puzzle Of Pieces In an Odd Fit
Dean Moss is an elegant performer and a choreographer of obvious intelligence.
But the full-evening piece he presented on Saturday night at the Bessie Schonberg Theater was a conundrum, starting with its inscrutable title, "Commodities, Identities and Synchronized Swimming." Like the rest of the piece, the meaning of its parts or why they were joined remained a mystery that was doubly frustrating because Mr.
Moss seemed to have intentionally made a lazily roiling, neatly ordered mess.
In advance publicity material, he described the dance as an expression of "the convergence of culture, the fragmentation of identity and the role of commerce as a catalyst for both." Almost none of that was apparent.
Nor was the piece rich enough just to let it wash over one.
Yet the work did have a fully finished look.


Suspect in Murders Traces Troubled Past
In one moment during a prison interview today, Reginald McFadden, the parolee who authorities suspect went on a murderous rampage after his release from a Pennsylvania prison last year, maintained that he was not guilty of any murders.
In the next moment, he said his "undoing" was caused by the very friends who helped him get his sentence for murder commuted in Pennsylvania and then abandoned him once he was released.


Council Set to Fight Mayor On Service Cuts in Budget
Drawing battle lines over Rudolph W. Giuliani's proposed New York City budget, officials of the City Council said yesterday that they would scale back some or all of the Mayor's $185 million in proposed tax cuts if the city failed to receive enough state aid and could not find ways to pay for the cuts without drastically reducing services.
And if the city can afford any tax reductions, the Council officials said they would propose alternatives to the Mayor's plan that would provide a greater benefit for middle- and working-class New Yorkers.


Bronx Man, Beaten by Police, Settles Case
A Bronx man who was beaten by police officers was awarded $1 million yesterday after New York City officials decided to settle in the middle of a trial in the case, the man's lawyer said.
The man, Euclid Levine, 45, was driving home on Oct. 9, 1985, when two police officers stopped his car for what they said were traffic violations on the corner of East 149th Street and Third Avenue in the Mott Haven section of the Bronx, said the lawyer, Howard Borowick.


U.S. Support for Turks' Anti-Kurd Campaign Dims
After clashing with European allies and members of Congress, the Clinton Administration has softened its support for Turkey's offensive against Kurdish rebels in northern Iraq and has stepped up pressure on Turkey to withdraw its 35,000 troops.
Although President Clinton initially gave his blessing to the offensive, Secretary of State Warren Christopher signaled a harsher attitude over the weekend when he sent a message to the Turkish Prime Minister, Tansu Ciller, telling of his concerns that Turkish troops had committed human rights violations and were planning a long stay in northern Iraq.


The Backlash Against New Deal Liberalism
THE END OF REFORM New Deal Liberalism in Recession and War
By Alan Brinkley
371 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $27.50
In the grim winter of 1942-43, with the United States at war abroad and Franklin D. Roosevelt's advisers striving to maintain their liberal program at home, opinion polls suddenly showed that the public was becoming impatient with the New Deal, especially with the high taxes and the bureaucratic expansion that many voters saw coming with it.


Major Ethnic Changes Under Way
New York City's white population, which made up more than 60 percent of the residents in the city in 1970, will decline to 35 percent by the end of the century, predicts a new forecast by the City Planning Department.
By contrast, the Hispanic population is projected to grow substantially by the year 2000, the study says, surpassing the black population for the first time.
The study, based on projections of birthrates and migration from the 1980's, provides a rough sketch of what the racial mixture is most likely to be.


Has-Beens vs. Never-Weres, If You Keep Score at Home
"Bob Stoddard, who's retired 10 in a row, is in danger of having his streak broken. Ohh, a walk breaks the spell."
"Thoutsis got it, and Eufemia has set down 13 in a row."


Peter Sandfort, 79; Dairyman Fought Milk Price Controls
Peter H. Sandfort, a dairyman who fought New Jersey's pricing policies on milk in a campaign that was closely followed by the industry in the 1960's, died on Saturday in Valley Hospital in Ridgewood, N.J.
He was 79 and a resident of Hawthorne, N.J.
The cause was complications from pulmonary fibrosis, said his wife, Mary Ann Badner Sandfort.


The Winner Isn't David Letterman
As the stars glittered, Dave fizzled.
The biggest surprise of Monday's Academy Awards telecast on ABC was the growing insignificance of David Letterman as the evening droned on.
Instead of keeping things moving smartly, Mr.
Letterman stuck with his late-night shtick, too often leaving the show's pacing in shambles.
Glamorous people waiting for awards announcements aren't terribly interested in New York City cabdrivers or stupid-pet tricks.
Within the confines of his own CBS show, Mr.
Letterman shines in a context that lets him coast cleverly.
The delighted studio audience is primed to applaud his every sally.
Paul Shaffer, the music director of Mr.
Letterman's "Late Show," carefully provides the ka-boom sound effects that accompany the jokes and Mr.
Letterman's calculated hand gestures.
A flubbed line becomes a running gag throughout the show, supposedly getting funnier with each repetition.
The nightly routine is now set in concrete.


Gloomy Reports to the Contrary, 87% of Americans Feel Healthy
IN a national survey that challenges doomsayers' views of American health, a Federal agency has found that nearly 87 percent of adults said their health was good to excellent.
By two measures in the survey, more residents of the District of Columbia, where political, economic and crime problems are easily evident, reported satisfaction with their physical and mental health than did adults living in any of the 49 states surveyed.
This finding was among many intriguing tidbits to emerge from a state-by-state survey reported last week by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta.
Only Wyoming failed to participate in the 1993 survey because it lacked money to pay for its share of the costs.


Pataki Drops Threat to Close Down Government
Gov.
George E. Pataki backed away today from his repeated threat to close down state government if a budget is not enacted by Saturday, the start of the fiscal year.
He conceded that a timely budget, which he had made a priority of his administration, was slipping out of reach.
Some legislators said the reversal would undercut the Republican Governor's credibility as budget talks reach a crucial phase.
But Mr.
Pataki said he had decided it would be unfair to penalize innocent state workers for what he said was almost certain to become the state's 11th consecutive late budget.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.06
6.13
3.45
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.68
5.64
3.48
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.80
5.80
3.82
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.13
7.04
6.71
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.39
7.31
7.06
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.27
8.21
7.88
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.36
6.34
6.15
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 8


Inheritance Plot Feared in Deaths of Couple
Sometime in January, a Staten Island couple walked into a patch of dense woods in the Pennsylvania Poconos and were beaten to death.
The bodies lay there more than two months, slowly decomposing in the winter chill, until they were found last Thursday by a passer-by.
Before the corpses were found, when the investigators were treating the disappearance as a missing persons case, they learned that the couple had come into an $85,000 inheritance, and they began to suspect the worst.


CUNY Budget Protesters Didn't Stir Disorder; Childish Excesses
To the Editor:
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani was wrong about last Thursday's student protest at New York City Hall.
The only thing wrong with the demonstration was that it was poorly organized and badly supervised.
Someone should have checked the spelling on the signs.


CHRONICLE
After months of speculation about the state of their marriage, JULIA ROBERTS, the actress, and LYLE LOVETT, the singer, songwriter and actor, announced yesterday that they were separating.
Ms.
Roberts, 27, and Mr.
Lovett, 37, whose marriage in June 1993 surprised relatives, friends and fans, agreed to a legal separation, their publicity agent, Nancy Seltzer, told The Associated Press.


U.S. Plan on Utility Pricing And Power Access Awaited
The Federal agency that oversees the utility industry is expected to propose guidelines today on access to transmission lines and the prices charged by utilities for such access.
The goal of the agency, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, is to establish a fair and uniform system of access and pricing, as more states move to open their power markets to competition.


Tyson and King a Team
MIKE TYSON and DON KING will appear at a news conference in Cleveland tomorrow, King's boxing director, AL BRAVERMAN, said yesterday.
"This will put to rest all the rumors and stories," he said.


Home Holdings Bondholders' Plan to Save Insurer
Bondholders of Home Holdings Inc. have submitted a plan to New Hampshire state regulators to save the loss-ridden insurance company that is different than an earlier plan proposed by Home and the Zurich Insurance Group.
The New Hampshire Insurance Department, Home's primary regulator, was presented with the new plan yesterday, five days before hearings to consider the Zurich plan.


Book Notes
Turning the Last Page?
Books made of paper will soon be obsolete, so go electronic before it's too late.
Such was one battle cry that went up this week at the annual conference of the Association of American Publishers.
Some 200 of the nation's senior publishing executives gathered for the three-day huddle here, where they sat in a dimly lighted meeting room as a range of speakers discussed the future of books and bookselling.


Super Rite Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 4


Topps Co.(TOPP,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 25


Mason Is Glad To Be Back
Last night was Anthony Mason's first home game since his five-game suspension, making it a special occasion for him even if Michael Jordan had not been in town.
Mason has become a favorite at Madison Square Garden.
Fans briefly chanted his name last week during a loss to the Charlotte Hornets -- a clear sign of support in his dispute with Pat Riley.


Cinemark USA Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Paris Tablecloth Sketches From a Golden Age of Art
The sight of earnest young artists sketching away at sidewalk cafes may seem familiar enough, but even in Paris not many restaurants can claim to have inspired the likes of Picasso, Max Ernst, Alexander Calder, Jean Cocteau, Paul Valery, Paul Eluard and Balthus.
Between 1944 and 1952, though, a coterie of artists and poets were regulars at a little Left Bank bistro called Le Catalan.
And as they sat around chatting, smoking, eating and drinking, many of them drew playfully -- and often erotically -- on the paper tablecloths that were then the norm.
Georges Hugnet, painter, poet, bookbinder and the first person to translate Gertrude Stein into French, ate daily at Le Catalan and it was around his table that many of the artistic lights of the period would gather.
Fortunately, he made a point of collecting their improvisations at the end of the evening.


KODAK ANNOUNCES ALLIANCES FOR DIGITAL PHOTOGRAPHY
The Eastman Kodak Company, as expected, announced a variety of new products and alliances yesterday, to help build its digital photography business.
The company reached an agreement with the Microsoft Corporation to develop software for manipulating pictures on personal computers; with the Sprint Corporation to develop a system for transmitting images of data files over telephone lines; with the Hewlett-Packard Company to develop low-cost scanners and printers, and with I.B.M. to develop systems to move images over computer networks.
Kodak also said that Sega Enterprises Inc. had licensed Kodak's Photo CD technology for its Saturn video-game player, and that Kodak had reached an agreement with the Kinko's office services company to develop new desktop publishing systems that incorporate color images.
Among products Kodak introduced a digital camera, priced less than $1,000 and intended for use with desktop computers.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Named Rick Wise pitching coach for Pawtucket of the International League and Bill Maloney pitching coach for Battle Creek of the Midwest League.


A Charm School For Car Salesmen; In Class, Making Peace With Buyers; Then There's the Real World
It is barely 8:30 in the morning, but already Timothy C. Gercke, auto industry educator and evangelist, has invoked Henry Ford, Moses and the Masai in trying to rouse the two dozen auto salespeople before him to the potential of their calling.
He wants to inspire them to resolve the bitterest feud in American commerce, between the people who sell cars and pretty much everyone else.


Henley Is Convicted Of Running Drug Ring
Cornerback DARRYL HENLEY and four other men were convicted yesterday of running a cocaine ring.
Henley, a 28-year-old unrestricted free agent who played with the Los Angeles Rams last year while free on bond, was accused of financing an operation that packed cocaine at his home in Brea, Calif., for sale in Memphis and Atlanta.


No Headline
"It's like marrying the two most beautiful people in the world." ALICIA OGAWA, a financial analyst, on a merger that created the world's largest bank.  [ A1:6. ]


Now Playing on Beverly Blvd.: The Last Days of Chasen's
For four more days, Chasen's will still be the classiest restaurant in town.
Alfred Hitchcock routinely fell asleep there at his favorite booth.
Howard Hughes often showed up with his own utensils and always ordered the same dinner -- steak, mashed potatoes and ice cream.
Errol Flynn and Humphrey Bogart would drop in for a steak.
Ronald Reagan sat at booth No. 2 and would order boiled beef.
Elizabeth Taylor enjoyed the chili so much that she had it flown over to Rome often while making "Cleopatra." It once had even had its own sauna and barber.


Quick &amp; Reilly Group Inc.(BQR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Man's Best Friend's Fiercest Foe: Man
WHEN Noel Velez describes the pit bull fights he and his friends have attended, the revulsion he plainly reveals is accompanied by an adolescent's complicated pride of place.
It is as if by having witnessed the illegal and barbarous dogfights the 14-year-old boy has glimpsed secrets of his Washington Heights community that have further bound him to his neighborhood.
But Noel has other allegiances that have made homeboy solidarity and mean-street authenticity hard to bear.
He loves animals.
He has kept fish, birds and reptiles, and once raised a squirrel monkey.
"I want to become a veterinarian," said the youth as he walked his 3-month old Staffordshire terrier.
"I read about animals all the time."


Japanese Police Say They Found Germ-War Material at Cult Site
Japanese police have found materials that raise the possibility that a religious cult suspected of unleashing a poison gas attack in the Tokyo subways might also have been trying to develop biological weapons.
In their seventh day of searches at the cult's compound near Mount Fuji, the police found 160 barrels of peptone, a substance used to grow cultures of bacteria, according to Japanese press reports.


Time for a Fitness Pyramid?; After Thigh Master, a Stream of Fitness Gadgets
REMEMBER the last time a rush of resolve pulsed through your sluggish heart, the moment when you knew that this time you would do it, you would exercise regularly?
It was a beautiful moment, in which you knew that you would triumph over grim encounters with full-length mirrors.
You sallied forth to the sporting goods store in search of a new pair of sneakers.
You were not seeking Kathy Smith's Air Bench and Power Step Workout, or the Denise Austin Tone Up 1-2-3.
But these gizmos, along with the Slide Reebok, the Lifeline Gym, Tony Little's Ab Isolator, and Dyna-Bands, flanked the cash register.


OroAmerica Inc.(OROA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 27


Two Newark Politicians Found Guilty in Bribe Case
Two prominent Newark politicians were found guilty today of accepting tens of thousands of dollars in bribes in verdicts that appear to bolster a wide-ranging Federal inquiry into the city government's dealings with private companies.
A jury in Federal District Court took about eight hours over two days to convict the defendants, Councilman Gary S. Harris and former Councilman Ralph T. Grant Jr., on all charges, capping off a five-week trial that provided a glimpse into the kind of corruption that prosecutors maintain is rife in Newark.





Payroll Scheme Is Suspected
Eighteen employees of Continental Airlines kept getting fatter paychecks than they had earned, and the problem was not a clerical error, according to the Essex County Prosecutor, Clifford J. Minor.
Rather, Mr.
Minor said, a payroll padding scheme operated at Newark International Airport over seven months in 1992.
Yesterday, the workers -- now former employees -- were indicted along with the man the prosecutor says they shared their extra money with, Henry Onyluke, who used to be a payroll clerk for the airline.
Continental officials said some employees had their pay inflated by $30,000, and the overall loss to the company was about $296,000.
LAWRENCE VAN GELDER


Some Airlines Break Ranks Over Fees Paid Travel Agents
Several airlines, following in their long tradition of breaking collective decisions, are already starting to chip away at the industry's recent move to cap commissions for travel agents.
In early February, in a bid to cut costs, the airline industry imposed a maximum commission of $50 on a round-trip domestic ticket.
But some carriers -- including Delta Air Lines, the pioneer of the limit on travel agent fees -- are now offering new backdoor financial incentives that reward bigger agencies for exceeding sales goals.
These moves mean some airlines are effectively giving back some of the money they said they would save when they announced the caps.
Before the cap, airlines generally paid travel agents a 10 percent commission on the price of ticket.


Facing Facts In Balkans
A small but significant change took place recently at the United States Embassy here: the brass plaque saying "Ambassador" outside the office of the senior American diplomat in Belgrade was replaced by one saying "Chief of Mission."
This investment in a new plaque, almost three years after the last American Ambassador left in protest at Serbian involvement in the Bosnian war, reflects a bleak reality.
It will be a long time before the debris from the destruction of Yugoslavia is resolved and an equally long time before relations improve to the point where an American Ambassador returns.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 17 about a sex-discrimination lawsuit against the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People misstated the terms under which an employee in its economic development department left the organization.
N.A.A.C.P. officials and the former employee, Ann Taylor -- who was not involved in the suit -- say she resigned from the organization.
Ms.
Taylor approached The Times last week; this correction was delayed for checking of the discrimination complaint.


Conner Wins on Water, But Has Problems on Land
With his grip on the America's Cup slowly but surely slipping, Dennis Conner went out on the water today needing to win to remain a viable threat in the 1995 defense trials.
The 21-year veteran of cup racing has a history of comebacks, and he pulled off another today in defeating Mighty Mary by 1 minute 31 seconds.


H &amp; R BLOCK SELLS PERSONAL FINANCE SOFTWARE HOLDING
H &amp; R Block Inc. said yesterday that it intended to sell its Meca division, which produces the Managing Your Money personal finance software.
Block, the tax preparation company and also the owner of the Compuserve computer network, said it intended to specialize in on-line services.
Earlier this month, Block agreed to buy Spry, a leading provider of software for use on the Internet, for $100 million.
Block has hired Salomon Brothers to sell Meca.
Block figures it will get a high price because many banks see personal finance software, which people use to track their investments and spending, as a key to offering electronic banking services.
The company invested $50 million in Meca, including the Tax Cut tax software program, which Block is not selling.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  GIANT BANK DEAL IN JAPAN  Two of Japan's financial giants, Mitsubishi Bank and the Bank of Tokyo, agreed to merge.
The deal would create a bank three times the size of Citicorp, the largest United States banking company.
A1  A CALL TO DISARM  Haiti's President, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, asked the international security force taking over from Americans to intensify efforts to disarm "opponents of democracy." A1


Arrow International (ARRO,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Philadelphia Rail Run Is Saved
The ticket costs $2.5 million, but it will keep commuters riding for another year on New Jersey Transit's Atlantic City-to-Philadelphia rail line.
Under a plan adopted unanimously yesterday by New Jersey Transit, the number of daily trips on the 67-mile route will be increased.
Alfred H. Harf, New Jersey Transit's assistant executive director for planning, said that the board seriously considered dropping the run when Amtrak announced it would end service, but that "universal support" dissuaded the board.
New Jersey Transit and Amtrak share the line and Amtrak maintains it.
The $2.5 million will cover the cost of maintenance.
After a year, New Jersey Transit will review the expanded operation.


Memorial for Carjacking Victim
Gail Shollar died in 1992, a victim of carjacking, rape and murder.
Her name will live on in a playground under construction in Quibbletown Park.
Mrs.
Shollar's husband, Robert, asked Mayor Ted Light last week if the community would consider naming an existing park for his wife.
The Mayor suggested the playground, and township officials approved the idea.
Mr.
Shollar called Mr.
Light's suggestion "perfect." Last month, Scott R. Johnson, 25, was convicted of murdering Mrs.
Shollar, 35, after abducting her from a South Plainfield shopping center.
He will be sentenced April 17.


You're Fired! See You Out of Court; Using In-House Panels to Keep Disputes Within a Company
The first time that one of Tom Frederick's management decisions at the Marriott hotel here was overruled by an employee jury, he didn't like it, and he did not agree.
The second time, however, Mr.
Frederick, the hotel's director of engineering, saw the light: He'd been wrong.
He'd given one of his engineering department employees a written reprimand -- a serious disciplinary measure at Marriott that can be the basis for a dismissal -- and the employee jury, after hearing both sides, reduced it to a verbal warning.


Stocks End Day Mixed, Deflated Somewhat by Bond Prices
The stock market closed mixed yesterday, with the Dow Jones industrial average falling, the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index edging again into record territory and the Nasdaq composite index, which is rich in technology stocks, surging to another high.
The negative factors included the dollar again falling near post-World War II lows against the mark and the yen, and bond prices dropping and long-term interest rates rising.
Moreover, some analysts say stock prices may be too high and thus headed for a fall.


Foreign Affairs; Wednesday News Quiz
In the old days, The Times ran a news quiz every Saturday.
It was always a favorite of mine, and I think it's time for a revival.
Here are this week's questions:
1.
Which country today is Iran's largest single trading partner? a) Russia; b) France; c) Iraq; d) Guatemala; e) the U.S.; f) Japan.


Students Turn to Internet for Nationwide Protest Planning
Gone are the phone chains that mobilized antiwar efforts in the 1960's.
Campus activism has launched into cyberspace.
Communicating by electronic mail from dormitories, libraries and campus centers across the country, college students have been sending one another a blizzard of messages during the last several weeks, discussing political platforms, possible protest dates and ideas for slogans and petitions.


Rangers' Help Wanted: Someone Who Can Score
A hand-written sign was posted next to the dressing-room stalls of Mike Richter and Glenn Healy today.
It read: "Hail Mary, full of grace, put the puck in the right place -- Go Rangers!"
"I didn't put it there," Richter said, breaking into a wide grin. "Not me."


SENATE IN ACCORD ON PLAN TO ALTER RULE-MAKING ROLE
The Senate reached broad bipartisan agreement today on a proposal to greatly expand the role of Congress in routinely reviewing and possibly rejecting major regulations issued by Federal agencies.
After a sparsely attended debate without a murmur of dissent, everything but the final roll-call was completed today.
The formal vote, scheduled for Wednesday, is meant to signal that members of the Senate, while unwilling to go as far as the House of Representatives has in curbing Federal regulations, share the prevailing distaste for what many businesses consider unduly burdensome rules.


The Fed Meets, and Doesn't Raise Rates
The Federal Reserve's interest-rate-setting committee met here today without changing short-term rates, the latest sign the central bankers think that the United States economy is settling down to steady growth with low inflation.
The policy group, the Federal Open Market Committee, issued a characteristically brief statement at the end of the meeting, which was the first since the panel raised rates by half a percentage point on Feb. 1.


Signs of a Power Struggle Come to Light in China
Despite an outward appearance of calm, a power struggle appears to be getting under way in the Communist Party leadership as the death of Deng Xiaoping, the paramount leader, nears, Western diplomats and Chinese say.
Signs of the struggle are visible in half a dozen major corruption investigations that have now been opened involving powerful political figures.
Chinese officials have privately told Western diplomats that there have been secret arrests of senior party officials and a suicide in the office of a top party official in Beijing.


Hillhaven Corp.(HIL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Audience Odder Than the Repertory
Audiences can be peculiar, but the one Mstislav Rostropovich faced on Sunday afternoon at Avery Fisher Hall was odder than most.
When Mr.
Rostropovich took his first bow, at the intermission, a young boy walked across the stage seeking an autograph.
The cellist guided him backstage and sent him off before the next curtain call.
And at the end of the concert a sketch artist handed Mr.
Rostropovich his afternoon's work, but when the cellist took it with him instead of signing it, the portraitist climbed on stage, looked puzzled for a moment, then headed backstage in pursuit.
In between, there were more typical annoyances: antiphonal coughing, but in greater measure than usual, and stragglers.
Mr.
Rostropovich's appearances in New York as a recitalist were few during his years as the music director of the National Symphony.
His relinquishing of that post last season has not meant an end to his conducting career (he is to lead the Philadelphia Orchestra at Avery Fisher Hall on Monday night), but listeners who find him more eloquent with a bow than with a baton are hoping that he will realign his performing schedule accordingly.


Bed Bath &amp; Beyond Inc.(BBBY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 26


Owen Healthcare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Another Unhappy Night For Nets
Three nights ago in Miami, the Nets made a valiant and heroic fourth-period comeback against the Heat to keep themselves alive for the eighth and final playoff spot.
Two nights later, they fizzled in Indianapolis, losing to the Pacers.
Coming into tonight's game against Golden State, the Nets were hoping to regroup and possibly catch a winning wave that they could ride through a three-game homestand that culminates on Sunday with a game against the Knicks.


Lockout Appears Unlikely if Judge Issues an Injunction
Despite a new proposal from the club owners, a Federal judge continues to hold the key to a baseball season with major leaguers.
A decision by Judge Sonia Sotomayor of United States District Court in Manhattan on whether to grant an injunction requested by the National Labor Relations Board appears to be paramount because the players are not going to accept the new proposal, and the owners seem less and less likely to lock out the players if they offer to return to work, injunction in hand.


Grozny Journal; Picking Up, After Guns Have Done Their Worst
The man installed by Moscow as the leader of a new, interim government for the rebellious Chechen region is a soft-spoken technocrat who understands that his efforts to restore a semblance of normal life to this war-smashed city may sign his death warrant.
"I'm here because someone must do this dirty work," the official, Salambek Khadzhiyev, said in an office heavily guarded by Russian troops.
"It's a question of conscience, not of desire for power. What was happening in Grozny seemed an awful nightmare. But reality is reality, and the point is not being indignant. We've got to get down to work."


Sports of The Times; The Night To Savor Jordan
SOME nights, the Madison Square Garden electricians don't have to turn on the lights.
Some nights, the athletes do it themselves.
But last night, one athlete turned on the lights.


A New Chapter in the Gates Story
The most compelling sidebar to the National Invitation Tournament took another turn yesterday morning: William Gates became a father for the second time.
Gates, a reserve guard for the Marquette University basketball squad that will face Virginia Tech in tonight's N.I.T. final, is better known for his starring role in the acclaimed documentary "Hoop Dreams."


Koor Industries Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
I was browsing at the Barnes &amp; Noble on Fifth Avenue at 48th Street when I became aware of someone at the front of the store talking quite loudly and with growing irritation.
I soon forgot about the best sellers as ominous phrases reached me like "Well, I'll tell you when I intend to take it to court" and "Don't worry about my having a case."


3 From Queens Precinct Indicted in Theft of $1,400 From Man
A grand jury has indicted two Queens police officers and a former officer in the theft of $1,400 from the apartment of a man in Flushing.
Investigators have said another officer or two may soon be arrested in an investigation into drugs and petty thievery involving the 109th Precinct.
The investigation into the precinct in northeastern Queens originally focused on 20 officers, including a sergeant suspected of using cocaine.
But months of sting operations have failed to incriminate the sergeant and other officers, law enforcement officials said.


Aristide Urges U.N. to Disarm Thugs in Haiti
With the United States scheduled to hand over responsibility for Haiti's security to the United Nations this week, President Jean-Bertrand Aristide asked the international force today to intensify efforts to disarm those he called "opponents of democracy."
Conditions are now "safe and stable enough to have that transition," Mr.
Aristide said in an interview this morning at his residence here.
But, he added, the situation "has to become safer day after day" in order for democracy and the rule of law to take root, and that will require peacekeepers to move aggressively against the remnants of the paramilitary groups that terrorized Haiti for three years.


The Foxwoods Myth
The phenomenal success of the Foxwoods casino in Ledyard, Conn., has led many Americans to believe that gambling is an economic panacea for Native Americans.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
According to the 1990 census, Native Americans are the nation's poorest group; 31 percent live below the poverty level.
In the 1980's, their average household income fell by 5 percent, while that of all other major racial and ethnic groups rose.
The average annual income of Native Americans living on reservations is less than $5,000.


When Removing Lead From Homes Increases the Health Risk; Hot Line Offers Help
To the Editor:
Thank you for your informative articles about lead exposure (Science Times, March 21, and Personal Health, March 22).


When Removing Lead From Homes Increases the Health Risk
To the Editor:
Jane E. Brody's two columns on lead poisoning (Science Times, March 21, and Personal Health, March 22) were extremely informative.
I was one of the "unduly complacent" parents she refers to in "How to safeguard children from lead exposure" (March 22).


Shopping for Rice Is No Longer A Simple Choice
TEN years ago, the choice of rice was basic: plain white or brown.
Apart from international travelers, few cooks really knew about long- or short-grain rice, let alone basmati, texmati, Wehani, fragrant jasmine, arborio and carnaroli, not to mention black rice from Thailand or round-grain rice from Spain's east coast.
Today, because of increasing rice production and growing consumer demand, the rice section of many supermarkets is complex and expanding.
Consumption is expected to climb to 25 pounds a person this year, an increase of nearly 10 pounds in the last decade, according to the Rice Council, an industry group based in Houston.
The greater popularity comes in part from a growing immigration from Asia and Latin America and the influences of those cuisines.
Much of the raw rice that consumers buy has been blended with "ethnic" ingredients, including curry spices, Middle Eastern aromatics and Caribbean flavorings.


Imposing Embargo on Libyan Oil No Easy Task, Experts Say
A global embargo on Libyan oil that Washington has proposed would be difficult to impose, executives in the industry said today, citing opposition by Libya's major customers as well as by a number of Arab allies of the United States.
Anthony Lake, President Clinton's national security adviser, speaking on Monday to relatives of victims of the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103, said that Washington would ask the United Nations Security Council next month to pursue a worldwide embargo to punish Libya.


N.H.L. Suspends Lemieux
Seated on the Devils' bench, Claude Lemieux did not think the officials were watching when he sucker-punched Brett Lindros in the face as the Islander rookie was leaning into the bench while fighting with Scott Stevens during Sunday afternoon's 5-5 tie at Nassau Coliseum.
But SportsChannel's television cameras were watching, and that is going to cost Lemieux three games without pay.
That was the suspension imposed on the Devils' right wing yesterday by Brian Burke, the National Hockey League's director of operations.
The ban begins with tonight's game against the Senators in Ottawa, and includes tomorrow night's contest with the division-leading Flyers in Philadelphia as well as Saturday night's home game with the Montreal Canadiens.


Informer in Terrorism Trial, Pressed by Defense, Is Cool
For two grueling days, a lawyer for Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman has tried to pressure the Government's main informer in the terrorism conspiracy trial in Manhattan into admitting that he is in fact an Egyptian spy.
And for two days, the informer, Emad A. Salem, has brushed aside the questions with a polite "absolutely not."
Mr.
Salem, a former Egyptian military officer whose credibility is critical to the prosecution in the bombing conspiracy case, has managed to keep his cool under the relentless questioning from the defense lawyer, Lynne F. Stewart.
He has stuck to his story again and again, denying contentions by the defense that he was paid for information he gave Egyptian intelligence officials.


MERGER TO CREATE NEW JAPAN BANK, WORLD'S LARGEST
Two of Japan's most powerful financial institutions, the Bank of Tokyo and the Mitsubishi Bank, announced today that they planned a merger creating the world's largest bank.
With about $819 billion in assets, the new bank would be about a third larger than the Sumitomo Bank, now the biggest with $604 billion, and more than three times the size of Citicorp, the largest in the United States.
If the deal goes through, the new behemoth, tentatively called the Tokyo Mitsubishi Bank, would combine two of the strongest banks in Japan, where the banking industry has been shaken in recent years by the collapse of the country's stock and real estate markets.


A Former Major Leaguer Wonders What to Do Now
Carmelo Martinez peruses the talent on the field, dares to gauge it against what he still possesses and knows that he, more than any so-called replacement player, can fit the bill of major leaguer.
But with less than a week to go before the start of the season, Martinez is still torn between taking the express route north, via a spot on a replacement roster, or sticking it out on the local, with no guarantee the whistle stops will ever occur in big-league cities again.


Bill Tice, 52, Creator Of Stylish Clothing To Wear at Home
Bill Tice, a fashion designer who was known for stylish robes and lounge wear, died on March 9 in the Heather Glen care center in Glendale, Ariz.
Mr.
Tice, who was 52, was a long-time resident of Manhattan and moved to Phoenix two and a half years ago.
The cause was lung cancer, said his sister, Dianne Cochran.


Mark IV Industries(IV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Dentist Accused in Holdup Plot
A Franklin Township dentist was identified yesterday as a mastermind of the March 14 jewelry store holdup that left the owner's wife dead.
The Somerset County Prosecutor, Nichols L. Biddell Jr., said that the dentist, Harry Insabella, was the local contact for four men who flew in from the Kansas City area to rob Jeffrey Scott Fine Jewelers.
During the holdup, the owner, Jeffrey Wolf, fired several shots.
One killed his wife, Brenda, the authorities said, and another injured a robber.
Dr.
Insabella was arraigned on murder, robbery and weapons charges and was being held at the Somerset County Jail on $1 million cash bail.


Dmitri Kessel, 92, A Photographer
Dmitri Kessel, a photographer whose camera captured graphic scenes of warfare as well as the wonders of nature and great art, died on Sunday in Southampton Hospital on Long Island.
He was 92 and had lived in Paris for 30 years before moving to Wainscott, L.I.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said Alison Hart, a spokeswoman for Life magazine.


A Building of Hard Toil and Shady Deals
From the day it opened 88 years ago, it was known as the Tin Building, a gritty structure that became the center of the landmark Fulton Fish Market.
For legitimate businessmen and workers it was a place of hard toil and rough business deals in the early morning mists on the banks of the East River in Lower Manhattan.


Stocks in Sharp Reversal After Early Rally
Wall Street shocked itself yesterday.
The stock market rallied sharply in the morning, with the Dow Jones industrial average coming within two points of a record 4,200-point level.
It then plunged sharply in the afternoon, giving up most of its gains, yet managed to close the day up 8.99 points at 4,160.80, still good for a record.
Stock traders and analysts cited a number of reasons for the Dow's boom and bust, including the release of a positive economic indicator in the morning and the souring of the bond market in the afternoon.  [ Pages D2 and D20. ]


Another Ailing Rocket
Houston Rockets guard VERNON MAXWELL has iron-deficiency anemia even more serious than HAKEEM OLAJUWON's condition, the team's doctor, JIM MUNTZ, said yesterday.
"We're 100 percent certain that both of those guys have iron-deficient anemia," Muntz said.
"Max's blood count is even lower than Hakeem's. They can both practice and shoot around but they'll just fatigue quicker."
Olajuwon was diagnosed with anemia on Tuesday and hours later, Maxwell complained of similar symptoms.
Muntz said both players are on a program to increase their blood counts and it will take about two weeks before they are fully recovered.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with an article about possible layoffs of two bilingual guidance counselors in Port Chester, N.Y., misidentified the counselor shown talking with supporters.
She was Helena Valdes, not Martha Cabanillas.


Jos. A. Bank Clothiers Inc.(JOSB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Discovery Zone Inc.(ZONE,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Maude B. Feld; Antiques Dealer, 94
Maude B. Feld, a retired Manhattan antiques dealer and expert on early American glassware, died on March 13 at her home in Manhattan.
She was 94.
She suffered a lengthy illness, her family said.


CHRONICLE
Talk about coincidence.
On Saturday, CHARLOTTE SCHROEDER, the vice president of Colbert Artists Management, called the Mayflower Hotel in Manhattan to confirm a reservation for her client, HEINZ HOLLIGER, the Swiss oboist, who is performing at the 92d Street Y this week.


International Briefs; In Brief
Soekor, South Africa's state-owned oil and gas exploration company, said yesterday that the country's first oilfield development was expected to come on stream early next year.
The field is off Still Bay, east of Cape Town.


Aquarium to Be Enlivened
Send in the clownfish.
With $4 million here and $5 million there, Camden is angling for visitors.
The $4 million will pay for a makeover at the New Jersey State Aquarium, to add more colorful fish (visitors have complained that too many are brown), and birds, aquatic animals, interactive exhibits and laser lights.
And $5 million will be applied to transforming the 91-year-old sailing ship Mosholu into a restaurant anchored just north of the aquarium.


Reviving the Sensibility of the French Baroque
Wise observers of the French Baroque approach its operas as a musician would its instruments.
In both cases we have solid proof about the artifacts involved, but we must guess at how they are meant to behave.
What makes Baroque practitioners different from us?
Three hundred years is not enough to change human nature, so it must be a matter of style.
Style is fickle; it changes on a dime.
In the stage works of Charpentier we are faced with emotions certainly as deep and direct as our own, but couched now in formalities and deflections that make a Mamet (or indeed a Shakespeare) seem barbaric.
Charpentier leaves us with remote metaphors for what we ourselves call "the real thing."


Fringe Group Distorts the Quebec Debate
To the Editor:
In your March 25 Montreal Journal you fall into the trap of reporting the Quebec sovereignty debates from the point of view of the Equality Party.
This group made its appearance as an Anglophone protest group in the election of 1989.
They won four seats with 125,726 votes.
Their bizarre comportment led to their winning no seats and only 11,526 votes out of the 3.9 million cast in last September's general election.


Bally Gaming Restrained in Use of Name
A Federal judge in Camden, N.J., issued a temporary restraining order yesterday that barred Bally Gaming International Inc., a gambling machine producer, from selling or distributing any equipment bearing the Bally name for up to 15 days.
On Monday, the Bally Entertainment Corporation, a casino and fitness center operator, filed a lawsuit against Bally Gaming, its former subsidiary, seeking to strip it of a license providing its use of the Bally name and trademark.


The Stage Is Her World; Avid Theatergoer Attends More Than 200 Shows a Year
At intermission Friday night at Synchronicity Space, an Off Off Broadway house in SoHo, Ruth Rauch decided the show was pretty good so far.
One or two of the performances were to her liking, and she knew one of the actors, always a special pleasure.
Now, she doesn't like every show she sees.
There was that reading last summer, three hours about the life of Warren G. Harding, which was the first time she ever fell asleep during a performance.
Even so, if she says a show is pretty good, you might want a second opinion.
She makes no claims to being New York City's most discriminating theatergoer, though she may well be its most prolific.


Panel Agrees to Let New York Hospitals Subsidize the Poor
New York hospitals were spared potentially devastating losses by some last-minute, late-night Capitol Hill deal making intended to allow New York to continue subsidizing care for the indigent by charging other patients extra.
The legislation, approved by a House-Senate conference committee Tuesday night, would also allow Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, which is required by law to issue policies to anyone who applies, to continue to reimburse hospitals at a rate 13 percent less than commercial insurers.


Head of Police Is Ambushed In Tokyo
The head of the National Police Agency was shot outside his home this morning, and the police said that he was seriously injured but that his life was not in danger.
A man wearing a white face mask fired about four shots at Takaji Kunimatsu, Japan's top law-enforcement official, as Mr.
Kunimatsu was about to step into his chauffeured car to go to work at 8:30 A.M.
The man then fled on a bicycle and escaped, television reports said.


Report on Bus Problems Cites Maintenance Errors
New York's buses are chronically unreliable because of an aging fleet that has not been replaced fast enough and because transit officials repeatedly glossed over serious design flaws and failed to enforce maintenance standards, according to a report released yesterday.
The report, issued by Henry P. Flinter, Inspector General of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, focuses on the oldest buses in the system, built from 1981 to 1983, and accuses the Transit Authority of failing for years to address problems with those buses.


Ready to Join Presidential Race, Specter Is Looking for His Niche
For Senator Arlen Specter, it seemed like just the right formula for winning the Republican nomination for President: He would stand out as the only Republican contender to take on what he called "the extreme fringe" of religious conservatives who he fears are commandeering the party.
But so far, Mr.
Specter's unofficial campaign has had the air of an ill-fated protest candidacy, and that is how it is regarded by many leading Republicans.


Calendar: Exhibitions, Antiques Shows, a Talk
Flowers to Facades  Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82d Street; (212) 879-5500.
More than 75 garments dating from the 17th century will trace the history of floral themes in fashion in a show starting Saturday and continuing through Aug. 20.


Wall-to-Wall, If Home Is a Yurt
ON the northwest corner of 14th Street and Eighth Avenue stands one of New York City's best examples of Greek Revival style, an 1896 building designed by R. H. Robertson that once housed the New York Bank for Savings.
After a landmark-sensitive restoration by the Staten Island architectural firm of Scarano Englert &amp; Norton, it reopened a few months ago as the "grand palais of rugs," Central Carpet.
More than 15,000 rugs are now displayed under its 60-foot-high cupola, right; soaring vaulted ceilings, and huge antique chandeliers.
The ocher-hued Sienese marble that lines the walls acts as a backdrop for the rugs that hang vertically on metal racks.
A circular staircase leads to the newly installed mezzanine, where one can discover a colorful cache of Shyrdak carpets, crafted by Kyrgyz nomads.
"They are made somewhere along the border between Afghanistan and China," said Ike Timianko, the owner of the store.
Many of the rugs are in the 5-by-10-foot range, rather long and narrow, reflecting the size of the tents, or yurts, for which they were made.
Each costs $1,699.


Mr. D'Amato, Let Your People Go
Senator Alfonse D'Amato, in his kingmaker mode, has informed most Republican officeholders in New York that they like Senator Bob Dole for President.
With the exception of Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, they are following orders.
The D'Amato plan has the virtue of efficiency.
We have a bias for the process known as democracy.
Therefore it is necessary to protest the Senator's plan to enforce his preference by, in effect, canceling the state's Republican Presidential primary.
This would be done by making sure no other candidate can collect the requisite number of valid petition signatures to get on the ballot.
"If you're so confident that you're going to get all the votes," asked Senator Phil Gramm in discussing the plan to deliver New York to Mr.
Dole, "why don't you open the ballot and let the people decide?" That is the right question.
Gov.
Pete Wilson of California, who met yesterday with Mr.
Giuliani, correctly terms the closed process "terribly undemocratic."


Pentagon Picks Miami as Base for Latin America Command
In a decision that could bring 1,500 new jobs and thousands of additional visitors to Florida, the Pentagon today selected Miami as the next headquarters for United States military activities in Latin America.
The announcement was timed to coincide with President Clinton's arrival in Tallahassee, Florida's capital, this evening.
"The President was going to be in Florida and has good news to share with them," said a senior White House official.


House Proud
ONE side of the two-family house has a new kitchen with a neon banana hanging over a grand piano.
The other side also has a new kitchen -- with a sedate collection of Staffordshire plates over an oak table.
David B. Waters and Don Sturdy live side by side.
They met 13 years ago, were housemates for five years and then drifted apart -- until one needed a partner to buy a house.
Now, they live together again -- in mirror-image half houses with completely different decor.


Officials Say U.S. Is Unlikely to Meet Clean-Air Goal for 2000
In a move that seems likely to reduce their leverage at a global conference, Administration officials conceded today that the United States was unlikely to meet President Clinton's goal of limiting emissions of heat-trapping gases to 1990 levels by the year 2000.
The admission, though not a surprise, is expected to make it far harder for American officials at a global climate conference now under way in Berlin to persuade other countries to reduce output of gases like carbon dioxide, which trap heat in the atmosphere much the way glass traps heat in a greenhouse.


No Sentimental Journey For a Stubborn Wooden
He is the father of their country, but the U.C.L.A.
Bruins have been unable to coerce John Wooden to attend this weekend's Final Four in Seattle.
He will skip it for sentimental reasons.
Wooden's wife of 53 years, Nell, died 10 springs ago, and their last trip as a couple had been to the 1984 Final Four.


Williams-Sonoma Inc.(WSGC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


A gritty campaign from DDB Needham seems to be the medicine Digital Equipment needed.
FOR DDB Needham Worldwide, it was one of the toughest assignments possible for an advertising agency: persuade people to buy big, expensive products from a company when everyone thinks the company is dead or dying.
The solution, since last fall, has been chin-up bravado and television commercials so irritating that no one could mistake the company for dead.
The campaign moves into a new phase next month.


Tridel Enterprises reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Bank Failures Undercut Venezuelan Government
Fourteen floors above the disconnected teller machines of the failed Banco La Guaira, Luis Raul Matos Azocar revels in his new penthouse office with its Persian carpets, leather sofas, antique tables and a small rock garden overlooking this capital's Andean valley.
"I love the sunsets," chortled Mr.
Matos Azocar, Venezuela's Finance Minister.
"I have never gone back to the old ministry." And no wonder.
The rundown Government office center he moved from two weeks ago is notorious for its wheezing air- conditioning, exposed electrical wiring, broken elevators and padlocked bathrooms.


Music for the Ages


Tale of Evasion Of Ban on Aid For Guatemala
The Bush Administration, in a show of public anger over the killing of an American, cut off military aid to Guatemala in 1990 but secretly allowed the Central Intelligence Agency to send millions of dollars to the military Government to make up for the loss, members of the Bush and Clinton Administrations said today.
The payments apparently continued into the Clinton Administration but it could not be learned if they are still being made.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Traded Edgar Diaz, infielder, to the Toronto Blue Jays for future considerations.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Released Pat Bailey and Joe Siwa, catchers.


Synergistics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the conviction of two Newark politicians on Federal corruption charges referred incompletely in some editions to a prosecutor in the case.
He is Larry R. C. Stephen, chief of the corruption division in the United States Attorney's office in Newark.


Dr. Joseph Post, 82, Cancer Researcher And Expert on Cells
Dr.
Joseph Post, who developed the first successful nutrition-based treatment for liver disease, died on Saturday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 82 and lived in Manhattan.
He died after a lengthy illness, his family said.


Theft Suspect Pleads Not Guilty
His taste in cars proved his undoing, prosecutors said yesterday.
They were talking about the man the police dubbed the "Sable Bandit," whom they blame for at least 11 assaults and robberies since January.
His habit was to escape in a Mercury Sable or Ford Taurus after sneaking up behind women to steal their purses or jewelry.
On Friday, the police in Newark spotted a stolen Sable and arrested Spillerman Hill, 29, of East Orange.
Yesterday, he pleaded not guilty to charges including robbery, aggravated assault and carjacking.


Showalter Getting Itchy To Pencil In Regulars
Buck Showalter erased the names of the replacement players from the depth chart hanging in his tiny office and in their place etched in the names of the real Yankees from the 40-man roster.
Showalter wants to believe that Don Mattingly and friends will be here soon.
He wants to be ready, so he erased and he etched.
As the Yankee manager packed for today's journey to Houston for Thursday night's exhibition game with the replacement Astros, he conceded that he sounded like an amateur psychologist as he tried to convince himself there would soon be a labor settlement.
He did not have to concede that he seemed like a manager with a hunch -- or maybe it was merely a hope -- that he would be back to manage Mattingly and to even drink the last diet soda he symbolically left chilling in his refrigerator.


International Briefs; Shares of Renault Fall Despite Earnings Surge
The shares of Renault S.A., the French car maker, fell sharply yesterday as financial analysts cut their forecasts despite tripled 1994 profits.
The stock closed down 9.2 francs, or 5.3 percent, at 164 francs ($33.44).
The closing price was below the level in November, when the state reduced its stake in the company to 50.1 percent, selling shares to the public at 165 francs ($33.64).


Bond Prices Surge on Home Sales Data, Then Slip on a Weak Auction
Prices of Government securities ended with modest gains yesterday, following an early rally that had been spurred by yet another report indicating that the economy's growth is slowing.
Bond prices opened the day lower on a weak dollar, then surged ahead on the decline in new home sales in February.
But after the Treasury conducted a disappointing auction of five-year notes, Government securities gave back most of their gains.


Brooklyn Philharmonic Names New Director
The Brooklyn Philharmonic has appointed Robert Spano as its music director, succeeding Dennis Russell Davies, who will leave the orchestra at the end of next season.
Mr.
Davies, who has been principal conductor since 1991, oversaw a thorough revamping of the orchestra's programming, replacing conventional concerts with thematic weekends that include recitals, films and lectures as well as orchestral programs.
Mr.
Spano, 33, is to take up his new post in the 1996-97 season, but his debut with the orchestra is scheduled for next season, when he conducts one of its five weekend programs.
The director of the Oberlin Conservatory Opera Theater since 1989, he was also an assistant conductor of the Boston Symphony Orchestra from 1990 to 1992 and has appeared extensively as a guest conductor in the United States and Europe.
Last year, he won the Seaver/ National Endowment for the Arts Conductors Award, a $75,000 prize for young conductors, administered by the Juilliard School.
The Brooklyn post will be his first orchestra directorship.
His contract runs for three years.


Fire Sweeps Through Major Building at Fulton Fish Market
A fire swept through one of the main commercial buildings at the Fulton Fish Market yesterday, incinerating offices and storage rooms and largely destroying the 88-year-old structure that housed a number of the market's major wholesalers.
Coming as it did just as the Giuliani administration moved to seize control of the market, the fire immediately prompted investigations by city and Federal officials to determine whether it had beendeliberately set.
Officials said financial records that might be critical to an inquiry into the market's business operation and links to organized crime may have been kept in the building.


International Briefs; BASF Sees Higher Profit
BASF A.G., the German chemicals company, said yesterday that its earnings would be considerably higher in 1995 than in 1994, buoyed by the German economic recovery and despite the recent surge in the mark.
The company's managing board chairman, Jurgen Strube, said at a news conference, "We look for a considerable rise in sales and earnings compared with 1994." For the first two months of 1995, BASF reported that revenue climbed 16 percent, to more than 7.7 billion marks ($5.59 billion).
But Mr.
Strube declined to put a figure on expected 1995 results, saying predictions would be premature. (Reuters)


And Now for Some Serious Fun
STEPHEN CALLOWAY once hung a pasteboard caveat at the entrance to one of his exhibitions here at the Victoria and Albert Museum: "The organizers wish to point out some of the material in this exhibition is of a disturbing and challenging nature."
Today that ominous label is displayed in another setting demanding a deep breath and an open mind: an 18th-century town house in Clerkenwell, a working-class neighborhood on the "wrong side" of the Thames.


Va. Tech Wins Thriller
The 58th-annual National Invitation Tournament came down to two free throws.
Two free throws with 0.7 seconds left in overtime and an unflappable 6-foot-6-inch, 249-pound junior by the name of Smith at the line.
Virginia Tech's Shawn Smith coolly hit the first to tie the game.
Marquette, which was undone by its inability to hit its own free throws last night (6 for 16), called timeout to let Smith think about a second overtime.


For U.C.L.A.'s Zidek, Life's More Than Game
George Zidek's U.C.L.A. teammates were listening to more questions about competing for a national basketball championship, questions that had to do with timing and pressure and the burdens of history.
He has become an important part of their effort, a 7-foot, 250-pound, self-made senior center and a first-team academic all-American.
Zidek's importance will be magnified on Saturday, when he meets Oklahoma State's Bryant Reeves, the 7-foot, 292-pound center in the type of power matchup that has nearly vanished from the college game.


Edwin Hartrich, 82, Reporter and Author
Edwin E. Hartrich, a journalist and author who wrote about West Germany's economic recovery after World War II, died last Friday at Hines Hospital in Maywood, Ill., near Chicago.
He was 82.
Mr.
Hartrich, who lived in Orland Park, Ill., a suburb of Chicago, suffered a long illness, his family said.


If a Cow Had Mirrors
NEOTU, the French art-furniture gallery, is now ensconced in a town house at 409 West 44th Street, and its French owners, Gerard Dalmon and Pierre Staudenmeyer, see clients by appointment.
Among their offerings: this cabinet of wenge wood with mirror and leather insets by the Paris-based designers Mattia Bonetti and Elizabeth Garouste ($8,700).
Telephone: (212) 262-9250.


Richer Surmounts His Aches
Stephane Richer, a sensitive and emotional player, has been the best player for the Devils in this season of high expectations for New Jersey.
But it appears the Devils have found a way to make him unhappy.
Richer has been concerned with a groin injury that forced him to miss three of the six games before tonight's encounter here with the Senators and he questioned the wisdom of his bosses for the way he has been used during his rehabilitation.


Indian Point A-Plant's Safety Doubted on Eve of U.S. Visit
After more than two years of work on the equipment at Indian Point 3 and on the attitudes of the people who work there, the New York Power Authority says it believes it is almost ready to reopen its hard-luck nuclear reactor.
But internal reports filed with the Nuclear Regulatory Commission suggest that both equipment and personnel problems persist, and authority officials said today that when they reopen the plant, it would have to run much more efficiently or be scrapped.


On Deck, Judge Sonia Sotomayor
After bouncing from the bargaining table to the White House to Congress without resolution, the baseball stalemate is headed toward Federal court just days before the season is scheduled to start.
Whether Judge Sonia Sotomayor of New York can get the big-leaguers back on the field is unclear, but she should take a shot.
The National Labor Relations Board is bearing down on her court, seeking an injunction to restore bargaining issues the owners have taken off the table.
If she rules in the board's favor, which she can do for valid legal reasons, the players would end their strike.
The owners could still scuttle a real season by locking out the players, but it is not certain a three-fourths majority of the owners would support that step.


Minister, Quizzed in Killing Of S.I. Couple, Dies in Crash
As his world was caving in on him Tuesday afternoon, the Rev.
James S. Castria stopped at a religious bookstore in Mountain Lakes, N.J., and asked the clerks to suggest a prayer.
The request may have seemed strange, coming from a Protestant minister, but then Mr.
Castria was in unusual straits.
The authorities say he was under investigation in connection with the deaths of a Staten Island couple who were slain in Pennsylvania after their bank account was looted.


GARDEN Q.&amp;A.
Yellow Flowering Corydalis
Q.
During a visit to England last summer, I saw a lovely yellow flower, called Corydalis, in wall cracks and rustic paths.
Will it grow here? -- Elizabeth Engle, Westport, Conn.


Market Place; A seafood chain whets appetites of fans and short-sellers alike.
LANDRY'S SEAFOOD RESTAURANTS is a stock that brings about strong reactions.
Its biggest fans love it so much they can't get enough of it, with a handful of money managers buying like crazy on expectations that the company will grow and grow.
And short-sellers are ganging up on it, unable to believe the valuations.
To make the scene even more exciting, each side now hopes that the other has become overextended.
The bulls talk of a short squeeze, in which those who bet against the stock are forced by rising prices to flee with losses.
The bears point to signs that the biggest bulls will have to sell stock.


Mexico's Rebels Offer a Proposal for Peace Talks
In their first concrete proposal for new peace talks with the Government, peasant rebels in the southern state of Chiapas called today for a wide-ranging discussion to be held in Mexico City.
Arguing that the army's occupation of the territory they once held in Chiapas made talks there impossible, the rebels suggested that the two sides meet along with other political groups at one of four sites in the capital: the downtown cathedral, the national university, a Roman Catholic basilica or the local headquarters of the United Nations.


Private Research Unit Sees Big Shortfall for Whitman
A respected nonpartisan legislative research group predicted today that the state would take in $680 million less in revenue than Gov.
Christine Whitman has anticipated, raising serious questions about her ability to deliver another round of tax cuts.
The prediction by the research group, the Office of Legislative Services, represents the widest forecasting discrepancy with a Governor's budget in at least a decade.
Last year, the projections by the group and Governor Whitman were nearly identical.


Proposed F.C.C. Deal Would Avoid Delay of License Auction
The Federal Communications Commission proposed a deal today that it hoped would extract itself from a messy legal battle over the agency's plan to reserve wireless telephone licenses for small businesses, minorities and women.
Under the plan, the commission would make an exception and make room under its small-business rules for a rural telephone company in Mississippi that had gone to court contending that the special preferences were arbitrary and unconstitutional.
At issue for the commission are more than 500 licenses to be sold at an auction in June for so-called personal communication services.


International Briefs; Ratings Cut for 2 Firms
The Standard &amp; Poor's Ratings Group said yesterday that it had downgraded slightly some credit ratings of the Nomura Securities Company and the Yamaichi Securities Company, two of Japan's largest investment firms.
The new ratings, which will make it more expensive for the firms to borrow money, affect about $1.7 billion of Nomura's debt and $40 million of Yamaichi's debt. (Dow Jones)


Whitman Backs Bond Issue
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman said yesterday that she stands behind a $310 million bond issue for land preservation that includes $30 million for a so-called blue acres program to acquire property at risk of flooding.
After appropriate legislative action, permission to issue the bonds would require voter approval.


Royal Bank of Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Hartmarx Corp.(HMX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Homeowners Will Rue Property Legislation
To the Editor:
Thomas Lambert may have created some confusion about what impact property rights legislation will have on neighboring homes and other properties (letter, March 21).


T.V.A. Seeking Small Investors
The Tennessee Valley Authority said yesterday that it would soon issue $500 million of its first bonds specifically aimed at small retail investors.
The electric utility said the 50-year bonds in denominations of $25 would provide it access to new debt markets and make the company more visible.
The securities, called Quarterly Income Debt Securities, pay quarterly dividends and may be paid off in full by the T.V.A. after five years.


Smith Is Leaving Tulsa To Coach at Georgia
TUBBY SMITH, who coached Tulsa to the National Collegiate Athletic Association Sweet 16 the last two seasons, got the basketball coaching job at Georgia yesterday and became the school's first black head coach.
Smith, 43, succeeds HUGH DURHAM, who was dismissed on March 19 after 17 seasons.
The Georgia athletic director, VINCE DOOLEY, said Smith agreed to a six-year contract at $115,000 a year.


INSIDE
Players Vote to Play, if. . .
Though a lockout threat remains, the players' union reaffirmed a stand by voting to halt the baseball strike if an injunction is granted.
Page B11.
Army to Punish 9 Rangers
The Army said nine instructors would be disciplined for poor judgment in the deaths of four Ranger trainees last month.
Page A19.
An H.I.V.
Recovery in Doubt
Some scientists say a child infected at birth with the AIDS virus was able to throw off the infection, but others question the evidence.
Page A18.


Retrial in Stabbing of Seles
The prosecution demanded a prison sentence in the retrial yesterday of the man who idolized STEFFI GRAF so much that he stabbed MONICA SELES in the back during a tennis tournament.
But the court in Hamburg, Germany, also heard testimony that GUNTHER PARCHE, 40, needed treatment rather than prison time, and that he is no longer a danger.
Parche was given a suspended sentence after his first trial for the April 1993 stabbing.
The leniency triggered an uproar, and the prosecution, backed by Seles and her lawyers, won a retrial.
Today, the court will hear closing arguments by the defense and Seles's lawyers.
A ruling is likely on April 3. (AP)


Corrections
An obituary on March 23 about Peter M. Spackman, who edited The Columbia University Forum and Cultural Affairs magazines during the 1960's, referred incorrectly to a previous marriage and omitted another.
Nancy G. Ellsworth, from whom he was divorced in 1968, was his second wife.
His first wife was Carol Cox, who died in 1958.


Lone Star Steakhouse &amp; Saloon Inc.(STAR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to March 21


Trump Plan Is Rejected
Donald Trump got bad news yesterday in Atlantic County Superior Court.
Judge Richard Williams rejected his plans for a $55 million expansion of Trump Plaza Hotel Casino.
The action overturned approval by the Casino Reinvestment Development Authority of $19.5 million in credits for the project and set aside condemnation proceedings that would have given Mr.
Trump control of neighboring properties.
But Mr.
Trump's lawyer said construction would continue despite the decision.


Hermitage, in Its Manner, Displays Its Looted Art
With the opening of a much-anticipated exhibition of long concealed French paintings today at the State Hermitage Museum, Russia took a major leap in its coquettish dance with honesty about art looted from Nazi Germany at the end of the war.
The lavishly mounted exhibition, in the Nikolayevsky Hall of the Hermitage, includes 74 paintings, nearly all Impressionist or Post-Impressionist, most of them marvelous and all of them formerly hidden in the museum's vaults by order of successive Moscow Governments after the Soviet Army seized them from a devastated Nazi Germany.


Chaos for Some, a Diversion for Others
As smoke and soot brought an early dusk to the canyons of lower Manhattan yesterday, thousands of office workers and tourists who sensed more diversion than disaster flocked to South Street to gawk as part of the Fulton Fish Market went up in flames.
Fire trucks seized the high ground -- in this case, the elevated Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive -- to pour water into the smoking ruin, while dozens of other emergency vehicles, with leaking fire hoses snaking around them, jammed the surrounding streets.
The highway and several streets were closed, some well into the rush hour, turning the area's usual traffic chaos into a slow-motion exercise in frustration.


Acting Out the Stories And Miracles in Mark
"Laurence Olivier," said Hermione Gingold in an ancient (1940's) London revue, "is a tour de force.  Donald Wolfit is forced to tour." The indomitable Alec McCowen is both in his two-hour solo presentation, "St. Mark's Gospel," which last night opened at the Lamb's Theater, where it was last seen in 1990.
Mr.
McCowen has been playing his technical achievement on and off in New York since 1978, and probably has a good many more limited engagements ahead of him.
This is a highly theatrical performance of the Gospel that is assumed to be the first written, and the source material for those of St.
Matthew and St.
Luke.
It also has a coherent narrative.


Excerpts From Debate On House Term Limits
Following are excerpts from speeches in the House today by Representative Henry J. Hyde, Republican of Illinois, a leading foe of Congressional term limits, and Speaker Newt Gingrich of Georgia, a supporter, as transcribed by The New York Times: Representative Hyde
It is unpleasant to rise in opposition to something that is so near and dear to the hearts of so many of my colleagues and people whom I revere, but I just can't be an accessory to the dumbing down of democracy.
And I think that's what this is.


Clubs to Vote Again on Rams
Paul Tagliabue has called a special owners meeting in Dallas on April 12 so they can again vote on the Rams' proposed move to St.
Louis, which was voted down in Phoenix two weeks ago.
Tagliabue and the National Football League president, Neil Austrian, met with the Rams in Los Angeles on Monday and Tuesday in an effort to reach an agreement that would allow the team to move to St.
Louis.
Most owners thought the Rams had contributed to the demise of the franchise in Anaheim, Calif., and didn't deserve the sweetheart deal that St.
Louis is offering, which includes low rent ($250,000 a year) on a $250 million stadium that will be completed in October.


Constance M. Morgan; Smith Trustee, 81
Constance Morrow Morgan, a longtime Smith College trustee, died on Saturday in Portland, Ore., at the home of her son, Rhidian.
She was 81 and lived in Ridgefield, Wash., and North Haven, Me.
The cause was a stroke, her family said.


Foote, Cone Office Names Executive
The San Francisco office of Foote, Cone &amp; Belding has named Paul Wolfe executive vice president and executive creative director, succeeding Mike Koelker, 56, who is taking a medical leave of absence.


Just Try to Slow These People Down
A stroke of nonverbal inspiration gave Bill Einreinhofer, a veteran producer of public television documentaries, the title for his latest project.
"I sat back watching it, with the sound turned down," Mr.
Einreinhofer said, "and I saw all these bodies in motion. All kinds of motion."


Police in an Informer Program Are Investigated Themselves
A Police Department program in which officers work in regular assignments but secretly provide information on corruption is under investigation by the Manhattan District Attorney's office.
At least four officers who took part in the operation, called the field associate program, are suspected of illegal acts, from committing perjury to tipping mobsters to pending criminal investigations, said Robert M. Morgenthau, the Manhattan District Attorney.


International Briefs; Pearson to Expand in TV
Pearson P.L.C., the media company based in London, said yesterday that it would expand its global television operations through the purchase of Grundy Worldwide Ltd., an Australian television producer, for $279 million.
Pearson will pay cash for all of Grundy's stock, including a stake of about 85 percent held by the founder and chairman, Reg Grundy, who will remain as a consultant.
Grundy will drop plans to sell a 35.5 percent stake in a public stock offering in the United States and Australia. (AP)


Furor Over Equipment Change
America's Cup matches on the Pacific Ocean course here paled today compared to rancorous confrontations ashore involving the fate of Stars &amp; Stripes in the defense semifinals.
The debate within the cup defense is over whether Stars &amp; Stripes had a right to replace the yacht's keel, which Dennis Conner's team found to be severely damaged during a race last Sunday.
The appendage, which had loosened inside its keel trunk, caused a leak that nearly sank the boat.
If not allowed to attach a new keel, the only one he had left, Conner in all likelihood would have been knocked out of racing permanently.


International Briefs; Volkswagen's Deliveries Down in First Quarter
Volkswagen A.G., Europe's largest car maker, said yesterday that its sales volume was down in the first quarter and warned that its future profitability could be hurt by the strong German mark.
The financial controller of the company, Bruno Adelt, said that while revenue for the period rose 3 percent, to about 20 billion marks ($14.4 billion), car deliveries to customers fell 3.7 percent, to 803,000.
"But the first quarter is always our weakest," Mr.
Adelt said.


Tech Data Corp.(TECD,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Corrections
The Bridge column on Monday, about inductions into the American Contract Bridge League's Hall of Fame in Phoenix tonight, referred to one inductee incorrectly and omitted another.
Edgar Kaplan is a living inductee, not deceased; B. Jay Becker, a deceased inductee, should also have been listed.
Corrected references appear in the column today, on page C17.


Essay; Stop the Turks
Ten days ago the military-dominated Government of Turkey sent at least 35,000 troops, with tanks and F-16's, across the border into the northern portion of Iraq.
That is the "no-fly zone" where the U.S. and its allies -- including Turkey -- are protecting Iraqi Kurds from the genocidal fury of Saddam Hussein.
The ostensible purpose of the Turkish invasion is to kill some 2,500 Kurdish radicals who have been using terror tactics to whip up support for an end to suppression of millions of Kurds within Turkey.


Ex-Boyfriend Charged in Fire
The former live-in boyfriend of a Camden woman has been charged with setting a fire that killed two of her children and seriously injured two others.
The ex-boyfriend, Miguel Lazada, acted in anger after he was kicked out by Elizabeth Ponce, the authorities said.
Prosecutors said that Ms.
Ponce was at a crack house when the fire started, and they would not rule out the possibility that she may face charges.


Cuts Must Go to Deficit, Senate Says
The Senate today unanimously approved an amendment that would require $13.5 billion in cuts from spending in the current fiscal year be applied to reducing the Federal budget, not reducing taxes.
The move was intended to blunt the opposition of Democrats to the spending-cut plan.
As the Senate began debate today on the midyear budget cuts, known as rescissions, Democrats made it clear that they would oppose the legislation unless they were given assurances that the Republicans would not use the savings to help pay for their proposed tax cuts.


G.O.P. Mobilizes for Contract Deadline
As the first 100 days of their revolution draw to a close, House Republicans are busily planning how to package their accomplishments for the voters.
As a result, coming soon to a media outlet near you: One Hundred Days.
A story of promises made and promises kept.
Of hard work and real change.
Of a Contract With America, and the men and women who delivered on it.
It is all part of an elaborate communications strategy to allay an abiding Republican fear: that a disengaged public has yet to get the message of how much was accomplished in the past three months.
House Republicans say they are proud of their output, frustrated at their failure so far to get their story across in the news media, but are determined to try, in the next few weeks, to get the full historic credit that they believe they are due.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $50 million of debentures due in 2000 through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
Callable in one year, the issue is priced at par to yield 7.81 percent.
Monsanto Co., St.
Louis, is selling $150 million of debentures due in 2025 through Salomon Brothers.
The issue is priced at 99.929 to yield 8.206 percent.
Callable in 10 years, the debentures are rated A1 by Moody's Investors Service, A by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and A+ by Duff &amp; Phelps.


Guatemalan Chief Tells Colonel to Sue
President Ramiro de Leon Carpio said today that he had advised a Guatemalan Army colonel who has been accused by an American Congressman of being a paid agent of the C.I.A. and of involvement in two killings to sue the lawmaker for defamation.
Mr. de Leon said he had advised the officer, Col.
Julio Roberto Alpirez, to pursue action against Representative Robert G. Torricelli, a New Jersey Democrat, in Guatemalan or United States courts.


Hart


Sports of The Times; Has Anybody Seen a Goal Around Here?
IF it's any consolation to all those Ranger rooters who suffered so much for so long since 1940, and are now suddenly suffering again, Mike Keenan is suffering too.
During the St.
Louis Blues' slump last week, the coach who deserted the Rangers shortly after their Stanley Cup celebration accused the club chairman, Mike Shanahan, and the president, Jack Quinn, of promoting "superstar status without the team concept," of not developing a "winning culture," of paying the players for "marquee value" rather than performance.


For Folk Art's Sake
THERE'S nothing like a country auction to inspire bidding fever.
At least that's what the Museum of American Folk Art is counting on when Sotheby's, 1334 York Avenue, at 72d Street, auctions folk art donated to benefit the museum, on April 11. (Previews begin April 8.)


If You Spoof a Cartoon, You'd Better Be Funnier
People who live in quotation marks are not, perhaps, the easiest figures to satirize, a lesson amply demonstrated in Charlie Varon's "Rush Limbaugh in Night School."
This one-man show takes on not only the conservative radio pundit but also such figures as Jackie Mason, Spalding Gray and Garrison Keillor, all of whom, like Mr.
Limbaugh, have made a career from a self-consciousness verging on self-parody.
When Mr.
Varon imitates them, he often seems to be missing the point of their personas, drawing cartoons of cartoons that are actually less funny than the real thing.


F.C.C. WILL ORDER PHONE COMPANIES TO CUT ACCESS FEE
The Federal Communications Commission will order the nation's local telephone companies on Thursday to reduce the access charges they impose on long-distance carriers by about $1 billion a year for the next few years, agency officials said today.
The rate cuts could translate into one of the biggest single reductions in long-distance telephone costs since the breakup of the Bell System a decade ago.


Electricity Rates Are Frozen For Con Ed and Lilco for Year
Electricity rates will be frozen this year for customers of Consolidated Edison and the Long Island Lighting Company under rate plans approved yesterday by the State Public Service Commission.
The commission approved a three-year rate plan for Con Edison that involves no increase for the first year, beginning April 1.


End of Urban Agency Draws Fears of Neglect
Seventeen floors above 125th Street in Harlem, Donald J. Cogsville was reluctantly preparing to move out of his corner office, with its expansive windows and sweeping views of Central Park and the Hudson River.
"We've been cut out," said Mr.
Cogsville, the chairman and chief executive of the Harlem Urban Development Corporation, as he sat surrounded by architects' renderings and scale models of grand development projects, many of which never came to be.


Shopko Stores Inc.(SKO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 25


In Open Panel, Albany Tries Democracy In Lawmaking
The move toward greater legislative democracy did not go smoothly here today.
With a former rank-and-file legislator in the Governor's mansion, this was the year when greater power was to be given to rank-and-file legislators, who have traditionally watched from the sidelines as most major decisions have been made by the triumvirate of the Governor and the Assembly and Senate leaders.


Heavy Angst When It's 'Ivy or Else'
Within easy reach in the green canvas backpack that Karen Sumberg carries to high school is a pocket-size daily planner that helps her track all the assignments, volunteer activities, projects and club meetings that are crammed into every free hour.
Ever since sixth grade, Karen's daily life has been circumscribed by all she must do to reach her self-imposed goal of getting into a top-tier college.
"You are always asking yourself, 'Are they going to like this or that?' " said Karen, a sophomore, as she strode across the marble foyer of Temple Beth El, in Norwalk, where she spends Sunday mornings as a religious-school aide.


No Headline
"We've already got term limits. They're called elections." -- REP.
BILL RICHARDSON.  [ A1:6. ]


Acklands Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Maj. Gen. John M. Dunn, 69, Military Aide to Vice Presidents
John Michael Dunn, a veteran of three wars who rose to become a major general and a military aide to two Vice Presidents, died on Friday at his home in Arlington, Va.
He was 69.
The cause was complications from pulmonary fibrosis, said his son Alan.


A Swamp? Take That Back!
He may be the Governor of New York, but George E. Pataki is not going to get away with calling New Jersey a "swamp." Not if the assistant State Senate minority leader, Bernard J. Kenny Jr., a Hoboken Democrat, has anything to say about it.
In a letter to Mr.
Pataki that was inspired by a comment reported in The Buffalo News, Mr.
Kenny suggested yesterday that the Governor might like to apologize for remarks that "reflect a huge amount of insensitivity" to New Jersey.
"My point is that good neighbors should speak kindly of one another," Mr.
Kenny said.
LAWRENCE VAN GELDER


Marshall Safir, 75, Shipping Executive
Marshall P. Safir, a businessman and former shipping executive who long opposed government subsidies to the industry, died yesterday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 75 and lived in Floral Park, L.I.
The cause was a heart attack during recovery from surgery for colon and liver cancer, a family spokesman said.


Report Casts Doubts On Trenton Tax Cuts
A nonpartisan legislative research group predicted that New Jersey would take in $680 million less in revenue than Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman has anticipated, raising questions about her ability to deliver another round of tax cuts.
The prediction represents the widest forecasting discrepancy with a Governor's budget in at least a decade.


International Briefs; Profit at Deutsche Bank Declined 39% in 1994
Deutsche Bank A.G., Germany's largest bank, said yesterday that bond trading losses slashed its profit by 39 percent, to 1.36 billion marks ($980 million), in 1994.
The managing board chairman, Hilmar Kopper, said profit would rebound amid confidence that 1995 would be a better year for financial markets.
Operating profit, which is before taxes but after provisions for bad loans, fell 23.1 percent, to 4.05 billion marks ($2.92 billion).


Serena's Song Is Lukas's Current Guessing Game
Five weeks before the Kentucky Derby, the nation's top 3-year-old horses are gathering for prep races from Santa Anita in California to Keeneland in Kentucky.
But the favorite in the richest of the preps, the $600,000 Jim Beam Stakes at Turfway Park in Kentucky on Saturday, is the filly Serena's Song, who may not even run in the Derby.
The filly is the star of a guessing game right now: Will she run in the Kentucky Oaks on Friday, May 6, and leave the Derby the next day to her stablemate, the champion colt Timber Country?
Or will she try for the ultimate sweep: first filly to win the Jim Beam in its 14 years, then the fourth filly to win the Kentucky Derby in 114?


Plot and Subplot On a Village Lot
IT seems absurd to remove a garden to make a movie about saving a garden," said Martha Danzinger, the district manager of Community Board 3. But that's what's happening to the ABC garden on Eighth Street between avenues B and C.
About two months ago, a film company called Roachco Inc. got a city permit to shoot a movie called "Joe's Apartment," about a man in the East Village who falls in love with a community gardener.
He builds a garden out of a rubble-strewn lot, and dancing roaches save the day.


Hillary Clinton Finding a New Voice
Halfway around the world from the battles that haunt her, an outspoken American woman found a new voice today in the words of an Indian schoolgirl, who composed a poem called "Silence" and sent it to Hillary Rodham Clinton with the handwritten exhortation: "More power to you."
" 'Too many women in too many countries speak the same language -- of silence,' " Mrs.
Clinton said in a speech, quoting the poem by Anasuya Sengupta, a senior at the Lady Sri Ram College here.
" 'My grandmother was always silent, always aggrieved, only her husband had the cosmic right (or so it was said) to speak and be heard.'


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  SECRET U.S.
FUNDS FOR GUATEMALA  The Bush Administration, in a show of anger over the murder of an American citizen, cut off military aid to Guatemala in 1990 but secretly allowed the C.I.A. to send millions of dollars to the military Government, U.S. officials said.
A1


Philharmonic Radio Forum
The public is to have a chance to ask questions about plans and workings of the New York Philharmonic on Tuesday, when the orchestra's music director, Kurt Masur, and executive director, Deborah Borda, are to take questions from listeners on the Philharmonic Radio Forum, 4:30 to 5:30 P.M. on WQXR-FM (96.3).
Tom Bartunek, the station's vice president for programming and operations, is to be the host.
Information: (212) 875-5709.


Fire at Fulton Fish Market Prompts Investigation


Owner of Collapsed Building Got City Renovation Deals
One of two men who owned a Harlem building that partly collapsed last week, killing three tenants, is also the president and part owner of a construction company that is receiving city money to oversee the multimillion-dollar renovation of low-income apartment buildings in the same neighborhood.
The city's Department of Housing Preservation and Development has threatened Morris Wolfson and Marcus Lehmann with jail for failure to correct housing code violations at the building on 140th Street.
At the same time, Mr.
Wolfson's company, the Adonis Construction and Development Corporation, is the general contractor on three rehabilitation projects financed with $10 million in city funds, including parts of the Bradhurst project, the largest in the city.


Matteau Could Spend Some Time on Bench
During this shortened National Hockey League season and through the Rangers' current six-game losing streak, Coach Colin Campbell has been reluctant to embarrass his slumping regular players by taking them out of uniform and assigning them to watch the games from the press box or on the locker room television monitor.
That policy might change Thursday night when the Rangers play the Quebec Nordiques at Madison Square Garden.


Yesterday in Washington
TERM LIMITS The House voted squarely against the will of the people by rejecting, one after another, four proposed constitutional amendments that would have limited the number of terms served by members of Congress.
The result made term limits the first item in the Republicans' Contract With America to go down to defeat in the House.
SPENDING CUTS The Senate unanimously approved an amendment aimed at blunting Democratic opposition to a bill that would cut $13.5 billion from current-year spending.
The amendment would require that the savings be applied to deficit reduction.
Its sponsor was Senator Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia, the ranking Democrat on the Appropriations Committee, who said, "I will not indirectly cast my vote for tax breaks for the wealthy by voting for painful cuts that may be used to finance subsidies for the rich."


For Mets, the Next Best Thing to Dugout Chatter
After months of what one player called unencouraging conversations, members of the Mets' 40-man roster held a conference call today and discussed -- albeit tentatively -- the process by which they could soon return to work.
The call, initiated and moderated by Bobby Bonilla, the team's player representative, was referred to as optimistic by a half-dozen players contacted this afternoon, and focused primarily on the possibility that players could return to work while negotiations with the owners continue.


An Insider's Guide to the Art of Film
MAKING MOVIES  By Sidney Lumet  Illustrated. 220 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $23.
There will be no "personal revelations," Sidney Lumet, the film director, warns in the preface of his absorbing handbook, "Making Movies." There will be "no gossip," he adds, "about Sean Connery or Marlon Brando."


What Would Fay Wray Say?
The Empire State Building turned blue last night at sunset.
New York City's most famous symbol is periodically lit up with different colors to mark holidays, large and obscure.
It glows red for Valentine's Day and Fire Prevention Day.
It is a bouquet of yellow and white for Easter.
It gleams green, white and orange for India Independence Day, red and white for Pulaski Day, lavender for Gay Pride Weekend.
But last night's blue was not for a day. It was for a candy.


House Subcommittee Initiates a Bill to Establish a Board to Manage Washington's Finances
A House subcommittee today voted unanimously to establish a board that would essentially take over the financial management of the District of Columbia.
The city, which is on the verge of bankruptcy, faces a deficit of about $400 million.
The legislation would create a five-member board, which is modeled on the financial bailout agencies used for New York and Philadelphia.
It was described by staff members who worked on the bill as "the strongest ever created" for any American city.
The board, which will be selected by the President and Congress, will control the city's spending and will set up an annual balanced budget, as well as a four-year financial plan for the city.


Police Officer Kills Man
A police officer shot and killed a suspected gunman in the Washington Heights section of upper Manhattan last night after witnessing a shooting, the police said.
Neither the dead man nor the officer was identified. Two other suspects were arrested.


Russians Shut Down Branch of Japanese Sect
The Russian branch of Aum Shinrikyo, the Japanese cult that is the leading suspect in the poison gas attack in the Tokyo subway system, has been shut down by Russian authorities.
One of the country's most aggressive cults, Aum Shinrikyo says it has more than 30,000 followers in Russia.
Its offices were sealed on Tuesday by the Ministry of Internal Affairs, on the ground that Russian members of the cult could be in physical danger after reports that the cult's leaders had suggested suicide as a last resort for followers.


Don't Eat The Painting
THE subject matter could not be more appropriate.
Twenty-eight of Linda Miller's 12-inch-square artworks, in which she incorporates oil paint, photographs and wax, are on display at two Dean &amp; DeLuca cafes, at 1 Wall Street Court, at Pearl Street, and at 9 Rockefeller Plaza, at 48th Street.
Ms.
Miller has concentrated on such edibles as cheese, peppers, pears and fish.
"Sometimes I thought I was cooking dinner," she said.
The paintings are $500 each.
Ms.
Miller is at (212) 533-1677.


The Wrong Pressure on Libya
Libya continues to shield two suspects wanted for the terrorist bombing of a Pan Am airliner over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988 that killed 270 people.
In a well-intentioned but flawed effort to press Libya to turn them over, the Clinton Administration has proposed tighter economic sanctions.
Tougher sanctions make sense in theory, but the Administration's proposal for a global embargo on Libyan oil sales is unlikely to get international support.
It will not produce the justice the victims' families seek or the terrorists deserve.


Bojana Journal; What's There to Pardon? Bulgaria's Old Boss Asks
Inside a whitewashed villa surrounded by a wire fence and protected by police guards, Bulgaria's longtime Communist leader, Todor Zhivkov, is living out his last years under house arrest.
Mr.
Zhivkov, now 82, was among the Communist leaders in Eastern Europe who were ousted in late 1989.
He was sentenced in 1992 to seven years in prison after being convicted of illegally spending the equivalent of $24 million on cars, entertainment and apartments for favored aides.


Argentine President Discourages New Revelations on 'Dirty War'
In a radio interview President, Carlos Saul Menem has called on former military torturers and murderers to confess to priests and not to "rub salt in old wounds" by publicly recounting their deeds.
"Publicly coming forward to give testimony is a way of returning to a horrible past that we are trying to forget," he said.
Mr.
Menem, who is running for re-election in May, accused "some of the media" of playing up recent revelations by a former navy captain, Adolfo Scilingo, who said the military disposed of hundreds of political prisoners by throwing them, alive but unconscious, into the ocean from aircraft.


BUSINESS DIGEST
F.C.C. to Order Cut In Telephone Access Fees  The F.C.C. will order local telephone companies today to reduce the "access charges" they impose on long distance carriers by $1 billion a year.
The charges constitute about 40 percent of the cost of a long distance call, and the rate cut could lower prices, depending on how much of the savings carriers share with consumers.
The move is intended to be part of a bargain in which the agency would remove a cap on the profits local phone companies can make from long-distance access services.
A1.


Foster-Care Discharge Grants to End Monday
For years, children leaving foster care have received up to $500 to buy the things necessary to start their lives over again: furniture, bed linens, dishes.
But starting on Monday, that money will no longer be available -- a fact that foster care agencies realized only this week because of a bureaucratic slip-up.


Sexual Harassmen And a Chief Executive
When J. P. Bolduc resigned unexpectedly on March 2 as chief executive of W. R. Grace &amp; Company, his departure was described by the giant industrial corporation as a result of "differences of style and philosophy." Later, it was cast by Mr.
Bolduc's supporters as corporate retribution for his insistence on airing the Grace family's generous perquisites and consulting deals.
But now, it seems that the powerful and effective chief executive resigned under pressure for far different reasons.
According to a draft of the company's preliminary proxy statement for its coming annual meeting, the company now is attributing Mr.
Bolduc's departure to allegations of sexual harassment against him by Grace employees.


Cintas Corp. (CTAS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


CHRONICLE
And the winner is . . . blue.
Mars Inc. announced yesterday that blue had been chosen in a national poll as the newest color for its M &amp; M chocolate candies.
"A grand total of 10,243,142 votes were cast between Jan. 15 and March 17," said PAT D'AMATO, public relations manager for the company.
"Of that number, 5,579,083 voted for blue."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.75
6.10
3.36
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.64
5.68
3.46
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.74
5.80
3.77
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.12
7.13
6.76
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.37
7.39
7.09
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.25
8.27
7.95
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.35
6.36
6.26
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 8


FX Narrows Review To 4 Finalists
FX, the cable television network operated by Fox Inc., said yesterday that it had narrowed the review on its consumer and trade account to four finalists from nine semifinalists.
The account, with billings estimated at $5 million to $10 million, had been at the Venice, Calif., office of Livingston &amp; Company until that agency and Fox ended their yearlong relationship in December.


International Family Entertainment Inc.(FAM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Aristide Condemns Killing
President Aristide strongly condemned the killing of Ms.
Durocher Bertin today and said his Government would do "everything in our power" to apprehend those responsible for it.
But he also seemed to acknowledge that his own police force was incapable of solving the case or assuring the safety of ordinary citizens.
"It's true that the state of insecurity hangs above the heads of everyone," Mr.
Aristide said.
He added that while the weapons of the interim police force set up after the disintegration of the Haitian armed forces last fall "may be more limited than those of the bandits, that does not mean we should give up."
Throughout the day today, the Haitian capital was awash with rumors about who may have killed Ms.
Durocher Bertin and why.
"The only problem is that I don't know whether to suspect the extreme right or the extreme left," one diplomat here said.
At his news conference today, called to mark the eighth anniversary of the promulgation of the Haitian Constitution, Mr.
Aristide said he was certain the killers did not come from the ranks of his supporters, and seemed to blame remnants of the paramilitary groups that helped overthrow him in 1991.
"There are a lot of people still carrying weapons who have not been disarmed yet," he said.
"We must disarm them."
Since Mr.
Aristide was restored to power last October, Ms.
Durocher Bertin, who was educated in the United States and France, has steadily and sharply criticized the President.
At the time of her death, she was trying to bring a case in international courts that accused him of violating the Haitian Constitution.
Just a few weeks ago Ms.
Durocher Bertin announced the formation of a new political party.
Parliamentary elections are scheduled here for June and a presidential vote set for December


Rochester Community Savings Bank (RCSB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Of G.O.P. Promises Made
Republicans in the House have begun an elaborate strategy to allay their abiding fear: that a disengaged public has yet to get the message of what was accomplished in the first 100 days of the new Congress.
They want to get the full historic credit that they believe they are due for pushing hard to make the Contract With America a reality.
Page A21.


Interstate Bakeries Corp.(IBC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 4


Corrections
An article yesterday about the O. J. Simpson trial referred incorrectly in some copies to the length of time a limousine driver said Mr.
Simpson appeared to be away from home.
The witness, Allan Park, said he was sure that for 17 minutes -- not 27 -- he did not see Mr.
Simpson's Ford Bronco.


Corrections
An article by Reuters last Thursday about transplants of immature brain cells in mice to treat a genetic brain abnormality misstated the surname of an author of the study.
He is Dr.
Evan Snyder, not Smith.
The article also misstated the number of mice that were treated. It was 17, not 700.


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Boston University
After two weeks as the school's director of athletics, Jack Parker told Chris Palmer, the football coach at the time, that he had made a terrible mistake.
So Parker quit and went back to something he knew he did well and liked, coaching the B.U. hockey team.
That was six years ago and in four of the ensuing seasons Parker's teams came within either one or two victories of national championships.
The Terriers try again today in a semifinal game of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament at Providence, R.I.
They will play Minnesota, and Maine will oppose Michigan, with the winners to decide the championship on Saturday afternoon.
ESPN will televise all three games.


Clinton Opens Drive on Economic Gains
President Clinton engaged in an all-day public discussion of the Southern economy here today as he began a yearlong campaign to overcome a political conundrum: that his standing with the voters remains mediocre despite the nation's economic health.
The South, a leader both in economic vitality and in antipathy to Mr.
Clinton, may be the region where that difficulty is most pronounced.
But from early this morning until late this afternoon, in a regional conference at Emory University, the President demonstrated just how relentless he intends to be in trying to subdue it.


Union Takes One Step Toward The Fields
With a unanimous voice vote, the executive board of the players union yesterday took its step, the middle one, in the three-part process that could snatch major league baseball away from replacement players and restore it to major league players.
Two days before a Federal judge is scheduled to hear arguments on the National Labor Relation Board's request for an injunction, the union adopted a resolution saying the players would offer to end their strike and return to work if the board is granted the injunction.


Despite the Religious Songs, Party Music
Conjunto Cespedes, an Afro-Cuban group led by the exceptional singer Gladys Cespedes, is generally considered the most important group in the flourishing West Coast Latin music scene.
This band -- which has just released a new album, "Vivito y Coleando" (Xenophile) -- has been marketed as a world-music group, among the few Latin bands to receive the treatment.
And given the upsurge in interest in Cuban music generally, it isn't surprising that the Cespedes packed S.O.B.'s on Sunday night with a crowd intent on having a good time.
It's easy to understand the group's reputation: with four horns, a violin, several percussionists and more, it creates a big, thick sound.
Though Ms.
Cespedes sings religious songs occasionally, this is party music, for dancers.
Ms.
Cespedes is the key to it all.
She's an amiable performer with a great pillar of a voice, solid and dense, and with its own chocolate texture.
She bends notes slightly to pressure a changing pitch into surrendering emotion, and uses rhythm to make her phrases take on profundity.


Where To Buy A Monkey
AN amusing moment of the Academy Awards ceremonies Monday night came when David Letterman tried to convince the world that many celebrities competed with him for his cameo role as Earl Hofert, an old salt, in last year's flop movie "The Cabin Boy."
In one of his brief scenes in the movie, Mr.
Letterman held up a handmade stocking monkey and bellowed, "Do ya wanna buy a monkey?"


Students Protest Education Cuts at Rallies Around U.S.
Students at universities around the country held rallies, marches, teach-ins and vigils today to protest both proposed Federal cuts in education and the Republicans' Contract With America, which they said was responsible.
At Emory University here, where about 300 students rallied while President Clinton held a regional economic conference, speakers included the university's president, William M. Chace, and representatives of homosexual student groups.
At Cornell University in Ithaca, N.Y., students built a shantytown of cardboard boxes that they called Newtville after Speaker Newt Gingrich and some began a four-day hunger strike.
In New York City, students dressed in black held a mock funeral march from Battery Park to City Hall.


California Governor Seeks Giuliani's Support


Economic Scene; Illinois is looking to market forces to help reduce its smog.
LIKE the vast region in and around New York City, the six counties of northeastern Illinois forming the Chicago sprawl have a wretched summer smog problem.
And both do not have many years to address the problem before the Environmental Protection Agency is supposed to impose harsh sanctions that would slash economic development.
Unlike New York, however, Illinois is gung-ho to use market forces to cut the cost of the solution.


Five Bags or Three Bags? Simpson Prosecutor Asks
A skycap at Los Angeles International Airport testified today that O. J. Simpson boarded a flight to Chicago around midnight with only three pieces of luggage.
That is two fewer suitcases than a limousine driver said he saw at Mr.
Simpson's home half an hour earlier, and at least one fewer than the driver said he loaded into the car.
Earlier, the driver, Allan Park, testified that he saw a second black duffle bag -- one that the skycap never saw -- atop a trash can by the skycap's station, with Mr.
Simpson standing nearby.
The skycap, James Williams, testified that he had also seen Mr.
Simpson standing by the same trash can.


AT HOME WITH: Loretta Young; Life Waltzes On
THE IMAGE is frozen in the scrapbook of memory: Loretta Young twirling through the door in an elegant gown to introduce her weekly television show.
Even now, more than 30 years after the last episode was broadcast, a visitor to Miss Young's home in this fashionable desert community is instructed by office colleagues -- old enough to remember -- to make special note of how she enters the room.


Haitian Officials May Have Plotted to Kill Opponent
The United States alerted the Haitian Government last week that a prominent opposition figure who was shot to death on the streets of Port-au-Prince on Tuesday was the target of a plot, Administration officials said today.
The Haitian Justice Minister, Jean Joseph Exume, warned the woman, Mireille Durocher Bertin, a 38-year-old lawyer, but she declined Government protection in favor of her personal bodyguard, Administration officials said.
She was a leading supporter of the 1991 military coup that unseated President Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
She and a client were killed as they drove in her car on one of the busiest streets in the capital.


Suddenly Put on the Defensive, Pataki Takes to the Road to Do Battle for His Budget
Gov.
George E. Pataki hunched forward in the metal chair and stared intensely at the student with the nose ring, someone else upset about his budget: It would increase state college tuition, close campuses, hurt poor people, hurt single mothers, hurt her, she said.
As she spoke, the Republican Governor fidgeted like an excited student waiting to answer.
"By far the most important part of this budget for students, for you, for everybody, and you might disagree, is that we are going to start creating jobs in New York State," he finally blurted out, karate-chopping his hands together.
"We want you to get a decent, good, affordable higher education in New York, and get a job."


COMPANY BRIEFS
BOEING CO., Seattle, the aerospace concern, said Bavaria Fluggesellschaft, a German aircraft leasing company, had confirmed an order for two additional next-generation Boeing 737-700 twin jets worth an estimated $80 million.
KOBE STEEL LTD., Tokyo, plans to merge two of its U.S. construction machinery subsidiaries, Kobelco America Inc. of Houston and Kobelco Construction Machinery (U.S.A.) Inc. of Calhoun, Ga., into a new company.


Journal; The Glamour Gap
Don't feel sorry for the sequestered O. J. Simpson jurors -- envy them.
Thanks to an edict by Judge Lance Ito, they were not allowed to waste Monday night watching the Oscars.
The judge had feared that some prejudicial barbs about the case might surface on the telecast.
He needn't have worried.
O.
J. was never mentioned in this endless orgy of irrelevancy in which the belly-flopping David Letterman demonstrated just how large a bullet he dodged by not moving his own show to L.A.


Turkey Moved on Iraq to Combat Terrorism; In Iran, Who Dictates?
To the Editor:
In "How to Trade With Iran" (column, March 24), A. M. Rosenthal has encouraged the Administration to isolate Iran further as punishment for its many sins, including that of dictatorship.
Yet Mr.
Rosenthal has consistently failed to identify the present Iranian dictator.


Turkey Moved on Iraq to Combat Terrorism
To the Editor:
Your belated concern in "Turkey Crosses a Line" (editorial, March 23) over Iraq's territorial integrity, "violated" by the Turkish military operation is disingenuous, to say the least.
It is also misinformed and suggests a visceral opposition to the Turkish Government.


Remember No. 23? The Islanders Do
A few weeks ago Bobby Nystrom's 12-year-old son asked him, "Dad, why isn't your jersey up in the rafters, too?"
"Because, Eric," Nystrom replied, "I was a journeyman player. They'll never retire my number."


Suzy Shier Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


HOUSE TURNS BACK MEASURES TO LIMIT TERMS IN CONGRESS
After months of hot oratory about the evils of career politicians, the House voted squarely against public opinion tonight and rejected four proposals that would have limited the number of terms its members could serve.
The votes were the first ever to be held on a Constitutional amendment on Congressional term limits, which polls show have broad popular support.


Binks Manufacturing Co.(BIN,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


U.S. Proposes Opening Power Cost and Supply To Competition
The Federal agency that oversees the nation's utilities approved a sweeping proposal today to force utilities to open their transmission systems to competitors.
The proposed rule, which would greatly increase competition, would eventually bring down wholesale rates, if the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission decides to put it into effect later this year, as expected.
However, the changes could be modified after all sides have the chance to comment.


For Directors, Board Room Survival 101
First, a passel of background papers comes by overnight mail.
Then, about a week before directors of Megamicro Inc. are to meet, an inch-thick "board book" arrives, outlining the knotty issues on the agenda.
Tucked in with the binder is the customary invitation to cocktails and dinner with the chief executive on the eve of the meeting -- when the role-playing begins.
It may not be a murder-mystery weekend at the Mohonk Mountain House.
But the board meeting of the fictional Megamicro is about as close as corporate America gets: Participants in the Directors' Institute, a 48-hour course run by the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania for directors and director-wannabes, are cast in this corporate drama so they can learn the ins and outs of the board room.
At a time when the burdens on boards are growing, this is Wharton's attempt to cash in on directorial insecurities.


After Dark, 4 Agents Light Out
In a late-night drama worthy of an action-adventure movie, four top agents at International Creative Management left their jobs shortly after midnight today to start their own agency.
They took their files with them, prompting the threat of legal action on the part of their former employers.
Their move outraged Jeff Berg, the chairman, and James Wiatt, the president, of International Creative Management, which has a client list that includes Mel Gibson, Julia Roberts, Arnold Schwarzenegger, Jodie Foster and Michelle Pfeiffer.


Brown Is Told Sports Program Cheats Women
A Federal judge ruled yesterday that Brown University had discriminated against female athletes by eliminating women's gymnastics and volleyball teams in 1991, a decision that could have broad implication for colleges that inadequately fund women's athletic teams.
Judge Raymond S. Pettine of United States District Court in Providence, R.I., found that Brown had failed to comply with Title IX, a 1972 Federal law that prohibits sex discrimination at schools receiving Federal funds and ordains that women receive opportunities equal to those accorded male athletes.


C.I.A. Settles Suit on Sex Bias
The Central Intelligence Agency said tonight that it would pay more than $1 million in back pay and salary increases to settle charges of sex discrimination filed against the agency by female employees who conduct or supervise clandestine operations around the world.
Joseph M. Sellers, a lawyer who represented the women, welcomed the agreement, saying it "should end an old-boy network whose demise is long overdue."


Corrections
A company symbol in some editions of Business Day yesterday, with a brief report in the Company News column about a plan by Tandy Brands Accessories Inc. to discontinue its television home shopping business, was published in error.
The symbol was that of the Tandy Corporation, a separate company.


New World Communications Group Inc.(NWCG,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


No Bail in Montclair Killings
The man accused of killing four people and wounding another in a robbery at a Montclair post office was denied bail at a five-minute court hearing yesterday.
Citing his "truly heinous crime" and risk of flight, the United States Attorney, Faith S. Hochberg, argued that Christopher Green, 29, should be imprisoned until he goes on trial.


Premdor Inc.(PI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Giuliani and Whitman Welcome California's Wilson, Without the Embrace
With Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani laughing warmly at his side, Gov.
Pete Wilson of California said yesterday that he would fight for a ballot spot in New York's Republican Presidential primary, despite the strong show of support for Senator Bob Dole by virtually every top G.O.P. official in the state -- except the Mayor.
Mr.
Wilson and Mr.
Giuliani stood together at City Hall after the Californian became the first Presidential contender to be granted an audience with Mr.
Giuliani, a conspicuous holdout from an unusual series of endorsements that Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, the Mayor's political foe, choreographed for Mr.
Dole earlier this month.


Shabazz Case Illustrates the Havoc Caused by Paid Informers
To the Editor:
Re your March 24 front-page article on alleged payments by Federal agents to an informer in the case against Qubilah Bahiyah Shabazz, who has been indicted on charges that she plotted to kill Louis Farrakhan, leader of the Nation of Islam:


Grey Loses Some Slim-Fast Work
The Slim-Fast Foods Company, the marketer of diet products in West Palm Beach Fla., dismissed Grey Advertising in New York yesterday on the domestic creative, strategic planning and research portions of its account, which Grey had handled since August 1987, and shifted those assignments to Young &amp; Rubicam New York after a brief review.
The billings were estimated at $30 million but are expected to increase to as much as $60 million to $70 million.
"As of late last week, we'd been planning to keep the Slim-Fast assignments in place and retain a second agency to focus on new products," said Ronnie Stern, executive vice president for marketing at Slim-Fast.
"But we came away from the Young &amp; Rubicam creative presentation so enthusiastic over the insights and a new direction that we decided to reconsider our thinking." Grey will continue to handle the domestic media and international portions of the account, he added, with billings estimated at $25 million.


Bridge
Among the three living players who will be inducted into the American Contract Bridge League's Hall of Fame here tonight is Edgar Kaplan.
In Monday's column, he was incorrectly included among the deceased inductees.
The other living inductees are Alvin Roth and Robert Wolff.
One of the 14 deceased inductees is B. Jay Becker, whose name was omitted from Monday's column.


Bilingual Education Trains Citizens of Future
To the Editor:
In response to Toby L. Boritz's March 23 letter, "Bilingual Education in New York No Longer Serves Students," I would like to clarify the role of bilingual education.


Robert A. Kennard, 74, Is Dead; Architect and Mentor for Blacks
Robert A. Kennard, a Los Angeles architect who turned his struggles as a young black apprentice into a lifelong campaign to ease the way for other minority members who are professionals, died on Friday at the University of Southern California Norris Cancer Center.
He was 74 and lived in Los Angeles.
His family said the cause of death was lymphoma.


Where Gods and Athletes Part Company
To the Editor:
Although I wholeheartedly agree with the tenor of "Olympic Swat Teams Hit Atlanta" (Topics of the Times, March 26), I must comment on a point that increasingly appears in print.
You state that the word Olympic means "of, or belonging to Olympus, the fabled home of the Greek gods." The Olympic Games derive their name from the idyllic location of Olympia in the southern Greek region of the Peloponnesus.


CHRONICLE
The troubles of STEPHEN FRY continue.
Mr.
Fry, the English comedian and actor, has been sued by the producer of "Cell Mates," a West End production that he left after three performances in February, The Evening Standard reported yesterday.
He is being treated for depression at a private hospital in London and is expected to plead ill health in response to the lawsuit, the newspaper said.


A Diamond in the Rough


Dolphins Trade Jackson
KEITH JACKSON, one of the National Football League's top tight ends, was traded yesterday by the Miami Dolphins to the Green Bay Packers for a second-round choice in April's draft.
But the five-time Pro Bowl player wants a new long-term contract before joining the Packers.
As part of the trade, the Dolphins returned to Green Bay a fourth-round draft pick acquired in the March 21 deal that sent Miami's MARK INGRAM to the Packers. (AP)


METRO DIGEST
MINISTER QUIZZED IN DEATHS DIES IN CRASH A Protestant minister, under investigation in connection with the deaths of a Staten Island couple who were found slain after their bank account was looted, steered his car into an abutment, killing himself in an apparent suicide, the police said.
A1.
FALLEN BUILDING'S OWNER GETS CITY MONEY One of two men who owned a Harlem building that partly collapsed last week, killing three tenants, is also the president and part owner of a construction company that is receiving city money to oversee the multimillion-dollar renovation of low-income apartment buildings in the same neighborhood.
A1.


Nike Enlists Female Athlete For a New Line of Footwear
In a case of footwear gender equity, Nike Inc. said yesterday that it would introduce the Air Swoopes basketball shoe, named for Sheryl Swoopes, who led Texas Tech to the National Collegiate Athletic Association women's basketball championship in 1993.
Nike last named a shoe for an athlete 10 years ago, when it christened the Air Jordan line of men's basketball sneakers, after Michael Jordan.


Thorny Issues Are Holding Up a Pivotal Health Care Deal
Getting the buyer and seller to agree in negotiations for a giant health care merger in California was only the first step.
Wellpoint Health Networks and Health Systems International cannot complete their $1.8 billion stock swap without the approval of the state commissioner of corporations, who has sweeping authority over health maintenance organizations.
People close to the deal said the two big health maintenance organizations were on the verge of announcing that Health Systems had agreed to acquire Wellpoint this week.
One unresolved problem is obtaining the go-ahead of Gary Mendoza, the commissioner of corporation.
A spokesman for Blue Cross of California, the nonprofit parent of Wellpoint, said it could still take four or five months to button up the issues pending before Mr.
Mendoza.


Kitchenware With a Switch
SERENDIPITY might well describe 32-year-old Richard Wrightman's life.
After he decorated his Manhattan apartment two years ago, friends asked Mr.
Wrightman -- who had been a clothing designer -- to do theirs.
Along the way, he made a lamp, using a colander and a cast-iron base.
Now, eight of his designs are being sold at Lamalle Kitchenware, 36 West 25th Street; (212) 242-0750.


Knicks Snap Back And Feel Relief
The Knicks needed a victory tonight.
They needed to soothe the pain inflicted by Michael Jordan's 55-point performance on Tuesday.
They needed to stop their two-game losing streak.
And they needed to stay ahead of the streaking Indiana Pacers.
Holding off a fourth-quarter rally by the Detroit Pistons, and coping with the fourth-quarter ejection of Anthony Mason, New York pulled out a 107-97 victory at the Palace.


House Panel Backs Easing Of U.S. Water Standards
A House subcommittee today approved sweeping revisions to the Clean Water Act that would give much greater weight to costs when deciding whether to seek further improvements in the quality of the nation's water.
The vote, by a strong 19 to 5 for the revisions, was the first time in the new 104th Congress that the roll has been called on fundamentally amending one of the nation's core environmental statutes.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Good Things Come in Threes for Miller  At Indianapolis, Reggie Miller's trio of 3-pointers last night gave the Indiana Pacers the lead for good and he finished with 22 points in a victory over the Cleveland Cavaliers.
Miller's long-range shooting sparked a 15-4 Indiana spurt as the Pacers extended their winning streak to five games over all and seven straight at Market Square Arena.
Cleveland trailed by 64-60 after Mark Price hit a 3-pointer with 7 minutes 50 seconds left in the third quarter.
After two free throws by Cleveland's Chris Mills, who led all scorers with 25 points, the Cavaliers trailed, 66-62.
Indiana responded with 14 consecutive points, sparked by Miller's 3-pointer with 6:51 remaining in the period.
The Cavaliers went more than six minutes without a field goal. (AP)
76ers 99, HORNETS 81: Clarence Weatherspoon scored 28 points and Sharone Wright and Dana Barros each added 18 as Philadelphia defeated visiting Charlotte.
Jeff Grayer added 16 points for the 76ers, who had lost 10 of their last 11 games and 18 of 22.
Larry Johnson had 22 points for the Hornets, who lost their starting forward, Scott Burrell, for the season with a ruptured right Achilles' tendon in the first period.
The 76ers scored 10 straight points, 6 by Barros, to take a 76-67 lead at the end of the third period, and led by 81-69 with 9 minutes 35 seconds to play. (AP)


Baby Is Said to Have Cast Off H.I.V., but Some Are Skeptical
Scientists in California report that a child infected with the AIDS virusat birth successfully cast off the infection by the age of 1, but some other experts doubt that the case has been fully proved.
This medical conundrum is important because if the boy did fight off the virus his health may hold a vital clue to defeating the disease.


Classes for Young Gardeners
Knowledge about plants and ecology can be at your children's fingertips this spring.
Gardening programs designed for children ages 3 to 17 are starting this week at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx and next week at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Most of the Bronx classes are for gardeners between ages 5 and 16.
The spring session is virtually full, but there will be a waiting list.
Classes begin this Saturday morning, 9 to 11:30, and continue on Saturdays through June 24.
There will also be sessions in the summer (July and August) and fall (September and October).
Tuition is $85; members' children, $65.


Victims' Kin: A Voice at Trials
The Senate passed a bill yesterday to give the families of murder victims the right to try to persuade juries to give a convicted killer the death penalty.
Among those lobbying for the bill were relatives of Gail Shollar, who was slain in a 1992 carjacking.
Her family did not get to argue for her killer's execution; he was sentenced earlier this month to life imprisonment.





Brash and Buzz-Cut Atop Her Beloved Tank
"Tank Girl" is a comic-based movie with the flashy pop style of a real comic book, but that's a mixed blessing.
It's a comic book that takes an hour and three-quarters to read, for one thing.
And its storytelling isn't moved forward by anything better than an occasional need to turn the page.
But "Tank Girl" may be sending out a dog-whistle signal to its own special constituency, fans of an androgynous punk heroine who's so underground she's almost buried.
A bigger phenomenon in England than it is here, the "Tank Girl" comic strip celebrates beer-swigging insouciance and a taste for heavy metal, the kind found in military equipment this heroine likes to commandeer.
"Feeling a little inadequate?" the movie's Tank Girl taunts, as she rides on the enormous gun of her beloved tank.
"My God, the sheer size of it!" she says of a huge gun in another scene.


Art of the Public Offering: Trump Plans to Sell Stock
He has sold them bonds and he has sold them books.
But will Donald J. Trump have success in selling his admirers stock?
Mr.
Trump filed an initial public offering with the Securities and Exchange Commission yesterday for shares in the holding company for one of his Atlantic City casinos.
Mr.
Trump hopes that the offering, in combination with a separate offering of bonds also filed yesterday, will raise between $245 million and $295 million.


Baseball Bats Helped Ignite Fire
Investigators said that the chemical warehouse fire here last weekend that forced the evacuation of nearby homes was caused not by arson but by spontaneous combustion -- with an assist from baseball bats.
Prosecutors said that the problem was the way workers at the Causeway Distributors warehouse handled ammonium persulfate and sodium persulfate.


Compton to Handle Newport Account
Lorillard Inc. in New York said yesterday that it had selected Compton Partners, Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York to handle its Newport cigarette account, with billings estimated at $30 million.
The account had been at Ally &amp; Gargano in New York from 1986 until that agency and Lorillard ended their relationship, effective March 1, because of creative differences.
When Compton Partners was known as the New York office of Campbell Mithun Esty, the agency handled for many years the account of a menthol cigarette that competes with Newport, the Kool brand marketed by the Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation.
The agency lost Kool and other B.&amp; W. brands last March to Grey Advertising in New York and Tatham Euro RSCG in Chicago.


Restaurants
The air is filled with music as fresh as the wind whispering through branches in a remote mountain forest.
Then it drops until it has turned into the melodic sound of water rushing over rocks.
Slippers pad reverently across pine floors and servers kneel to place lacquered dishes on low tables.
Wooden spoons slide from scarlet silk bags.
Fragrant clouds of steam waft into the serene room as lids are lifted from hot stone bowls.
A meal at Hangawi is an experience of all the senses, a chance to escape, if only for a little while, the stress and bustle of New York City.
If you like to travel to exotic places, consider a trip to 32d Street.


No Japan Move; Stocks Off
Despite widespread anticipation that it would follow the lead of Germany's central bank, the Bank of Japan chose not to cut its official discount rate today, saying instead that it would nudge short-term money market rates lower.
The decision caused prices to fall sharply on the Tokyo stock market, where traders had been expecting the discount rate to be cut.
The central bank said in a statement that partly because of the yen's sharp appreciation against the dollar, the gradual recovery of Japan's weak economy now "appears to have somewhat slowed down."


Ties Binding Tyson and King Are Strong
Mike Tyson, making his first public comments since his release from prison last Saturday, asserted today that he would resume boxing, and nominated his controversial promoter, Don King, to remain in control of his career.
"I will fight again," said Tyson, who served three years in an Indiana prison for a rape conviction.
He appeared to be at least 15 pounds lighter than his fighting weight of 210-220 pounds and was dressed sharply in a black sharkskin suit and a maroon tie.


Pataki-Silver, Live: Budget Fight on Air
Gov.
George E. Pataki and his chief political rival, Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, shifted their budget duel out of the backrooms and onto the airwaves last night, firing bitter partisan salvos at each other in back-to-back, statewide televised addresses.
For Mr.
Pataki, a Republican, the donated air time allowed him to go over the heads of protesters and lobbyists speak directly to the people outside what he calls "the Albany beltway." He argues that most New Yorkers strongly support his proposals to shrink government, reduce welfare and cut taxes.


Term-Limit Gamble
If the American people agree on anything, it may be that members of Congress should serve a limited number of terms.
Polls show consistently that up to 80 percent of Americans support term limits.
Why then did the House reject them last night?
One reason is that support for term limits is broad but shallow.
Voters love them, but compared with crime, welfare and education, term limits are not a priority.
It is not the kind of issue that overshadows all else when voters are deciding how to vote.


From Mets' Dugout to Clubhouse, a State of Confusion
The charter flight is booked to Cleveland on Friday afternoon.
The return flight to Florida is scheduled to arrive in Fort Lauderdale on Saturday evening, in anticipation of the Mets' season opener against the Miami Marlins at Joe Robbie Stadium.
Dallas Green has named his opening day starter -- Bob Stoddard -- and packed up boxes and boxes of his and his wife's possessions so they can be shipped to New York.
That does not mean, however, that the Mets have things in order.
They are scheduled to become the first team to bat in the first replacement game in major league baseball history on Sunday night, yet everyone from Green down to the equipment manager has been left in a state of confusion.
No one knows whether to prepare for the season or prepare for another round of spring training workouts.


A Mexican Struggle to Stay Afloat
Everything that Mauricio Brener thought he knew about business and about himself, all that he once hoped for, he now questions.
"For the first time in my life I really don't know what's going to happen," said Mr.
Brener, 33, a Mexican entrepreneur whose $25 million-a-year manufacturing business has been pounded by Mexico's economic crisis.
From day to day, he says, he doesn't know if he will survive or go under.
On his desk he now keeps a book given to him by a friend.
It is "The Plague of the Black Debt: How to Survive the Coming Depression."


Excerpts From Two Budget Speeches
Following are excerpts from yesterday's speech by Gov.
George E. Pataki, a Republican, on television channels statewide urging support for his budget proposal and from the response by Assemblyman Sheldon Silver, the Speaker of the State Assembly, the Legislature's highest ranking Democrat, as transcribed by The New York Times.
ADDRESS BY GOVERNOR PATAKI
Good evening.
It's no secret that our state has a serious fiscal crisis.
The prior administration left us with a $5 billion deficit and I don't have to tell any of you that New Yorkers are already the highest-taxed people in America.
And that over the last four years, while the rest of the country created more than seven million new jobs, New York State lost 125,000 jobs.
I submitted a budget that changes the direction of this state, that rejects the failed policies of the past and points New York toward a bright new future.


A Battle for Survival Far From the Water
Winning a place in the defense finals has come down to a sea of technicalities.
With both Stars &amp; Stripes and Mighty Mary on the edge of elimination in the semifinals, each side has put a microscope to the rules.
The fate of Dennis Conner and his Stars &amp; Stripes team in trying to win a slot in the America's Cup defense finals hung in the balance today over a dispute about Conner's legal right to have his yacht remeasured.


Art in Review
Melissa Miller
Holly Solomon Gallery  172 Mercer Street (at Houston Street)  SoHo  Through April 22
Like pictures from some terrifying children's book, Melissa Miller's paintings take us into a world of forests and meadows where wise and savage animals dance a strange pavanne.
Human angels, demons and sprites appear from time to time, but they are mere accomplices to the rituals at hand.


Experts Differ on Likelihood of Arson by Mob
As the search began yesterday for the arsonists responsible for the Fulton Fish Market fire, law enforcement officials said there was disagreement over where to focus the inquiry: on the Mafia, or on individuals who might have had a personal reason for causing the blaze.
Many organized-crime experts in Federal and city law enforcement agencies said that the fire on Wednesday had the earmarks of arrogant mobsters trying to intimidate merchants from cooperating with a city campaign to rid the market of gangsters and corruption.
But other officials said that the business disruptions caused by the blaze and the intensive investigation will dry up many of the traditional rackets at the market run by the Genovese crime family.


Is Top Dissident Even Alive? Beijing Will Not Say
China said today that it would not respond to international appeals for the release of the country's most famous political prisoner, Wei Jingsheng, who has been detained without charges for a year.
Chen Jian, a Foreign Ministry spokesman, said at a news conference that the arrest of Mr.
Wei on April 1, 1994, was a matter of "China's internal affairs." He refused to say whether Mr.
Wei was alive.


Pope Offers 'Gospel of Life' vs. 'Culture of Death'
Pope John Paul II today used his strongest language ever to condemn abortion and euthanasia, which he said were "crimes which no human law can claim to legitimize." He also issued the Roman Catholic Church's toughest position to date against the death penalty.
In an encyclical letter titled "Evangelium Vitae" ("Gospel of Life"), made public today, the Pope called on Catholics to resist laws that violate what he called the fundamental right to human life, whether of the unborn or the dying.
The Pope took his case for a binding morality into the political arena, chastising democracies for denying "the original inalienable right to life" on the basis of the will of the majority.


Art in Review
Mariko Mori  American Fine Arts 22 Wooster Street SoHo Through April 15
This show marks the impressive debut of Mariko Mori, a young Japanese artist who studied in London and New York City.
It features large-scale color photographs of the artist in costumes of her own design, standing on the streets of Tokyo, often looking like a fashion model from cyberspace.
High points include extravagant hot pink or blue wigs, a blue plastic breastplate and a silver body suit.
The suit culminates in a hood with silver ears that suggests women reduced to machines, while adjacent video games suggest her more natural habitat.
Ms.
Mori's radiant presence merely accentuates the profound sense of alienation in the world rushing around her.
The work, which combines aspects of Cindy Sherman and Jeff Wall, is promising, despite the unnecessary presence of the actual costumes, enclosed in clear plastic time capsules and displayed in front of the photographs.
ROBERTA SMITH


D.M.B.&amp; B. Picked For Dairy Account
Dairy Management Inc., a joint venture of the United Dairy Industry Association and the National Dairy Board in Rosemont, Ill., said yesterday that it had selected D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in Chicago and the agency's national media-buying unit, Televest Inc. in New York, to handle the national media planning and national media buying portions of its account, with billings estimated at $65 million to $75 million.


Conceptually, and Literally, a New York Figure
Conceptual art of the 1970's has always been hard to grasp: literally, since it was based on the notion that art can exist as an idea rather than as an object.
Exhibitions of dematerialized work took the form of notebook entries, piles of dirt moved from one place to another, galleries filled with nothing but radio waves or a few enigmatic words painted directly on the wall.
The word installations were the work of Lawrence Weiner, among the earliest Conceptualists (others were Joseph Kosuth, Mel Bochner, Douglas Huebler, Robert Barry and John Baldessari), but one who has received relatively scant attention, at least on this side of the Atlantic. (Mr. Weiner, born in the Bronx in 1942 and a long-time resident of Amsterdam, has been awarded numerous public commissions in Europe.)


Tel Aviv Journal; At Center Stage, It's Israel's 4-Alarm Spy Case
When the house lights come up at the end of this play, the audience rushes out not to catch taxis but to sign petitions in the lobby.
Their demand is freedom for the title character, a real person serving a life sentence at a Federal prison in North Carolina.
The play is called "Pollard," and since it opened nearly two months ago at the Cameri Theater here, it has become a vehicle for Israelis to call on President Clinton to pardon Jonathan Jay Pollard, the American Jew who was arrested in 1985 and convicted two years later of spying for Israel.


U.S. Responds on Established Lines
Much immediate reaction in the United States to Pope John Paul II's new encyclical fell along the established battle lines of Roman Catholic teaching on abortion and euthanasia, the major targets of the papal declaration.
But the Pope also gained some surprising approval from outside his usual circle of supporters and stirred some troubled responses among Catholics.
Catholic church leaders welcomed the papal statement, to be sure, while Planned Parenthood, a major advocate of abortion rights and provider of abortion services, denounced it.
Criticism also came from the Hemlock Society, an educational group that advocates access to voluntary euthanasia and medical assistance in committing suicide for the terminally ill.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.  Jordan Steps Back and Bulls Step Forward
Michael Jordan continues to be full of surprises.
After scoring a National Basketball Association season-high 55 points in Chicago's victory over the Knicks on Tuesday night, Jordan settled for 23 points in another triumph by the Bulls, 100-82, last night against the visiting Boston Celtics.


With Croel In, Is Bailey Out?
Mike Croel, a former Broncos linebacker who played for Coach Dan Reeves when both were in Denver, agreed yesterday to a one-year deal with the Giants, a move that put Carlton Bailey's chances of re-signing with the club in jeopardy.
Croel, the N.F.L.
Rookie of the Year in 1991, signed for $850,000 (with $200,000 up front).
If the Giants go with a four-man front, they would most likely go with Croel on the weak side, Corey Miller on the strong side and Michael Brooks inside.


H. L. Stevenson, 65; Reporter at U.P.I. Became Top Editor
H.
L.
Stevenson, a former editor in chief of United Press International who presided over the news service's coverage during the era of the Vietnam War and Watergate, died yesterday.
He was 65 and lived in Rye, N.Y.
Mr.
Stevenson had been in poor health since suffering a heart attack in November, a family friend told U.P.I.
He died at St.
Joseph's Medical Center in Stamford, Conn.


Giants' Brown Settles In And Enjoys the View
He is munching on chicken fingers in a restaurant not far from Giants Stadium and the first thing you notice about Dave Brown is that he is relaxed.
He has always been talkative, friendly, smart.
But last season was the first year of the Giants P.S. -- Post Simms -- and there was sometimes a hint of tension in Brown's voice.
It was understandable.
First, he had to battle Kent Graham for the spot left vacant when the Giants released Phil Simms.
Brown was a first-round draft pick and every throw he made in training camp was supposed to be great.
Graham was an eighth-rounder and every great throw he made was unexpected.


Art in Review
Antonietta Raphael
Paolo Baldacci Gallery  41 East 57th Street  Manhattan  Through April 22
Antonietta Raphael, the daughter of a Lithuanian rabbi, studied art in London before moving to Italy in 1924.
A founder of the anti-fascist Scuola Romana, she renounced painting in favor of sculpture in order to avoid competing with her husband-to-be, Mario Mafai.
She and her three daughters, guarded by gentile friends, survived World War II in Genoa.
After the war, separated from her husband, she returned to painting.
By her death, in 1975, she had achieved a major reputation in Italy but had virtually been forgotten on the international art scene.


Oh, the Trouble a Little Slingshot and Some Rocks Can Cause
Sniper attacks, serial killings, Joey Buttafuoco -- the Nassau County police have seen it all.
But even they were surprised when they arrested Gabriel Scibelli.
On Wednesday night, they said, Mr.
Scibelli, a 42-year-old importer, climbed into his 1993 Lincoln Mark VIII around midnight with a powerful slingshot and a pocketful of rocks and went on a two-hour shooting spree in Westbury and Jericho, smashing the windows of more than a dozen parked cars and storefronts.


Bronx Hunt Pressed For a Serial Rapist
The police are searching for a man they believe is a serial rapist who has been attacking women in building elevators and deserted hallways in the Bronx, the authorities said yesterday.
The man, who is between 20 and 30 years old and usually wears a green military-style jacket and a ski mask or bandana, is believed to be responsible for nine attacks, beginning last May, said a police spokesman, Doram Tamari.


As Fire and Police Investigators Work, So Do Fishmongers
As a film of gray smoke continued to drift from the charred hulk of one of the Fulton Fish Market's oldest buildings early yesterday morning, the market came to life on South Street much as it has for decades.
The chaos that materializes on the narrow strip of pavement between Fulton Street and Peck Slip five nights a week was made marginally more chaotic because of the fire trucks, police cars and floodlights that vied for space with tractor-trailers and forklifts.


The Woman Behind a Grisly Photo
We knew the corpse, naked and abject, but we never knew the story.
Or we didn't until "Leona's Sister Gerri," Jane Gillooly's searingly effective study of an infamous photograph and how it came into being.
Patiently piecing together the facts behind this wrenching image, Ms.
Gillooly brings a wide breadth of understanding to the tragedy she uncovers.
It's a tale with echoes of Dreiser, and with a sadder-than-fiction authenticity like that of "Hoop Dreams."
The picture, first published by Ms. magazine and later used as potent ammunition in the battle over abortion rights, is that of a woman lying contorted and bloody on a floor.
It's an image so bleak that it almost defies closer examination, but Ms.
Gillooly quietly sets about determining its origins.
The film maker happened onto this material because she knew the dead woman's niece.
She presents it with a sense of discreet outrage, and perhaps an awareness that it otherwise would have gone untold.


Owners Vote to Use Replacements as Talks Go On
Club owners formally anointed replacement baseball yesterday, hours before the union made a new proposal.
But a hearing before a Federal judge today could put the striking players back on the field in the replacements' place.
By a conference-call vote of 26 to 2, the owners authorized the use of replacement players beginning Sunday night, when the regular season is scheduled to open.
Only the Baltimore Orioles and Toronto Blue Jays opposed the plan.


Slide Has Messier Talking and Campbell Talking Change
Following the Rangers' seventh consecutive defeat last night, the team captain, Mark Messier, stood up in the locker room in Madison Square Garden and addressed his teammates.
"Mess talks when it is necessary," said Petr Nedved, a Ranger forward who scored during the 5-4 loss to the Quebec Nordiques.
"He spoke for maybe four or five minutes. He said what we have to do to get out of the slump. He said we have to play every game like it is a playoff game. He is the big leader here. He gave us a few pointers."


Defying Fate From the Seat of a Wheelchair
Although "People in Motion" is mostly about people in wheelchairs, it is not victim television.
This three-hour PBS series calls not so much for sympathy, although that comes naturally enough, as for an appreciation of how some severely disabled men and women are challenging their fates.
Tonight's opening hour, "Ways to Move," focuses on two dance companies that feature performers in wheelchairs, a candidate for Congress rolling along the campaign trail, and the Miami Project to Cure Paralysis, the nation's biggest research center for spinal cord injury.


Cancer Tests Don't Always Raise Survival Rates; Hospital Mastectomies
To the Editor:
The statement in a graphic in "Helping Health Insurers Say No" (Business Day, March 20), on the Milliman &amp; Robertson health coverage guidelines, that a woman can't be admitted to a hospital for a mastectomy is frightening.


Cancer Tests Don't Always Raise Survival Rates
To the Editor:
"Tests to Assess Risks for Cancer Raising Questions" (front page, March 27), on genetic testing, prompts me to warn against the "technical imperative," our tendency to do what is technically possible to people rather than what is clinically possible to do for them.


FINANCE BRIEFS
*
Bank of Montreal, Chicago branch, is selling $300 million of subordinated notes due in 2007 through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The notes are priced at 99.331 to yield 7.887 percent.
The noncallable issue is rated A+ by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $100 million of notes due in 1997 through Fuji Securities.
Callable in six months, the issue is priced at par to yield 7.12 percent.


Fulton Market Fire Investigators Find Blaze Was Deliberately Set
Fire Department officials said yesterday that the blaze that destroyed one of the two main commercial buildings at the Fulton Fish Market on Wednesday had been deliberately set.
And they described the noontime arson as a crude but ambitious act: the floor of a hallway in the building was soaked with a flammable liquid, and the structure's entire sprinkler system was intentionally shut off.
"I don't know if we can characterize it as professional," said Howard Safir, the New York City Fire Commissioner.
"But it was very effective."


For Children
Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus
Madison Square Garden  33d Street and Seventh Avenue  (212) 307-7171  Recommended ages: 2 and up  Through April 30
Neon-bright costumes, the newest addition to this 125-year-old three-ring circus, glow during certain performances when the lights go out, which happens more than you would expect.
The other big change this year is that the company's majordomo clown, David Larible, pulls spectators from the audience to goof around with him in the middle ring, which went over well with the chosen few.


Chicago's 'Cinderella Team' Scholars Are Suspected of Cheating
Student scholars from working-class Steinmetz High School were hailed as underdog heroes earlier this month when their team won the Illinois round of a nationwide academic competition, posting astonishing scores that humbled its elite competitors.
"The Cinderella Team!" the Steinmetz principal exulted.
Then the other shoe dropped.


Brahms Requiem Gets Masur Imprint
Kurt Masur might well have been expected to shine in Brahms's "German Requiem" with the New York Philharmonic and the Westminster Symphonic Choir on Wednesday evening, as in fact he did.
In his four seasons as music director of the orchestra, Mr.
Masur has generally risen superbly to big challenges, and Brahms has long been a specialty of his.
Then again, there were no guarantees.
Mr.
Masur visited Avery Fisher Hall in 1986 with the Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra, playing all the Brahms symphonies and the Requiem, and the results were sometimes soporific, notably in the Requiem.


Watson to Take Over Circa Pharmaceuticals in $600 Million Deal
Watson Pharmaceuticals Inc., a highly profitable generic drug maker, said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire Circa Pharmaceuticals Inc. in a stock deal worth $600 million.
The merger of the drug makers occurred amid increasing consolidation and price-cutting in the industry.
To protect profits, drug makers are striking up alliances and buying competitors to achieve cost savings in manufacturing, sales and distribution.


What Became of My Democrats?
When I landed in this country in 1942, I was 14 and very lucky.
I was in America.
I could as easily have wound up in Auschwitz.
To me, America meant freedom, opportunity and F.D.R.
Even though I later made my career on Wall Street -- not exactly a bastion of liberalism in the 50's and 60's -- there was never the slightest question in my mind about my political identifications.
I was a Democrat, a liberal, a believer in the New Deal and in government's ability and duty to improve the well-being of its people.
As chairman of New York's Municipal Assistance Corporation from 1975 to 1993 and an adviser to two governors, I began to see the world somewhat differently.
Irving Kristol once said that a conservative is a liberal who's been mugged.
I was mugged by deficits.
I did not change parties or become a social conservative.
But I became a fiscal conservative -- a balanced-budget liberal.


Belfour's Deal Extended
Goalie ED BELFOUR signed a three-year, $8 million contract extension with the Chicago Blackhawks yesterday.
Belfour, 29, will receive $2.5 million this season and $2.75 million in each of the next two seasons. (AP)


If They Play It, Will Fans Come?
Kenneth E. Smith sat in his windowless office at Shea Stadium in Queens this week with a telephone receiver at each ear.
He had the mustard guy on one end and the nacho guy on the other.
"When can you get that product in?" Mr.
Smith asked the mustard guy.
"Monday is good. In three weeks, we'll make the conversion from half gallons to gallons. All I want you to do is send the pumps directly to me. Attention: Kenny Smith."


Final Four Shows Its Business Side, Too
The four surviving teams of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament arrived here today, reaching a place that so many others had set as a goal.
The basketball establishment conducted its meetings, a function of the Final Four that existed long before the event generated revenues beyond any realistic expectations.
Fans, coaches, athletic directors, college presidents and equipment manufacturers gathered for the event that is responsible for the television revenue that generates more than 75 percent of the $203 million annual income for the N.C.A.A.
And as the gathering of the basketball industry began to take shape, Cedric Dempsey, the N.C.A.A. executive director, made a detailed 90-minute presentation to describe the financial problems of the membership and explain the group's stance against paying athletes.


Raid Ruffles Gamblers In Furs
The elderly ladies in their fancy furs started spilling onto the street after dark Wednesday in Brooklyn, complaining that their evening had been ruined by the police.
But neighbors said it was about time the gambling den in the basement of the Kings Highway Jewish Center was shut down.
When officers entered the building in Midwood, a tidy community of well-appointed homes in the heart of Brooklyn, they found 17 blackjack tables and a roulette wheel.
They also came upon some $13,000 in cash, indicating the operation wasn't exactly penny-ante gaming.


No Headline
"The coach gave us the  answer key last year. He told us: everybody cheats, that's the way the world works, and we were fools to just play by the rules." ANGELA LAM, captain of a high school academic team in Chicago.  [ A14:1. ]


Reflections on the World


An Array Of Beasts With Only Two Legs
Should a circus lead viewers to contemplate mortality and geometry?
Should it evoke Russian winters, European cabarets and tropical rain forests?
For those who think so, the Cirque du Soleil -- whose latest production, "Alegria," will be under its big top at Battery Park City through May 14 -- is the only game in town, and perhaps in the world.
Cirque du Soleil, which is based in Montreal, is probably the most pretentious circus anywhere, but it earns every pretension, using costumes, music and balletic motion to turn a variety show into a dreamlike unity.
"Alegria" provides laughs and gasps, as a circus must; it also has a note of apocalyptic melancholy.
Its trilingual (Italian-English-Spanish) theme song, declaimed by Francesca Gagnon with husky Edith Piaf peaks, calls for joy in an elegiac minor key.


COMPANY BRIEFS
DU PONT CO., Wilmington, Del., said its agricultural products unit had formed an alliance with the Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, one of India's national laboratories, to develop new chemistries to increase food production.
OLSTEN CORP., Melville, L.I., the temporary personnel and health care service company, signed a definitive agreement to buy a 50.1 percent stake in privately held Norsk Personal AS Norway, a staff service company, for $25 million as part of a strategy to expand into Continental Europe.


Corrections
The Pulse chart in some copies of The Metro Section yesterday, showing average home heating oil prices, omitted the names of the states represented.
A corrected chart appears on page B1.


AT THE MET WITH: Roy Lichtenstein; Disciple Of Color And Line, Master Of Irony
"I WOULDN'T believe anything I tell you," laughs the painter Roy Lichtenstein during a walk through the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Slim and fit, the master of Pop is now 71, his gray hair tightly pulled back into a ponytail, accentuating his narrow face, big eyes and beaked nose.
He's known as a reluctant talker, given to quips rather than speeches, but he has a fair amount to say in the museum.
Despite his puckish, self-deprecating humor and shy, soft-spoken demeanor, he is intent, serious and unpredictable.
He reacts to almost every work he passes, even if only with a polite "no comment," which is his way of registering dissatisfaction.
He wants to visit the Old Master, 19th- and 20th-century galleries.
More than 30 years ago, Mr.
Lichtenstein shocked the art world, then steeped in New York School abstraction, by painting images cribbed from phone books, bubble-gum wrappers and comic strips.
Coming after Pollock's drips, his scenes involving figures, and not just any figures but cartoonish ones, seemed radical and regressive.
But to hear him talk about art now, you might almost think he is a New York School painter: he's so focused on formal issues like line and color that he often doesn't notice the subject of a painting.
"I hadn't realized that this was a funeral," he says, surprised, after talking for several minutes about color in front of Manet's "Funeral."


Essex County's Bond Rating Is Downgraded
The financial crisis in Essex County deepened today when its bond rating was downgraded for the second time in four months, in part because of concern that an austerity plan for layoffs and service cuts would do little to address the county's sustained economic decline.
In taking the action, Moody's Investors Service, a major Wall Street bond-rating concern, said that the county's fiscal health was so poor that its leaders had little room to maneuver.
It also questioned whether all the reductions being considered to balance the budget were possible.


Kickback Scheme Admitted
The former chief financial officer for Adidas, U.S.A., admitted in court yesterday that he coerced a company consultant into paying him $80,000 in kickbacks.
In pleading guilty to a single count of tax evasion, the former executive, John Mangini, said that he didn't declare the money on his returns for 1988 and 1989.


Rail Transfer Gets Federal Aid
A new rail transfer station here designed to cut travel time for commuters to New York City will receive $101 million in Federal money.
Supporters say the station will save riders of the Bergen and Main lines 30 minutes going to and from Manhattan.


Diner's Journal
125 Years Old
When Billy's Restaurant opened in March of 1870, Tiffany's was still on Union Square, St.
Patrick's was a church on Spring Street and the bridges that link Manhattan to the rest of the world had yet to be built.
The Statue of Liberty had not arrived and the first elevators had just been introduced.
Billy's may have changed a bit since then, but not so you'd notice.
The 125-year-old restaurant, now owned by Joan Condren Borkowski, great-granddaughter of the founder, is still the archetypal family restaurant.
It's the sort of place where waitresses carry children around on their shoulders chanting, "I knew your mother when she was your age," and boys with long hair and big boots walk in with their parents, looking embarrassed but resigned.
And this may be New York City's lowest-key celebrity-laden restaurant.
Bill Blass loves Billy's, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan celebrated it in the Congressional Record, but you can get a table any time.
Not only that, they'll make you welcome.


Budget Brinkmanship in Albany
It was no mystery why Gov.
George Pataki went on television last night to try to rally support for his sweeping budget cutbacks.
Opinion polls show that New Yorkers are alarmed by the pain his budget would inflict.
Led by the Assembly Speaker, Sheldon Silver, Democrats would rather delay passage of a budget than accede to one that does so much damage.
If Mr.
Pataki wants a timely budget, he will have to compromise.
It is an old Albany axiom that the party that cares less about getting a rapid agreement ends up getting more out of the eventual deal.
Mr.
Pataki needs a budget agreement right now to establish his credentials as an effective Governor.
An impasse does not redound to his credit.


Home Video
This fall, makers of video games will step up the action.
As 16-bit games begin to fade, more powerful 32-bit games will take their place.
And beyond 32-bit lies 64-bit.
"You have to keep raising the bar," said Howard Lincoln, the chairman of Nintendo of America.
"You've got to give players more. The next game has to be better than the last."


Maine Has Final Say In Third Overtime
Up and down the ice they skated.
The Maine Black Bears and the Michigan Wolverines matched one another shift for furious shift.
Shot for wicked shot.
Save for sparkling save.
After three periods, the two teams, battling for a berth in the National Collegiate Athletic Association final, were deadlocked at 3-3.
It was time for overtime.
Another intense 20 minutes were played.
No one scored.
It was on to double overtime.
Who would blink first?
No one.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "IN SEARCH OF STRINDBERG," the Actors Studio, 432 West 44th Street, Clinton.
The Actors Studio and An Actor Works present Viveca Lindfors's improvisational performance, using texts from August Strindberg's letters, diaries, novels and plays, about this Swedish writer's life.
To close on Sunday.
Today, tomorrow and Sunday at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $10.
Information: (212) 757-0870.


Cancer Tests Don't Always Raise Survival Rates; Faith in Chemotherapy
To the Editor:
Chemotherapy is risky under any circumstances, but the deaths of Betsy A. Lehman and another unnamed individual may illustrate that the risks are not limited to drugs and to the practitioners who administer them (news article, March 24).


Add Insult To Injury: Coleman Is Hurt
He went down in a heap after scoring a layup and tied the score with the ensuing free throw.
Moments later, Derrick Coleman held his left wrist and walked slowly off the court with five seconds left in the game.
He may have taken the Nets' season with him.


U.S. Suspicions Over Killing May Mar Clinton's Haiti Trip
On the eve of a visit by President Clinton, relations between the United States and Haiti have suddenly become snarled in a dispute over whether Haiti's Interior Minister may have played a role in the killing this week of a leading opponent of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
American diplomatic and military officials said today that they told Mr.
Aristide more than a week ago that informants had named his Interior Minister, Brig.
Gen.
Mondesir Beaubrun, as the mastermind of a plot to assassinate Mireille Durocher Bertin, a lawyer who supported the military dictatorship that overthrew Mr.
Aristide in 1991.


The Self and Those Who Tend It
CONSTRUCTING THE SELF, CONSTRUCTING AMERICA  A Cultural History of Psychotherapy
By Philip Cushman
430 pages. Addison-Wesley. $27.50.
Given the ascendancy of the therapeutic ethos in America today, the expressed aim of Philip Cushman's new book is certainly a useful one: to trace evolving notions of the self in America and to provide a cultural history of psychotherapy as it has developed in this country in recent years.
But while "Constructing the Self, Constructing America" is peppered with fascinating insights, the volume is also filled with dogmatic assertions that ultimately color all of the author's arguments.
It should not be read as an objective or fair-minded cultural history, but as a highly ideological assessment of American psychotherapy and its social and political implications.


Wellpoint Prepares $1.8 Billion Swap to Get Health Systems
After a postponement to review an enhanced bid by Blue Shield of California, Wellpoint Health Networks prepared yesterday to sign an agreement to acquire Health Systems International in a $1.8 billion stock swap that would create one of the nation's biggest health maintenance organizations.
People close to the deal said that Leonard Schaeffer, chief executive of Wellpoint, had answered last-minute questions about the role of Dr.
Malik Hasan, the chairman of Health Systems who would also become chairman of the new company.
Dr.
Hasan would have the largest individual equity stake, 6 percent.
Mr.
Schaeffer would be chief executive.


U.S. Stars Keep Low Profile in Cup
Red clay underfoot, red-carpet treatment, red sauce for their pasta: Pete Sampras and Andre Agassi, the dream-team singles stars who decided to make a patriotic sacrifice and face Italy this weekend in the Davis Cup quarterfinal instead of taking a week's vacation, are experiencing Sicilian hospitality from a comfortable distance.
They reside in tower suites of Palermo's most luxurious hotel, a seaside art deco palace, and they have scores of uniformed police, with machine guns dangling from their belts, to guard them from harm.


METRO DIGEST
FULTON FIRE: ARSON IS OBVIOUS . . .
Fire Department officials said the blaze that destroyed one of the two main commercial buildings at the Fulton Fish Market on Wednesday had been deliberately set.
They said hallway floor had been soaked with a flammable liquid and the sprinklers had been intentionally shut off.
A1.  . . .
BUT PRIME SUSPECTS ARE NOT
As the search began for the arsonists, law enforcement officials said there was disagreement over whether to focus on the Mafia or on individuals who might have had a personal motive for setting the fire.
B4.


When They Talk About Fish, the Mellow Canadians Bellow
It has been great television theater watching the Fisheries Minister, Brian Tobin, almost nightly pouncing on Spanish fishermen as the plunderers of undersized fish off the coast of Newfoundland.
Tuesday he was on an old barge on the East River in New York, displaying a small-mesh Spanish net and a dead fish while announcing, "We're down now finally to one lost, lonely, unloved, unattractive little turbot, clinging by its fingernails to the Grand Banks of Newfoundland."


Full-Court Discipline for Summitt
When Pat Head Summitt became the Tennessee women's basketball coach, she was a 22-year-old graduate assistant who was coaching, teaching four classes and working on a master's degree.
Now, 21 seasons later, she is the most successful coach in this rapidly growing sport.
She has coached Tennessee to a 563-128 record, an average of 27-6 a season, and international teams to a 63-4 record, including a gold medal in the 1984 Olympics.
She has won three national championships and three times was voted coach of the year.
She earns $118,000 a year in salary, $250,000 when camp, shoe-endorsement, television and radio money is included.


Clinton's Favorite, AmeriCorps, Is Attacked by the Republicans
The National Service Corps, a fledgling Federal program modeled after the Peace Corps but intended to revitalize American communities, not foreign ones, takes up about a 30th of a percent of the nation's $1.6 trillion 1995 budget.
But small as it is, it makes a perfect bull's-eye.
From the moment that President Clinton called the corps a "proud achievement" that is "changing the way government works," Republican Congressional leaders started taking aim.


On Stage, and Off
A Scandal at 'Sunset'
A scandal involving "Sunset Boulevard" box-office figures shocked Broadway this week and led to a resignation offer by Edgar Dobie, the head of North American operations for the Really Useful Group, Sir Andrew Lloyd Webber's production company.
Sir Andrew released a letter yesterday saying that he was refusing Mr.
Dobie's resignation, but it took a rather paternalistic tone; Sir Andrew distanced himself from Mr.
Dobie's decision to inflate box-office figures, even calling it "idiotic." That may leave Mr.
Dobie little choice but to quit.


To Make Cyberspace Safe for the Family; Forum for the World
To the Editor:
The communications decency bill is based on a deep misunderstanding of the Internet and electronic communication.
It will be at best ineffective, at worst destructive of this new medium of human interaction.


Riley Faces Tough Choices With a Rare Full Roster
Pat Riley has more options. He also has more decisions.
For the first time this season, the Knicks have their full complement of frontcourt players.
Patrick Ewing, Charles Smith, Charles Oakley, Anthony Bonner and Herb Williams are all healthy.
Anthony Mason has returned from suspension.


Art in Review
Robin Bruch
J&amp;D Gallery and Art Center  66 Rivington Street  Lower East Side  Through April 17
Robin Bruch's paintings are relaxed but quietly ecstatic versions of geometric abstraction.
Each consists of a flexed, uneven triangle or diamond form framed with multiple borders and set against a plain, brushy ground or field of stripes.


Murdoch Publishing Unit Sells Mirabella to Hachette
Mirabella, adrift as a women's magazine in Rupert Murdoch's television and newspaper empire, has been acquired by Hachette Filipacchi Magazines, where it will be transformed from a monthly to a six-times-a-year publication.
The announcement was made yesterday by David J. Pecker, president and chief executive of Hachette, and Leslie Hinton, chief executive of News America Publishing Inc., a division of Mr.
Murdoch's News Corporation.
News America had put Mirabella up for sale a week ago, saying if it was not sold the May issue would be its last.
The purchase price was not disclosed.


BUSINESS DIGEST
U.S. Stock, Bond Markets Sluggish After Rate Cut
Although the dollar surged after the Bundesbank unexpectedly cut German interest rates, the move was shrugged off by stock and bond markets in the United States.


How Stupid Is Tommy? Maximally
Dumb-guy jokes!
Fat-guy jokes!
Buddy routines!
"Tommy Boy," the latest in a relentless stream of movies cranked out by the "Saturday Night Live" machine, is the very poor cousin of a dopey Jim Carrey movie.
Chris Farley plays Tommy, who graduates after seven years of college and returns to Sandusky, Ohio, to save the family car-parts factory from going under.
How stupid is Tommy?
He passes a history final by guessing that the founding fathers included Thomas Jefferson, James Madison and Herbie Hancock.
How funny is he?
Rarely as witty as that.
David Spade plays Richard, a supercilious management type assigned to take Tommy on the road and show him the ropes as a salesman.
Playing off their trademark "Saturday Night" characters, Mr.
Farley says "awesome" a lot and Mr.
Spade acts like a weasel.
Their best moments are some throwaway routines; they weep in the car as they sing along to the Carpenters' "Superstar." More often, the movie goes for stale, obvious sight gags like Tommy's slow destruction of Richard's precious car.
As mismatched-buddy teams go, Felix and Oscar have nothing to worry about here.


Yesterday in Washington
AID TO MEXICO Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato stalled a vote on a Senate bill to cut $13.5 billion from the current budget by introducing an amendment aimed at blocking the loan package to Mexico.
He agreed to delay consideration of his amendment after the Republican leadership scrambled to avoid a threatened Democratic filibuster.
BANKING -- House and Senate Republicans, including the chairmen of both banking committees, introduced bills that would substantially scale back consumer protection laws and laws requiring more lending in poor neighborhoods.
Republicans said the legislation would save money for banks and ultimately for consumers.
Opponents said the bills would increase consumers' risks and undermine affirmative action.


Haiti, After Six Months
With political and criminal violence resurgent in Haiti, President Clinton visits that troubled country today to mark the American role in restoring President Jean-Bertrand Aristide to office.
The renewed violence makes clear that while the six-month United States military occupation may have subdued turbulence in Haiti, it has not eliminated the notorious culture of political murder and paramilitary terror.
This week a leading Aristide opponent was assassinated and Washington suspects the Interior Minister may have ordered the killing.
As the American military mission gives way to a smaller United Nations peacekeeping force today, it is pertinent to ask how far this U.N. force should go in helping Haiti reshape its institutions so that democracy might have a chance to take hold.


Business Leaves the Lobby And Sits at Congress's Table
It all began with a routine E-mail message: Staff workers of the Senate Judiciary Committee were invited to attend a briefing on the latest version of a Republican bill that would bring far-reaching changes in the nation's health and environmental laws.
But the aides, mostly Democrats, were dumbfounded at the scene that unfolded on Wednesday in the committee's hearing room.
Seated at the head table beside the staff director, Larry Block, and answering many of the questions about the complex legislation were three lawyers from Hunton &amp; Williams, a Richmond, Va., law firm that has an extensive Washington practice representing dozens of electric utilities before environmental regulators and in court.


Castro Led Own Inquiry of Kennedy Assassination, F.B.I. Learned
The Federal Bureau of Investigation learned from an agent posing as an American Communist leader that Fidel Castro conducted his own investigation into the assassination of President John F. Kennedy a year after it happened, according to documents made public today.
The documents detail how the bureau handled this agent and one other posing as an American Communist official in the cold war.


Law Students Buy and Hold Pollution Rights
It was an unlikely scenario: Law school students bidding against corporate giants for pollution rights.
But at the Chicago Board of Trade on Monday, students from seven law schools vied with representatives of electric utilities for government-issued allowances to emit sulphur dioxide.
The law students had pooled $3,256 to buy 18 of the auction's 176,400 allowances, each of which permits the emission of one ton of sulphur dioxide.
Instead of selling the allowances for a profit at a future auction, the students said they would let them expire unused -- yielding a reduction, albeit a small one, in pollution.


CHRONICLE
It seems that even London's gin-and-tonic crowds are turning to non alcoholic drinks, and no less than PRINCE CHARLES himself wants to quench their thirst.
Duchy Originals, the Prince of Wales's food-products company, has developed two herbal fruit drinks aimed at the business-lunch set, The Daily Telegraph reported this week.
The drinks, Duchy No. 1 (red) and Duchy No. 3 (white), sell for the equivalent of $3.90 a bottle and are blended from fruits from royal orchards.


Marcel Ravidat Is Dead at 72; Found Lascaux Cave Paintings
Marcel Ravidat, who in 1940 discovered the Lascaux cave paintings whose brilliantly colored renderings of prehistoric animals had been sealed from view for 17,000 years, died on Wednesday at his home in the village Montignac in the Dordogne region of southwestern France.
He was 72.
Village officials said the cause of death was a heart attack.


Recalling Terror of Bridal Shop Holdup
The eyes that had seen the gun aimed at her looked puffy.
It seemed she could not bring herself to look at the two men sitting at the defense table 20 feet away.
The woman, Edith Schaeffer, 49, had just finished recounting the horrific day last March when she and her 50-year-old husband, Gerald, were shot and wounded during a robbery at the Vera Wang Bridal House on the Upper East Side.


Algerian Militant Issues Call For Government to Negotiate
For the first time, a leading figure of the armed Islamic movement seeking to overthrow Algeria's Government has appealed to the military leadership for a peaceful resolution of the civil war that has taken nearly 40,000 lives in the last three years.
The call for negotiations between Islamic militants and Algeria's secular establishment came from Madani Merzak, head of the Islamic Salvation Army, the armed wing of the banned Islamic Salvation Front, the largest political opposition party in Algeria.


Let's Not Trash Nature's Medicine Cabinet
To the Editor:
Your March 28 Science Times article reporting that a substance from birch trees can shrink malignant melanoma tumors has important implications for the debate over the Endangered Species Act.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.13
6.07
4.18
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.68
5.64
3.47
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.79
5.74
3.79
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.15
7.12
6.73
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.41
7.37
7.08
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.31
8.25
7.95
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.34
6.35
6.36
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 8


In Budget War, Pataki and Silver Fight a Battle on Television
Gov.
George E. Pataki and his chief political rival, Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, shifted their budget duel out of the back rooms and onto the airwaves tonight, firing bitter partisan salvos at each other in back-to-back, statewide televised addresses.
For Mr.
Pataki, a Republican, the air time allowed him to go over the heads of the protesters and lobbyists who have ringed the Capitol in recent weeks and speak directly to the people outside what he calls "the Albany beltway." He argues that most New Yorkers strongly support his proposals to shrink government, reduce welfare and cut taxes.


Mildred Henry Merrill; Radio Writer, 93
Mildred Henry Gross, who wrote for several radio drama serials popular during the 1940's and 50's, died on Tuesday in Stuart, Fla.
She was 93.
Mrs.
Gross, who wrote under the name Mildred Henry Merrill, spent the early part of her career in Detroit, where she was a staff writer at the radio station WXYZ, the originating station for many shows broadcast over the ABC Network.
She wrote episodes for shows including "The Long Ranger," "The Green Hornet" and "Preston of the Yukon."


Harold Weintraub, 49, Biologist Who Studied Cell Development
Harold M. Weintraub, a leading molecular biologist whose research advanced the understanding of cell development, died Tuesday in Seattle at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center.
He was 49 and lived in Seattle.
The cause was complications from glioblastoma, a fast-growing brain tumor, said the center, where he was being treated for the disease.


Poz Magazine Sale Set
Poz, a magazine in New York about AIDS and H.I.V., will be sold to a group that includes the publisher of Out, a magazine aimed at gay and lesbian readers.
Sean Strub, publisher of Poz, said yesterday that he had reached an agreement with George Slowik, publishing director of Out Publishing Inc.; Richard Perez-Feria, editor in chief of Poz, and a group of private investors to purchase Poz.
The terms of the deal were not disclosed.
Mr.
Strub will serve as chairman of the newly formed Poz Publishing and executive editor of Poz.
Mr.
Slowik will serve as president of Poz Publishing and publisher of Poz.


CHRONICLE
JUDITH DANIELS, a California breeder, owner and handler of Staffordshire bull terriers, was elected president of the American Kennel Club on Wednesday.
She becomes the first woman to head the nation's oldest dog care and dog registry organization, which is based in New York City.
Mrs.
Daniels, who rose through the ranks of the 111-year-old organization as a board member, delegate and licensed judge, said yesterday that she wanted to broaden the kennel club's mandate.


G.O.P. Halts Senate Budget Bill by Move on Mexico Aid
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato and a band of fellow Republicans stunned the Clinton Administration today and stalled a vote on a Senate budget-cutting bill by introducing an amendment aimed at blocking the American loan package to Mexico.
The surprise amendment left both Senate Democrats and the Administration momentarily shocked and fearful that even a discussion of cutting off aid could imperil the Mexico rescue plan.
And it sent the Republican leadership scrambling to avoid a threatened Democratic filibuster that would delay if not kill any chance of swift passage of the bill, which would cut $13.5 billion out of spending in the current fiscal year.


Stocks Generally Shrug Off The Bundesbank's Action
Germany's surprise interest-rate cut electrified the international currency markets yesterday and sent the dollar higher, but stock traders appeared to take little notice.
Indeed, against most expectations, the stock market closed mixed but mostly down yesterday.


Art in Review
Ted Croner
Howard Greenberg Gallery  120 Wooster Street (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through April 8
New York is a blazing city of light in Ted Croner's night photographs from 1947-48.
In those years, Mr.
Croner studied with Alexey Brodovitch, the influential designer and photographer, and his images reflect Brodovitch's teaching in their exuberant pursuit of the new.


Joel Shapiro Looks Back, Differently
Joel Shapiro has returned to his roots, and it's a good thing.
His current exhibition at PaceWildenstein on East 57th Street is his best in several years.
For a while, it seemed that Mr.
Shapiro, one of several talented Post-Minimalist sculptors who emerged in the late 1960's and early 70's, was becoming his generation's answer to Henry Moore.
He had all but perfected a race of semi-abstract falling figures, built in blocky beams of wood and then cast in bronze, that had proved quite popular; judging from the life style magazines, it often seemed that a Shapiro figure poolside was de rigueur in Hollywood.
Perhaps Mr.
Shapiro's recent commission for the Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington pushed him to greater depths in his art, or a moment of reassessment.
That piece intensified the drama of his staple forms: not only the ambiguously unbalanced figure whose skewed beamlike limbs seemed to signal human catastrophe, but also the abbreviated geometric house shape, which for this occasion was presented precariously on edge.
In that work, Mr.
Shapiro depicted a world being blown apart with a clarity of form and meaning that can be the mark of a successful -- which is to say, accessible -- public monument.


Strike Slows Commuters In France
Thousands of railroad, subway, bus and airline employees in the Paris region went on a 24-hour strike today to push for wage increases, creating inconvenience for travelers and a political opening for France's presidential candidates.
The leading candidates were careful not to alienate voters by condemning the strikes.


Marbury Wins Honor
STEPHON MARBURY was named player of the year on Parade magazine's all-America high school boys basketball team yesterday.
Marbury, the 6-foot-2-inch point guard from Abraham Lincoln High School in Brooklyn, averaged 29 points, 9 assists and 4 steals a game this season.
He heads a list of 40 players -- to be announced Sunday -- that includes point guard SHAMMGOD WELLS of La Salle Academy in Manhattan, RYAN BLACKWELL, a 6-8 senior from Sutherland High School in Pittsford, N.Y., and MARK BLOUNT, a 7-foot senior from Dobbs Ferry High in Westchester County.


Back From the Brink, the Legal Services Corporation Discovers It's in Danger Again
It was a heady reception at the White House last September when old and young civil rights lawyers and judges gathered in the East Room to celebrate the survival of the Legal Services Corporation.
After more than a decade of fighting Republican Administrations that had tried to shutter its doors, the corporation had finally found itself with many supporters sprinkled throughout the highest ranks of power in Washington.
Its two strongest allies were in the White House -- a President who had long supported its mission of providing legal services to the poor and downtrodden, and his wife, who had once served as the corporation's leader in the late 1970's, its period of expansion.


Insurer to Settle Milwaukee Bias Lawsuit
The American Family Mutual Insurance Company of Madison, Wis., has agreed to pay $14.5 million to settle a lawsuit accusing it of discrimination against black people in Milwaukee.
The settlement, announced yesterday by the company, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, the American Civil Liberties Union and the United States Justice Department, was the most costly insurance-company settlement ever for discrimination charges.
It comes as the Department of Housing and Urban Development is preparing rules to make clear that the Federal Housing Act prohibits discrimination in the sale of homeowners insurance.


Hitting the Route In a French Comedy
Marion Vernoux's "Nobody Loves Me" plays like a lighthearted homage to Francois Truffaut, with its rueful view of romance and a story that unites two of Truffaut's stars.
Bernadette Lafont and Jean-Pierre Leaud cross paths glancingly as former lovers, both the worse for wear.
She is now a grandmother.
He looks authentically exhausted by the admiration of countless women.
Still, they speak with Truffaut's knowingness when she asks, "Did you cheat on me much?" and he answers, "None of your business."


A Surprise German Rate Cut Propels the Dollar Up by 2%
Moving against a powerful surge by the German mark and a punishing fall in the American dollar, Germany's central bank cut key interest rates today by up to half a percentage point.
The rate cut immediately propelled the dollar up more than 2 percent against the mark to 1.4083 marks in New York; it traded as low as 1.3758 in Europe in the early morning.


Yankees-MSG: No Progress
As opening day loomed with replacements in Yankee uniforms, the president of Madison Square Garden is pessimistic that the team will retreat on its demand that the MSG Network make its full $44 million payment for television rights.
"Optimism is not very high at this point," Dave Checketts said yesterday.
"If they're banking on an end to the strike, that's a tough bet to make."


Top Pension Regulator Sees A Narrowing Benefits Gap
The worst is past in the gap between promised pension benefits and the money set aside to pay them at companies with inadequate pension plans, and the shortfall, now $71 billion, should shrink by 70 percent over the next 15 years, the nation's top pension regulator said yesterday.
The gap in the plans, which cover 8 million people, grew 25 percent in 1993, the latest year for which data are available, after increasing 31 percent in 1992.


Boulez Named to Post At Chicago Symphony
Pierre Boulez, the French composer and conductor, has been appointed principal guest conductor of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra, an ensemble with which he has made several acclaimed recordings in recent years.
The post is Mr.
Boulez's first tie to an American orchestra since 1978, when he gave up the podium of the New York Philharmonic after a sometimes contentious seven-year tenure as music director.
The appointment makes Mr.
Boulez part of an artistic triumvirate with Daniel Barenboim, the Chicago Symphony's music director, and Sir Georg Solti, Mr.
Barenboim's predecessor, who holds the title music director laureate.
Mr.
Boulez brings to the orchestra an expertise in 20th-century music that complement's his colleagues' preference for mainstream repertory.
He is to conduct one of the orchestra's three performances at the Pierre Boulez Festival in Tokyo in May.


Clinton Warns Florida of Peril in Congress
President Clinton took his campaign against the House Republican juggernaut to the legislators and people of Florida today, urging them to take a critical look at proposals he said would work against the fast-growing state.
The appeal was the most comprehensive yet in the President's effort to draw the line against the crime and welfare measures already approved by the House of Representatives.
The bills would consolidate Federal spending into block grants, but Mr.
Clinton warned that the approach could hurt the states that need it most.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS gets back on track by winning a big-name electronics account.
LOWE &amp; PARTNERS/SMS, in a coup, ended a string of new-business disappointments yesterday when Sony Electronics named Lowe agency of record on its account, with billings estimated at $50 million.
Lowe has built such advertising themes as "Pardon me, would you have any Grey Poupon?" into catch phrases and built a bare-chested hunk named Lucky into an icon for Diet Coke.
The agency is also building interest in Mercedes-Benz with a commercial featuring the 1970 Janis Joplin song that mocks the car as a symbol of materialism.


Sports of The Times; A Sense Of Place And History
DURING the flight from New York to Seattle on Wednesday evening, I thought about the overwhelming response to Michael Jordan's 55-point performance against the Knicks a day earlier.
Radio programs, from all-news formats to talk shows, were consumed by reaction to Jordan's return to the Garden.
What struck me was the consistent expression of love and admiration for a man whom most callers probably know only through his commercials and his on-court exploits.


Accounts
*
Bell Sports, Scottsdale, Ariz., to Goodby, Silverstein &amp; Partners, San Francisco, to handle its bicycle helmet account, previously handled by various agencies on a project basis.
The billings were estimated at $7 million.
To take the Bell account, Goodby, Silverstein resigned the account of Specialized Bicycle Components, Morgan Hill, Calif.; those billings were not disclosed.


A Second Carjacking Charge
To friends and Montclair neighbors, Earl Bethel was a model citizen, a 19-year-old college student who had never been in trouble.
Then he was arrested earlier this month on charges of shooting a West Caldwell woman and stealing her car.
Now he has been charged with a second carjacking and shooting that took place last year outside a Union go-go bar.
The police said the female employee he tried to shoot escaped by ramming his car.
LAWRENCE VAN GELDER


At Last, Devils Earn The Mark Of Winners
The Devils, a team that some people considered a favorite to win the Stanley Cup, have been mired in mediocrity all season.
Tonight, though, they reached a new plateau.
For the first time this season, New Jersey is over the .500 mark.
It took the Devils 33 games to accomplish the elusive feat, but they did it in style at the Spectrum with a 4-3 triumph over the Atlantic Division-leading Philadelphia Flyers.


International Briefs; In Brief
*
Nokia Oy, a Finnish mobile phone producer, said yesterday that it had received an order worth 800 million marks ($578 million) to expand a German mobile phone network, one of its largest orders ever.
The contract was awarded by E-Plus Mobilfunk G.m.b.H.


On My Mind; Official Israeli Advice
Why has terrorism against Israelis exploded since the signing of peace principles between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization on the White House lawn on Sept. 13, 1993?
Is the P.L.O., a collection of groups united by a detestation of Israel and a determination for Palestinian independence, capable of carrying out its commitment to combat anti-Israeli terrorism?


Mother Goes On Trial In 5 Deaths
The trial of a mother charged with killing her five young children from 1965 to 1971 opened today with a prosecutor saying that the woman had admitted to suffocating them because she could not tolerate their crying.
But the woman's lawyer accused the prosecution of coercing her into signing that confession, a document that she did not understand because she did not have her reading glasses -- or her lawyer -- with her at the time.


JUDGE OVERTURNS PENTAGON POLICY ON HOMOSEXUALS
A Federal judge yesterday struck down the military's new policy on homosexuals, saying it violated the First and Fifth Amendments and catered to the fears and prejudices of heterosexual troops.
In the first legal rebuff to the policy, enacted into law in 1993 and in effect for the last year, the judge, Eugene H. Nickerson of Federal District Court in Brooklyn, dismissed the Government's argument that morale and discipline would suffer if openly homosexual men and women were allowed to serve in the military.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-13  POPE WRITES ON 'GOSPEL OF LIFE'  In an encyclical letter, Pope John Paul II used his strongest language ever to condemn abortion and euthanasia and voiced strong opposition to the death penalty.
A1  Reaction to the Pope's encyclical followed established lines.
A13  HAITIAN-U.S.
TENSIONS RISE  On the eve of a visit by President Clinton, relations between the U.S. and Haiti have become snarled over whether Haiti's Interior Minister played a role in the killing of an opponent of President Aristide.
A1


F.C.C., as Expected, Alters Rules Between Phone Companies
The Federal Communications Commission drew howls of protest from local telephone companies today by ordering them to cut about $1 billion off the prices they charge companies like AT&amp;T, MCI Communications and Sprint to connect with local customers.
But it remains far from obvious that consumers will get any of that money.
The real winners today were the long-distance companies, which have been chafing for years at the billions of dollars they pay to the regional Bell companies and to independent phone providers like GTE.


INSIDE
Why Did Term Limits Fail?
Even if House members were aware of the potency of a vote against term limits, analysts said, they figured they could get away with it.
"It's called the advantage of incumbency," one analyst said.
Page A26.
D'Amato's Surprise
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato set off a furor by proposing an amendment that would block the American loan package to Mexico.
Page A25.
Germany Cuts Rates
Moving to halt the mark's surge, Germany's central bank cut key interest rates.
The dollar immediately climbed more than 2 percent against the mark, and European stock and bond markets rallied.
Page D1.


Pope's Letter: A 'Sinister' World Has Led to 'Crimes Against Life'
Following are excerpts from Pope John Paul II's encyclical letter "Evangelium Vitae" ("Gospel of Life"), which was issued in English and seven other languages today:
In the new prospects opened up by scientific and technological progress, there arise new forms of attacks on the dignity of the human being.


Art in Review
Frank Moore  Sperone Westwater 142 Greene Street SoHo Through April 22
Frank Moore is a political painter and a retro-realist who uses a beguiling and familiar representational style to address two of the more sinister facts of contemporary life: AIDS and the destruction of the environment.
Like David Salle and Ross Bleckner, he recycles past styles, but fusion, rather than disjunction, is his aim.
His narratives blend Magical, Social and Photo Realism, "referencing" (to use the fashionable participle) trompe-l'oeil and Northern Renaissance painting, folk and commercial art, Titian, Frederic Edwin Church and the Hudson River School.


Art in Review
Andrea Zittel
Andrea Rosen Gallery  130 Prince Street  SoHo  Through April 8
Among the funniest sights at a Whitney Biennial not short on humor are Andrea Zittel's faux-Bauhaus "Comfort Units," elaborate service carts on wheels that permit such household fixtures as a vanity table, a desk and a kitchen unit to be brought bedside as needed.


Prosecutors Say Another Witness Saw Simpson Put Black Bag on Airport Trash Can
Prosecutors in the O. J. Simpson case have said they have another witness who saw Mr.
Simpson place a black duffel bag atop a garbage can at Los Angeles International Airport last June.
They also plan to haul one of the brown trash receptacles into court and introduce it into evidence.
Attempting to fill one of the gaping holes in its case -- how and where Mr.
Simpson could have jettisoned the murder weapon and bloody clothes after he killed Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman -- prosecutors say Mr.
Simpson stuffed a black duffel bag into a garbage can next to a skycap station shortly before boarding a flight to Chicago.


Market Place; The German rate cut gives a lift to European stock markets.
BY shaving its key interest rates yesterday at a time many feared it might do the reverse, the German Bundesbank has given a lift to German stocks and other European equity markets.
Earlier this week, the German mark's renewed strength against the dollar and leading European currencies had pushed the Frankfurt stock market's 30-stock DAX index down to an 18-month low of 1,910.96.
This meant that in March alone it had lost some 9 percent of its value, wiping out much of the spectacular gain it posted during 1992 and 1993 when the smell of Germany's coming recovery sent it soaring from 1,450 to a high of 2,271.


Waterloo Music Festival Faces Changes, at Least
The Waterloo Festival, a hybrid music school and classical music festival that has been presented since 1976 in a restored Colonial village near Stanhope, N.J., will be radically restructured this summer, a spokesman for Waterloo Village said yesterday.
But there is doubt among managers in the music world that the 20th Waterloo Festival will take place at all.
Normally, the concerts begin in the third week of June, but with less than three months to go, even the festival's new music director, Yoav Talmi, has not been told what, if anything, he will be doing there.


Giving Away Furniture Has Become Political
To the Editor:
Until recently, whenever I had household goods or furniture to get rid of, I could call Furnish a Future, a division of the Partnership for the Homeless.
They had a warehouse in Queens or Brooklyn where the homeless who were lucky enough to find housing could come and pick out what they needed.


Giuliani Backs Gun Controls in Visit to Capital
Seeking to raise his profile as a spokesman for the cities, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani came to the capital today and embraced Republican efforts to free localities from Federal regulation and roll scores of social programs into lump-sum grants to the states.
But Mr.
Giuliani also staked out some positions that put him at odds with many Republicans in Washington, calling for national gun control regulations and warning against some provisions of the welfare bill recently approved by the House.


Treasury Securities Prices Retreat After Early Gains
Prices of Treasury securities slumped yesterday, after a brief bounce from early gains in the dollar.
The dollar surged after the German central bank lowered interest rates and four other European central banks followed suit.
A stronger dollar makes securities denominated in it more attractive to foreign investors.


Ralph Levitz, 82, Furniture Executive
Ralph Levitz, former chairman of the Levitz Furniture Corporation, died on Saturday at his vacation home in La Costa, Calif.
He was 82 and lived in Palm Beach, Fla.
He suffered a long illness due to a stroke, his family said.


Inside Art
And the Winner Is. . . .
The fate of the last big estate of the spring season has been decided, and once it was determined that the art would go to auction, word from inside Sotheby's and Christie's revealed that it was a tight race.
Sotheby's is the winner.
The prize is Margaret Kahn Ryan's collection of French Impressionist and Post-Impressionist paintings, which includes works by Monet, Pissarro and Cezanne and is estimated by Sotheby's to be worth more than $10 million.


Motor Voter Law Needs The Funds to Do Its Job
To the Editor:
In the proposed 1995-96 New York State budget, Gov.
George E. Pataki attempts to reduce financing for the National Voter Registration Act, known as the motor-voter law.


Isles Sunk by 3 Goals in a 5-Minute Penalty
With next Friday's trading deadline rapidly closing in, and the reluctant-to-trade General Manager Don Maloney admittedly talking to everybody within earshot, the Islanders found yet another way to lose at Nassau Coliseum tonight.
This time, it was a game-misconduct penalty to Vladimir Malakhov that did them in.
The Boston Bruins scored three goals during the 5-minute major to offset a strong start by the Islanders, then coasted much of the rest of the way for a 3-2 victory before 11,094 frequently booing customers.
The setback plummeted the Islanders to 1-8-1 over their last 10 games.


To Make Cyberspace Safe for the Family
To the Editor:
"All the News That's Fit to Print" is still on your masthead, as incredible a thought as that might seem after reading "Mr. Exon's Foolish Farewell" (editorial, March 28).


Watts Journal; A Death In Ghetto, But Faith Doesn't Die
The sounds of mourning at the tiny Lighthouse Church in the heart of Watts today were the sounds of routine: the beeping of a forklift moving pallets of donated food, the bouncing of a basketball on the hard asphalt of the courtyard and the clatter of a police helicopter circling the Jordan Downs housing project across the street.
The Rev.
Edward Bynum was on the telephone as usual, dealing with this detail or that, and several of his grown children were downstairs overseeing the food-distribution program that daily gives the church the look of a crowded refugee center.


Term Limits: A Victory for Good Sense
House Republican defectors joined a majority of House Democrats this week to derail the push for Congressional term limits, perhaps the most popular clause in the Republicans' Contract With America.
Cynics may lay the defeat to selfish members protecting their comfortable incumbency.
Historians taking a broader view should see it as a triumph of wisdom.
In 10 hours of floor debate, no one put it better than Henry Hyde, the impeccably Republican 11th-term Representative from Illinois.
"I just can't be an accessory to the dumbing down of democracy," he said.
"America needs leaders, it needs statesmen, it needs giants -- and you don't get them out of the phone book."


Jefferson's Entanglements, In History And in Love
IN a leafy glade, Thomas Jefferson joins a group of French aristocrats as they coyly debate the merits of passion versus intellect.
This is how "Jefferson in Paris," the most gilded Merchant-Ivory film yet, rearranges Jefferson's famous "My Head and My Heart" love letter into a battle of bons mots.
Here and throughout the film, the effect is that of a parlor game, bristling with erudition and all the more imposing when the parlor happens to be at Versailles.
Certainly the Merchant-Ivory-Jhabvala team has a more workable let-'em-eat-cake philosophy than Marie Antoinette did.
There are 10 films within the biographical material for "Jefferson in Paris" -- but is there one?
"Jefferson in Paris" is this triumvirate's trickiest undertaking, a film jam-packed with a staggering range of personal and historical data.
The French and American Revolutions both figure in this story, as does the institution of slavery and Jefferson's tortured complicity in perpetuating it.
The interests (politics, architecture, art, gardening and music, among others) and inventions (a letter-copying device seen during the film's opening credits) that shaped Jefferson as a true American Renaissance man are also represented.


The Next Logical Step In Industrial Scenes
Bernd and Hilla Becher's first book, "Anonymous Sculptures" (1970), invited you to read the forms of lime kilns, cooling towers, blast furnaces, mineheads, water towers, gas tanks and silos as if they were Minimal or abstract sculptures.
The diagonal scaffolding of the mineheads, for instance, bore a striking resemblance to Robert Grosvenor's famous 1965 sculpture "Tapanga," with its cantilevered diagonal arm. ("Tapanga," in turn, was modeled on the Kitt Peak solar observatory in Arizona, designed in 1962 by Skidmore, Owings &amp; Merrill.)
The idea of an exchange between art and industry was very much in the air in the 1960's.


Guatemalan Military Has Violent History
To the Editor:
Gen.
Hector Gramajo of Guatemala offers highest praise for Col.
Julio Roberto Alpirez, the man accused of murdering one United States citizen and the husband of another, Jennifer Harbury, calling him "a soldier above all" (news article, March 26).


The Spoken Word
"BRAVE NEW ART WORLD," Tishman Auditorium, New School, 66 West 12th Street, Greenwich Village.
A symposium on "Patronage, Politics and the Public Function of Art," a discussion of newly emerging structures of artistic production and distribution, sponsored by the Parsons School of Design.
Participants include nationally prominent artists, curators and critics.
Tomorrow from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 229-8942.


Trump Is Selling Stock
Donald J. Trump has formed a holding company and will sell 10 million shares in a public offering to raise money for new casino projects in New Jersey and Indiana, according to a statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Mr.
Trump will also make a public offering of $135 million in bonds to help raise money for buying and opening a casino in his Trump Regency hotel and financing a riverboat casino in Gary, Ind.


1 Woman, 1 Vote and 1 for the Books
VILLAGE boards are pretty much like small ap pliances as long as they get the job done, most people don't spend time thinking about them.
For 76 1/2 years, Felicia Deyrup barely glanced at village hall.
Until a few months ago, she had never gone to a village meeting.
Now, she's bubbling with ideas about "involving the public" and "opening the process."


Plane Crash Investigators Cite Ignorance on Safety
Federal safety experts investigating the crash of a DC-8 cargo plane last month during a takeoff from Kansas City, Mo., have concluded that the Federal Aviation Administration official with primary responsibility for overseeing the safety of the airline was ignorant of crucial aspects of its training and policies, and of his agency's regulations.
The National Transportation Safety Board, an independent Federal agency that investigates air crashes, said yesterday in a letter to the aviation agency that it had not reached a final determination on why the plane crashed, killing the three crew members, but that the agency should scrutinize its oversight of the airline, Air Transport International, of Little Rock, Ark., as well as to examine the airline.


Grace Thrown Into Turmoil Over Sexual Harassment Allegations
If directors of W. R. Grace &amp; Company thought they were putting the past behind them when they released a cryptic statement announcing the unexpected resignation of J. P. Bolduc, the chief executive, on March 2, they have had a rude awakening.
Yesterday, the company was forced to admit that Mr.
Bolduc was let go after longstanding allegations of sexual harassment had come to the attention of the board.
With that, what was already one of the most bizarre corporate dramas in memory got worse.
Grace now must answer questions about its past management practices, its future leadership, its legal liabilities, the candor of its directors and its ability to satisfy the powerful institutional investors who hold the bulk of its stock.


At Home Abroad; Time Marches On
Those of us who live by freedom of the press must recognize that sometimes the freedom can be perverted into arrogance.
A media giant does cruel injustice to an individual -- and then uses its power to try to keep the victim from repairing the damage.
A particularly distasteful example is presented by a case now in the English courts.
It involves the American media colossus Time Warner and its news magazine, Time.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about money transferred secretly by the C.I.A. to Guatemala in the early 1990's referred imprecisely to the recipients.
They were military intelligence officials, not a military government.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a plan to freeze rates charged by the Long Island Lighting Company misstated the number of people it employs.
It is 6,000, not 600,000.


6 Are Arrested in Guard's Death
Six men were under arrest yesterday in the fatal shooting of an unarmed, off-duty prison guard earlier this month.
The guard was caught in the crossfire of a gang shootout as he tried to break up a fistfight.


Republicans Seek a Cutback In Lending Rules for Banks
House and Senate Republicans, including the banking committee chairmen, united today behind bills that would scale back substantially banking laws that provide for consumer protection and more lending in poor neighborhoods.
The bills, introduced today, would make more than 60 changes in Federal laws.
Some of the changes are broad, like an exemption for small and medium-sized banks from the Community Reinvestment Act, which requires that financial institutions lend in poor neighborhoods as well as in rich ones.


In Nigeria, a Strongman Tightens the Vise
Whenever he has sensed a challenge since seizing power 18 months ago, Nigeria's latest military dictator has consistently relied on two reflexes: dismissals and mass arrests.
The dictator, Gen.
Sani Abacha, who rules by decree, has dissolved labor unions and jailed their leaders, dismissed dozens of army officers, repeatedly shuffled his Government, shut down newspapers and even reached deep into the bureaucracy to fire anonymous civil servants.


Joining Race, Specter Attacks the Right
Senator Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania announced his candidacy for the Republican Presidential nomination today and, saving his severest criticism for the right wing of his own party, said the nominee should not be "captive to the demands of the intolerant right."
With other 1996 Republican contenders casting themselves as Washington outsiders, Mr.
Specter, now in his third Senate term, became the first candidate -- and may well prove the only one -- to announce his campaign in the capital.
His backdrop was the Lincoln Memorial, a spot he picked because, he said, he shares with Lincoln a "deep commitment to equality and opportunity."


Student Financing of Lobby Is Tightened
In a close vote today that followed an emotional debate, a bill that would make fund-raising more difficult for a student-backed advocacy group passed the New Jersey Senate.
With 21 votes needed for passage, the bill was approved, 22 to 15.
It will now go to Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman, who is expected to sign it.


Bayno Leaving UMass To Coach at U.N.L.V.
BILLY BAYNO, a Massachusetts assistant, was hired yesterday as the third coach in three years at Nevada-Las Vegas.
He replaces TIM GRGURICH.
It is the first head coaching job for Bayno, 32, who served as the graduate assistant under LARRY BROWN at Kansas and under P.J.
CARLESIMO at Seton Hall before joining the UMass staff. (AP)


Specter Enters Race
Senator Arlen Specter opened his drive for the Republican Presidential nomination with an attack on his party's right wing.
Page A24. (Stephen Crowley/The New York Times)


At the Bar; A South African jurist focuses on Bosnia.
While lawyers in the United States fret justifiably about their image, that is not the case in South Africa.
There, lawyers retain a more noble reputation, the legacy of the truly heroic role many played in the years before Nelson Mandela came to power.
These men and women are widely admired for how they operated in the peculiar legal twilight that existed under the country's white minority Government; the same rulers who used the Government ruthlessly as an instrument of repression simultaneously yearned to be seen as civilized adherents to the rule of law, Western-style.
It was in the odd territory created between the two elements that Richard C. Goldstone flourished as an advocate of human rights.


Clinton Orders Wide Review Of U.S. Activity in Guatemala
The swirl of allegations over the United States role in two deaths ordered by a Guatemalan colonel spread today into a broad Government-wide review of the affair.
The inquiries, ordered by President Clinton on Wednesday, are being conducted by Inspectors General at the Justice Department, the State Department, the Central Intelligence Agency and the Pentagon.
The Pentagon is also conducting reviews at three of its agencies -- the National Security Agency, the Defense Intelligence Agency and the Army.


Moderate Republicans Stress Tolerance and Inclusion
Feeling under siege, 1,000 moderates from the Republican Party gathered to pay their dues last night in support of candidates who oppose the rising strength of their party's right wing.
The Committee for Political Responsibility, a two-year-old political action committee based in Princeton, N.J., drew more than 1,000 contributors at a $1,000-a-plate dinner at the Sheraton New York Hotel in Manhattan to honor Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey and Gov.
George E. Pataki of New York.
Lewis M. Eisenberg, the committee's chairman, said both Governors are the kind of "fiscally conservative, socially inclusive" Republicans the committee wants to support.


Seeking Safety in Tanzania


Stoppard's Comedy Of 1809 And Now
THERE'S no doubt about it.
"Arcadia" is Tom Stoppard's richest, most ravishing comedy to date, a play of wit, intellect, language, brio and, new for him, emotion.
It's like a dream of levitation: you're instantaneously aloft, soaring, banking, doing loop-the-loops and then, when you think you're about to plummet to earth, swooping to a gentle touchdown of not easily described sweetness and sorrow.
That's the play.


Tempers Flare Over Simpson DNA Expert's Drug Use
In an unusually personal and verbally violent exchange, lawyers in the O. J. Simpson murder case argued today over whether a Nobel Prize winner for his work on DNA and a prominent defense witness should be questioned about his drug use, drinking habits and other aspects of his life.
A prosecutor, Rockne P. Harmon, suggested that the witness, Kary Mullis, Mullis be taken to a detoxification center before being allowed to testify.
This prompted an objection from Peter Neufeld, a defense lawyer, and then a warning to the prosecutor from Judge Lance A. Ito: "I really don't need to hear that sort of thing."


Division I Job for Alford
STEVE ALFORD, who helped Indiana win the 1987 National Collegiate Athletic Association championship, was hired yesterday to coach Southwest Missouri State.
Alford, 30, guided Division III Manchester (Ind.) College to a 78-29 mark the past three and a half seasons.
He succeeds MARK BERNSEN, who resigned. (AP)


