Comeback Effort Is Bobbled Away
After battling back from a 5-0 deficit to tie the game in the ninth inning, the Mets fell victim to the baseball gods, who apparently didn't want Hideo Nomo to be disappointed on his birthday.
Brett Butler awakened a Dodger team that was stunned by the Mets' comeback with a single to left to start the bottom of the ninth.
After Butler stole second, Jose Offerman followed with another single off reliever Jerry DiPoto, moving Butler to third.
Mike Piazza was intentionally walked to load the bases.


Crossfire Between Gangs Kills Pregnant Bystander, 22, in Bronx
A falling-out between drug gangs claimed a pregnant 22-year-old woman yesterday when she was caught in the crossfire and shot to death while on her way to a store in the Bronx, the police said.
The police said the victim, Brenda Garcia, was in the first three months of pregnancy, and had left her two small children at home when she was shot in the East Tremont section.


New York Executions, For and Against
At a news conference, right, Gov.
George E. Pataki spoke with three women who have had relatives in law enforcement killed in the line of duty.
The women are, from left, Janet McDonald, Maryanne Sammartano and Barbara Nugent. (Thomas Dallal for The New York Times; Associated Press)


Critic's Choice/Theater; Nakedness Reveals More Than Nudity
There is nudity in the theater, and there is nakedness.
Nudity, which can be seen in abundance on New York stages just now, tends to be decorative, silly or titillating.
It's entertainment.
Nakedness is something else altogether: it exposes skin to expose much more.
The best example of nakedness on or Off Broadway can be found at the tiny Judith Anderson Theater in the very first minutes of "Ecstasy," the highly (and justly) acclaimed production of Mike Leigh's slice of working-class life in northwest London.


Agency Issues Warning for Drug Widely Used for Heart Disease
Federal health officials warned yesterday that a drug prescribed to treat high blood pressure and heart disease should be used "with great caution, if at all," and that the safety of related drugs taken by millions of Americans was unclear.
The warning from the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute applied specifically to large doses of the short-acting form of nifedipine, which is marketed as Procardia by Pfizer Inc. and as Adalat by the Bayer company.


Companhia Siderurgica Nacional reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Bill to Spur Building Downtown Is Not Dead, Senate Leader Says
The leader of the State Senate said today that the Senate would reconvene in October to pass a tax abatement bill for development in lower Manhattan, which had been killed after a partisan political squabble in June.
The bill is designed to spur renovation of aging commercial buildings south of City Hall by reducing city taxes and utility costs for commercial tenants who relocate to the area and owners who invest in improving their buildings.


Where Monkeys Are the Rulers
In outbuildings of the great pilgrimage temple at Puri in eastern India, as at many other such sites throughout Asia, monkeys rule.
Cheeky and aggressive, they make it plain that the territory is theirs and theirs alone, and visitors who neglect to carry an appeasing morsel or a sturdy stick trespass at their peril.
Such precautions might seem to be in order even at the Asia Society these days because of the smart, atmospherically installed exhibition titled "Monkey," which takes the ubiquitous presence of these animals in Asian art as its theme.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in Manhattan that are to close soon:  Closing This Weekend "LONDON SUITE," Union Square Theater, 100 East 17th Street.
Neil Simon's four one-act comedies, set in a fashionable hotel.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $45.
Information: (212) 307-4100.
"TIME AND THE WIND," John Houseman Studio Theater, 450 West 42d Street, Clinton.
A musical by Galt MacDermot and Norman Matlock; directed by Louis Johnson.
Through tomorrow.
Performances: Today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 5 and 8:30 P.M.
Tickets: $25.
Information: (212) 239-4324.
"TROILUS AND CRESSIDA," Delacorte Theater, Central Park, reachable from the 81st Street entrance.
The Shakespeare drama, with Neal Huff and Elizabeth Marvel; directed by Mark Wing-Davey.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today through Sunday at 8 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 539-8500.
"THE ILLUSIONS SUITE," Cutler Gallery, 379 West Broadway, SoHo.
Drawings by Clive Barker.
Through today.
Free.
Hours: 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Information: (212) 219-1577.
Closing Next Weekend "SEVEN CONTEMPORARY NORWEGIAN ARTISTS IN NEW YORK," Thomas Nordanstad Gallery, 289 Hudson Street, at Spring Street, West Village.
Through Sept. 9.
Free.
Hours: Tuesdays through Fridays, noon to 6 P.M.; Saturdays, 1 P.M. to 6 P.M.; closed Sundays and Mondays.
Information: (212) 627-6628.
"GERMAN STAGE DESIGN PRESENT AND FUTURE," New York Public Library for the Performing Arts, 40 Lincoln Center Plaza, at Amsterdam Avenue and 65th Street.
Works by Achim Freyer, Dieter Hacker, Johannes Shutz and Erich Wonder.
Through Sept. 9.
Free.
Hours: Mondays and Thursdays, noon to 8 P.M.; Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Fridays and Saturdays, noon to 6 P.M.; closed Sundays.
Information: (212) 870-1630.


Retailers Say August Sales Were Sluggish
Many of the nation's large retailers yesterday reported sluggish sales in August.
Industry analysts attributed the lackluster results in part to warm weather that left consumers in no mood to shop for fall and back-to-school clothing.
Other reasons cited for the drop-off include inevitable negative comparisons over a strong performance during August 1994, as well as a general insecurity among consumers about the economy, which has made them reluctant to buy something until they absolutely need it and unless they can buy it cheaply.


Small Museum of Boundless Fantasies
THE scene could have inspired headlines in supermarket tabloids: "Little Girl Swallowed Up by Giant Bubble"; "Small Child Engulfed by Climbing Slime as Amazed Mom Watches." My daughter, Marisa, stood with a tire encircling her feet; around its inner edge was a hoop floating in soap suds.
As she pulled a string raising the hoop, a tall, cylindrical bubble formed around her, making her look like a character in a science-fiction film.
Marisa, who is not quite 7, thought the whole experience was totally cool.
Marisa and I, her 8-year-old friend Sam, and Naemi, Sam's mother, were visiting "Bubbles," the first part of our self-guided tour of the Long Island Children's Museum in Garden City.
A small but energetic institution that opened its doors almost two years ago, the museum is the first of its kind on Long Island, offering children opportunities to do things that make curators in adult museums turn pale, like write on the walls, touch and test the objects in the exhibitions and create art of their own.
But although all children's museums offer a hands-on approach, the founders and staff here maintain that they have taken the philosophy further than many of their urban counterparts.





Litton Industries(LIT,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jul 31


CHRONICLE
On Sunday, the DALAI LAMA, the exiled leader of Tibet, will arrive in Atlanta on the first leg of a trip that will also take him to Houston, Boston and Washington.
The International Campaign for Tibet, based in Washington, is sponsoring the 10-day trip, during which the Nobel laureate hopes to enlist the help of Government leaders, business leaders and human rights groups in the nonviolent struggle against the Chinese presence in Tibet.
"If Tibetans raise arms against China, it will be suicidal for the Tibetans," said a spokesman, Thubten Samphel of the Office of Tibet, which represents the Dalai Lama in the United States.


After 6 Brutal Years of War, Peace Is Celebrated in Liberia
After six years of devastating civil war that made this the most violent country in West Africa, tens of thousands of Liberians thronged Monrovia's battered and bullet-riddled streets today to welcome the return of peace and the leaders who waged the war.
Under threatening skies, the crowds sang cheerful praises to the West African peacekeeping force that shielded this city for years.
The most significant attraction, however, was the return of Charles Taylor, the man who started this most unconventional of civil wars and who stayed in his own would-be capital, Gbarnga, even when earlier peace accords were negotiated.


A Message for the Men in Charge


No Headline
"Man, this war has got to come to an end now. We have no schools, no homes, no food and no money, and if it doesn't stop now, we will all die just like this, with nothing." -- CAPT.
J.R.
BENSON, an 18-year-old soldier in the Liberian civil war, who has been fighting for five years.  [ A1:4. ]


Michael Ende, 65, German Children's Writer
Michael Ende, the German author whose children's book "The Neverending Story" became an international best seller and was made into a film, died on Monday at a clinic near Stuttgart.
He was 65.
The cause was stomach cancer, his publisher said.


In What Passes for Peace in Ulster, Anxiety Still
"You can go to bed now without putting steel bars on your front door so no one can come in and shoot you in your bed," a Roman Catholic woman said, recounting some of the changes wrought by the Irish Republican Army cease-fire that completed its first year today.
"You can sit up late, not afraid to have lights on so they can shoot you through the window," she continued.
"There are no soldiers on the streets, and the police hassling, the breaking into houses saying they're searching for terrorists -- that's all stopped."


Nets' President Hands In His Resignation
Jon Spoelstra, whose ambitious marketing concepts helped engineer attendance records for the Nets while sometimes clashing with an ownership resistant to change, resigned as team president yesterday.
In a release announcing the resignation, the Nets said Jim Lampariello, the executive vice president, would be acting as the new chief operating officer.
It was not immediately clear whether Lampariello would hold the position permanently.


Packwood's Team Attacks Credibility of His Accusers
Senator Bob Packwood took a more aggressive tack against his accusers today as his office offered excerpts of depositions from his supporters in an effort to cast doubt on some of the 19 women who have charged him with sexual misconduct.
At the same time, the Senator's office maintained that investigators from the Senate Ethics Committee had unfairly ignored the accounts of some of those supporters before the committee ruled this spring that there was "substantial credible evidence" against him.


Reeves Has No Doubts Maddox Will Fit In
When the Denver Broncos selected Tommy Maddox in the first round of the 1992 draft, it prompted some debate both within the Broncos organization and around the league.
Some thought Maddox could develop into a good player, a quarterback of the future for the Broncos and their coach then, Dan Reeves.
Others strongly disagreed.
The ESPN football analyst, Mel Kiper, called Maddox "a major gamble." General Manager Carl Peterson of the Kansas City Chiefs said he "wouldn't feel secure putting his franchise into the hands of Tommy Maddox." John Elway, Denver's starting quarterback then and now, heard about the selection from a fan after coming home from a vacation while standing in front of the baggage claim area at Stapleton Airport in Denver.
Elway thought then, and still does, that the pick was made solely to thwart him.


Robbery Suspect Kansas-Bound
The man who authorities say was the mastermind of a botched Somerset County jewelry store robbery in which the owner fatally shot his wife was ordered yesterday to face Federal bank robbery charges in Kansas before he is tried in New Jersey, the A.P. reported.


Whatever It Takes to See Pope
A gardener wants to show Pope John Paul II his exotic vegetables.
A rosary society wants the Pontiff to come over for spaghetti dinner.
These are some of the 600 special requests that have poured into the Newark Archdiocese in anticipation of the visit by the Pope, who is scheduled to celebrate a Mass at Giants Stadium on Oct. 5.
Most of the 86,000 tickets to the Mass will be distributed through lotteries conducted by local parishes, said the Rev.
William J. Fadrowski, who is overseeing ticket distribution.
The tickets are free, but that has not stopped many from offering to pay whatever it might take to be assured of a seat.
TERRY PRISTIN


For Yankee Fans, Life Is Good Until It's Bad
Skip the standings, the wild-card shuffling, the Buck-passing.
If you want to understand the kind of season the Yankees and I have been having, wrap your bat around this: No one ever smiles when I pull out my pinstriped Visa card with the red, white and blue Yankee logo.
I ordered it in April, when I decided to become a born-again Bronx Bomber fan, back when Don Mattingly had his beard, when Strawberry was out of season, when '94 still seemed like a promise.
The card arrived in May and I've used it every chance I could; the closest I've ever come to that smile was the nod of a head-waiter in Lisbon.
He recognized it, he said, because he was a Toronto Blue Jay fan.
The Visa card came with a come-on gift; two free tickets to any game (except the Opener and Old-Timers).
I finally used the passes the day before yesterday, sunny and breezy, Jim Abbott for the Angels, Andy Pettitte for us.
A perfect day for baseball.


Drug Raids Net Dozens in Major Chicago Gang, Officials Say
More than three dozen suspected leaders and street enforcers of this city's most notorious street gang, the Gangster Disciples, were arrested today on Federal narcotics charges in predawn raids by about 250 local, state and Federal law-enforcement officers.
Also arrested was Larry Hoover, an Illinois state prison inmate, who is accused of directing the gang.
Law-enforcement officials "went after the head of the snake," James B. Burns, United States Attorney for the Northern District of Illinois, said at a news conference this afternoon after the arrests.


Hospital System Chief's Parting Words
The following is the text of the opening remarks by Dr.
Bruce Siegel, president of the Health and Hospitals Corporation, at a news conference yesterday at the Grand Hyatt Hotel in mid-Manhattan.
The statements were recorded by The New York Times from a program on New York 1 News.
Thank you. Thank you for all coming out today.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
4.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.00
5.48
4.70
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.28
5.32
4.54
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.29
5.35
4.84
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.32
6.35
7.17
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.69
6.71
7.45
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.60
7.60
8.27
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.12
6.15
6.36
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


As Summer Comes to a Close, an Open-Air Sale


Red Sox Take a Pounding From Mariners
Mariners 11, Red Sox 2
Seattle's Randy Johnson was scratched from his start and Boston's Rheal Cormier did not last much longer last night as the Mariners scored six runs in the first two innings to beat the host Red Sox, 11-2.


Clinton, Fearing Fight, Shuns Bid to Name Friend as Judge
Faced with the threat of a difficult confirmation fight, President Clinton last year backed away from his intention to nominate a longtime friend, Peter B. Edelman, to an influential appeals court post.
At the time, the President was widely criticized by members of liberal groups who said it showed that he lacked resolve and was unwilling to expend any political capital on the issue of who sits on the nation's Federal courts.
Mr.
Edelman, a onetime senior aide to Robert F. Kennedy and a former law professor at Georgetown University, was then in line to be named to a Federal trial court, a lower-profile job.


Milwaukee Forces Debate on Vouchers
A week after the Wisconsin Supreme Court abruptly halted the nation's only program providing state vouchers for religious-school students, a private fund-raising drive has generated almost $1.4 million so that about 2,300 students can remain in religious schools while the case makes its way through the courts.
The donations from foundations, businesses and individuals -- including a million-dollar donation announced at a revival-like gathering at a black religious school on Wednesday night -- are raising the emotional stakes as Milwaukee pushes ahead with the nation's most aggressive effort to make private and church-run schools state-financed alternatives to public schools.


Road to Peace Is Full of Risks And Questions
Brokering an end to the 40-month-old Balkan war could be a crowning triumph for President Clinton's often-criticized foreign policy.
But it would also create a perilous new situation militarily, to say nothing of the potential political problems for a President entering a difficult election year.
The peace plan offered by the United States would put thousands of American troops on the ground in Bosnia for more than a year, trying to keep bitter enemies apart in a region that has repeatedly turned peacekeepers into targets, hostages and combatants.


That Time of Year, Again


Gay Romantic Comedy Fraught With Symbols
Eric Mueller's muddled romantic comedy, "World and Time Enough," is a movie so overloaded with symbolism that the fleeting good will it builds up is crushed under the weight of its allegorical pretensions.
Despite the regular intrusion of a campy narrator (Kraig Swartz), who treats the love story of Mark (Matt Guidry) and Joey (Gregory G. Giles) as a giddy romp, the movie is neither funny nor romantic.
Talk about symbolic overkill!
Early in the film it is revealed that Mark's devout mother died in church when a giant cross fell on her.
Following her death, her husband spent the rest of his life obsessively designing Gothic cathedrals.
After Mark, a Conceptual sculptor, discovers his father dead in his studio, he impulsively decides to carry on the tradition and begins building his own cathedral in a muddy field.
Erecting a crude scaffold on property that belongs to a sympathetic cleric, he climbs to the top and executes a suicidal swan dive.


Donors in Wisconsin Aid School Vouchers
A week after the Wisconsin Supreme Court halted a plan providing state vouchers for religious-school students, a private fund-raising drive has generated almost $1.4 million so that about 2,300 students can remain in religious schools while the case makes its way through the courts.
The donations are raising the emotional stakes as Milwaukee pushes ahead with an aggressive effort to make private and church-run schools state-financed alternatives to public schools.
Article, page A12.


Restaurants
When you order a shrimp cocktail at Gloucester, you get a single giant prawn in a bright blue glass bowl.
The creature, as large as a small lobster, arrives on a bed of ice with shreds of fresh horseradish and lemon peel dangling from its head like so much seaweed.
It is probably not what you expected, but then almost nothing at this lavish restaurant is.
Each meal at Gloucester is like a ride on the excess express; the thrills just keep coming.


Lee Krasner Revealed, By Her House and Work
On a side road in the Springs (a world away from today's East Hampton, though a mere seven miles distant), there is a shingled, two-story farmhouse, built in the 1880's, that was designated last year as a National Historic Landmark.
It looks like nothing much.
Nor does the land that comes with it, except for the mimosa trees outside the back door and the long narrow view toward the white-sailed boats on the Accabonac Creek.


Sounds Around Town
Salsa y Salsa
New York Salsa Festival, Madison Square Garden, Seventh Avenue and 33d Street, (212) 465-6741.
For its 20th annual event, the salsa festival splits up two generations.
The old guard, who still make some of the most propulsive music on earth, reigns on Saturday night at 8, with Celia Cruz's commanding raspy voice, El Gran Combo's elegance, Tito Puente's danceable drive and Eddie Palmieri's jazzy modernism, plus Ismael Quintana as a guest singer.
On Sunday at 7 P.M., younger performers who mix rhythm, romance and hints of hip-hop take over: Tito Rojas, Marc Anthony, India and Rey Ruiz.
Tickets are $25 to $50.
JON PARELES Musical Shell Game
Steve Turre and Sanctified Shells, the Knitting Factory, 74 Leonard Street (at Church Street), TriBeCa, (212) 219-3055.
Conch shells become dulcet natural horns in the hands of Steve Turre, who's heard more often playing trombone.
His guests are to include Pharoah Sanders on saxophone, Jon Faddis on trumpet, Mulgrew Miller on piano and others.
Tonight and tomorrow night at 9 and 11; tickets are $15.
J.
P.
Good Vibes
Gust W. Tsilis Quintet, Visiones, 125 Macdougal Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 673-5576.
With spiky harmonies and glittering runs, Gust W. Tsilis gives the vibraphone a modern-jazz edge while holding onto melody.
His quintet also includes Jack Walrath on trumpet.
Tonight and tomorrow night at 9, 11 and 1; Sunday at 9 and 11 P.M.
There is no cover charge but there is a $10 minimum at tables.
J.
P.


Hospital Chief Who Quit Denies Sexual Harassing of Employees
Fighting back tears, Dr.
Bruce Siegel, who resigned abruptly on Tuesday as president of New York City's Health and Hospitals Corporation, angrily denied yesterday that he had sexually harassed employees, while apologizing to a former assistant for "any misunderstanding" created by his actions.
At an emotional news conference, Dr.
Siegel also described for the first time his increasing disillusionment with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's plans to dismantle the municipal hospital system and complained of a lack of support from City Hall.


Corrections
The For Children column in Weekend last Friday misstated the date of Lou Gehrig's farewell speech at Yankee Stadium.
It was July 4, 1939.


Panel Urges Increase in Water Tests
While commending New York City's water quality testing program, an independent panel of experts has made several recommendations that it says will help to assure the quality of the city's drinking water.
The panel of six water quality experts from around the country called for the city's Department of Environmental Protection to begin conducting the same number of tests on weekends and holidays as it does on weekdays.
In addition, the panel urged that samples be taken in each of the five boroughs every day, a practice the department began in May.


O'Neill a One-Man Demolition Team in Home-Run Derby
Paul O'Neill never looks especially happy on the field.
He is renowned for flinging his helmet, bat or batting gloves, depending on how annoyed he is with his performance.
The Yankees are shrewd about seeking shelter.
The Angels had no protection last night.
O'Neill did not provide one of his aerial displays by chucking equipment.
Instead, he provided a dazzling aerial show of another sort by rocketing three balls into the right-field seats in his first three at-bats as the Yankees galloped to an 11-6 victory over the sputtering Angels at Yankee Stadium.


Corrections
A report in The Home Section on Aug. 3 about the tug-of-war over interior design at the White House during the Kennedy Administration misstated the role played by Scalamandre, the American luxury fabric house.
The company's upholstery fabric for the Blue Room was indeed rejected by Mrs.
Kennedy, in favor of French-made fabric, but its other fabrics were accepted in the Blue and Green Rooms during that time.


New Violence in India Sikh Area Kills Official
A bomb that exploded inside an official car today killed the top official in the Indian state of Punjab and 12 others, including at least three members of an elite Indian security force.
It was the most serious episode in the state since a decade-long insurgency by Sikh separatists was quelled two years ago.


How Nino, Tony, the Chief et al. Make Decisions
THE CENTER HOLDS The Power Struggle Inside the Rehnquist Court  By James F. Simon  Illustrated. 332 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.
The strength of James F. Simon's account of how the promised conservative judicial revolution of the Reagan-Bush years failed to take place comes from its unusually detailed descriptions of Supreme Court decision making.
Using interviews, personal papers and information that comes from what the footnotes call C.S.'s, or confidential sources, Mr.
Simon shows the nine Justices arriving at their conclusions in somewhat the same way that legislatures do.


It's a Doubles Game of Sorts For Future TV Contract
After 28 years of broadcasting the United States Open Tennis Championships, CBS Sports must decide by Tuesday whether it wants five more.
If CBS does not double what it now pays, it will lose another high-profile sports property, following the departure of the National Football League, Major League Baseball and the National Basketball Association.


U.N. Forum Hears Speech By Burmese
In a videotaped address that seemed to radiate across Asia with its admonitions against intolerance by authoritarian governments and violence against women, the Burmese Nobel laureate, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, today opened a meeting of private women's groups gathered from all over the world to shape the issues of the Fourth World Conference on Women, which opens on Monday.
"For millenia women have dedicated themselves almost exclusively to the task of nurturing, protecting and caring for the young and the old, striving for the conditions of peace that favor life as a whole," said Mrs.
Aung San Suu Kyi (pronounced awng sahn soo chee).


Brinker Int'l.(EAT,N) reports earnings for Year to Jun 28


USAir Makes Sharp Changes in Upstate New York Fares
In what might be a precursor to a new pricing strategy throughout its stronghold in the Northeast, USAir has quietly but radically changed its prices for flights that connect major East Coast cities and Pittsburgh to most cities in northern and western New York State.
While the new fare structure means savings opportunities and added flexibility for some fliers, particularly families on weekend trips, it means fare increases of 75 percent or so for weekly commuters and others.


The News Of Brews: The Joints Are Hopping
FOR most of this century, New York has not been much of a beer town.
At heart, it's a Champagne and martini kind of place.
Beer is O.K. for Milwaukee or Chicago, but in New York what roisterer out for a night on the town would think of topping off dinner and a Broadway show with a pitcher of suds?
Impossible.
While taking Manhattan, I'll take a manhattan.
The swells may be swilling Champagne, but a beer revolution has been brewing in and around the city.
New York, which waved farewell to its last brewery in 1976, is suddenly awash in pale ales and stouts, fruit beers and honey porters, churned out by legions of home brewers, new microbreweries and, most important, brew pubs, whose rapid rise recalls the wine-bar boom of the 1970's.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Placed Vaughn Eschelman, pitcher, and Chris James, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to Aug. 25 and Aug. 30, respectively.
Placed Aaron Sele, pitcher, on the 60-day disabled list.
Activated Carlos Rodriguez, infielder, from Pawtucket of the International League.
Traded Marc Lewis, outfielder, and Mike Jacobs, pitcher, to the Atlanta Braves for Matt Murray, pitcher, which completes the July 31 trade for Mike Stanton, pitcher.
Traded Chris Howard, pitcher, to the Texas Rangers for Jack Voigt, outfielder.
Claimed Dwayne Hosey, outfielder, off waivers from the Kansas City Royals.
Designated Steve Rodriguez, infielder, for assignment.


Cortines Safety Data Show Increase in School Violence
Saying that schools had made "significantly less progress than I had thought and hoped" on safety, Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines released statistics yesterday showing that students got into more trouble in the spring than in the fall.
In addition, nearly twice the number of boxcutters, a weapon now favored by many students, were confiscated in the spring.
Over all, the number of reported violent incidents in the 1994-95 year increased 16 percent from 1993-94.
Much of the increase, Mr.
Cortines said he believed, was due to more honest reporting, at his insistence, by principals and other school officials.
But the violence report comes at a time when Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has stepped up his campaign to take over school security.


School Sues Over Game Prayer
The Baptist college JERRY FALWELL founded filed a lawsuit yesterday to prevent the National Collegiate Athletic Association from enforcing a rule prohibiting football players from kneeling in prayer to celebrate touchdowns.
Liberty University of Lynchburg, Va., asked United States District Judge JAMES TURK to block the N.C.A.A. from penalizing teams whose players pray on the field beginning with tomorrow's games.


A New Moore For Jets' New Look
He wears No. 33, but many television viewers won't have any idea who he is when the Jets open their season Sunday against the Dolphins.
Ron Moore has been the most important Jet to be kept a virtual secret in the preseason.
He just happens to be the new running back -- for now, the player Coach Rich Kotite would like to make his every-play performer.


Energy Audits May Expire
The energy conservation audit may soon become a practice remembered only by nostalgia buffs.
New Jersey's three utilities have decided that home visits to educate customers about insulation are no longer needed because many residents already understand the benefits of conserving energy.
Public Service Electric and Gas Company and Jersey Central Power and Light of Morristown said they want to reduce the number of energy audits they conduct from 44,000 this year to fewer than 8,000 by 1997.


Risks in Separate Deals on Breast-Implant Suits
Efforts to reshape the pending $4.25 billion global settlement on breast implants may soon veer off on a new and erratic course, one that holds risks for both women reporting injuries from the devices and the companies that once made them.
The failure of lawyers for both sides in the dispute to renegotiate the pending deal by Wednesday's court-imposed deadline was widely expected.
The lawyers had bickered for weeks over such bottom-line issues as how much money to add to the settlement and whether women would be required to meet stricter medical criteria than in the original settlement to qualify for damage awards.


Errors at Hospital
After a monthlong investigation, the State Health Department said that "serious systemic problems" at Coney Island Hospital led to six blood-transfusion errors in five years, including one in July that contributed to the death of a Brooklyn paramedic.
The errors arose because technicians, nurses and residents disregarded rules for insuring that the right blood reached the right patients, the department said.
Article, page B4.


Belmont Gets Under Way With Lasix in the Spotlight
Horse racing in New York opens a new season and a new era today, with two months of marquee racing leading to the Breeders' Cup at Belmont Park and with 45 horses scheduled to run on the medication Lasix on the first day it is allowed.
The Belmont autumn meeting, which begins three days after Saratoga closed with mixed reviews, will bring every major horse, trainer and jockey to New York for a season that will create champions.


Bjorn Kjellstrom, 84, Orienteer and Inventor of Modern Compass
Bjorn Kjellstrom, who founded the company that makes the most popular compass in the world and later introduced the sport of orienteering to North America, died Saturday in a hospital in Stockholm.
He was 84 years old. His family said he died of complications of Parkinson's disease.


Cynicism Taints Hope, But at Least Hope's Here
In the brief snatches of time when Isidora Kozomara is not laboring for $100 dollars a month, fetching water and wood or sprinting down Sniper Alley, she sometimes thinks back to what has become a distant dream, then quickly shuts it away.
"You don't want to think about your future when you have no chances," said the 22-year-old waitress in her small apartment off the alley, which earned its nickname because of the long-distance killing by snipers in the hills.
"For us the future is running out."


Shuttle Flight Is Postponed For a Repair
The launching of the space shuttle Endeavour was postponed today for at least a week because of the failure of one of its three electric generators hours before the scheduled liftoff.
Officials of the Kennedy Space Center here said the malfunction was in a fuel cell, a unit that combines liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen to generate electricity while producing water.
The cell is to be replaced and tested over the weekend.
The officials had not determined the nature of the trouble, though a stuck valve was suspected of causing the unit to overheat.


Knicks Are Said to Have Asked for Riley's Silence
Pat Riley believed he was going to be released from his obligations as Knicks coach in exchange for silence about his coaching plans during the final stages of ITT's purchase of Madison Square Garden from Viacom Inc., two people familiar with the case said yesterday.
That was the reason, the people said, that Riley began preliminary negotiations to become the Miami Heat's next coach before he stepped down from the Knicks in June.
However, they said that when Riley asked to be released from his contract soon after the season, the Knicks refused.


Record Numbers for Fight
MIKE TYSON's comeback fight with PETER McNEELEY last month will gross more than $96 million worldwide, Showtime said yesterday, including a United States record $63 million for pay-per-view television.
With 90 percent of the revenue collected, Showtime Entertainment Television calculates the fight, which Tyson won in 89 seconds, was purchased by 1.52 million homes, another high.


At a Town Meeting, Common Ground on Medicare
Clarence Hensley, a retired policeman with a vise-like handshake, shot a cut-the-baloney look at Representative David M. McIntosh in a town meeting here on the future of Medicare.
"Whatever they do, I'm going to take a cut," said Mr. Hensley, 67. "I know that much."


Recalling Cleveland Robinson, a Labor Leader
Amid throbbing African drums, incense, anthems, hymns, prayers, Bible readings and speeches, hundreds of mourners gathered yesterday in the Cathedral Church of St.
John the Divine to remember Cleveland Robinson, the labor leader, civil rights advocate and champion of international human rights.
Among those who paid tribute were former Mayor David N. Dinkins, the civil rights leaders Coretta Scott King and the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, the entertainer Harry Belafonte as well as Andrew Young, the former United States representative to the United Nations.
President Clinton and President Nelson Mandela of South Africa sent messages of praise.


Sounds Around Town
'The Best Pipes'
Vic Damone, Rainbow and Stars, 30 Rockefeller Plaza, 65th floor, (212) 632-5000.
Many years ago, Frank Sinatra described Vic Damone as "the singer with the best pipes in the business." And among the traditional pop balladeers of a certain age, that accolade still applies.
At 67, Mr.
Damone's smooth, strong baritone is in remarkable shape, and he can swing, too.
His program at Rainbow and Stars focuses on classic pop standards with occasional forays into the contemporary (Neil Diamond's "September Morn" and Andrew Lloyd Webber's "All I Ask of You").
Shows begin at 8:30 and 11 tonight and tomorrow night.
There is a $40 cover charge, and dinner is obligatory at the early shows.
STEPHEN HOLDEN Tidewater Rock
Bruce Hornsby, Westbury Music Fair, 960 Brush Hollow Road, Westbury, L.I., (516) 334-0800.
Bruce Hornsby, the singer, songwriter and virtuoso pianist from Williamsburg, Va., is arguably rock's most musically sophisticated regionalist.
The lyrics for his Tidewater vignettes have plenty of local color.
His best music mixes meat-and-potatoes rock-and-roll and soulful echoes of Sam Cooke with jazzy keyboards skillfully enough to keep the flavors from clashing or blending into homogenized mush.
Show time is tonight at 8.
Tickets are $25.
S.
H.


20 Muslims Held in France; Link to Paris Bombings Seen
The police arrested 20 Muslim fundamentalists in early morning raids today in Lyons and Paris, seizing weapons, fake travel documents and a gas canister like those used in three bombs that have killed seven and wounded scores in Paris.
The police did not tie this morning's arrests to the bombings, but investigators have said for weeks that they were pursuing a trail that starts in Algeria, where a radical Islamic group is directing attacks against Paris.


Hajime Mitarai, 56, President Of Canon, Electronics Giant
Hajime Mitarai, the president of Canon Inc.who helped turn the electronics manufacturer into one of the world's most innovative companies, died early this morning in a Tokyo hospital.
He was 56.
A company spokesman said Mr.
Mitarai, a resident of Tokyo, died from pneumonia after having been hospitalized since July with what at first diagnosed as a bad cold.
The company has not yet appointed a new president.


New Storage for Nuclear Waste
After 14 hearings, the Zoning Board of Adjustment approved construction of a $15 million storage tank for spent nuclear fuel at the Oyster Creek power plant.
Jersey Central Power and Light Company, which owns the plant, agreed to notify the authorities before it begins moving any waste into the above-ground tank, a process that is supposed to start in January.
Jersey Power has said that it is running out of space to store used fuel and would have to stop operating the plant next fall unless a new tank is built.
The township's approval late Wednesday represents a defeat for neighboring Berkeley Township and William DeCamp Jr., an environmentalist from Mantoloking, who sued to keep the storage tank from being built on grounds that it might become a permanent repository for nuclear waste.


RESULTS PLUS
WORLD UNIVERSITY GAMES  Japan Takes Gold-Medal Lead
Japan edged back into the gold-medal lead in the World University Games yesterday with the help of Kazuhiko Yamazaki's victory, 48.58 seconds to 48.95 seconds, over Octavius Terry of the United States in the men's 400-meter hurdles at Fukuoka, Japan.
Japan increased its gold-medal collection to 20, one ahead of the United States.
The Americans still led, 59-54, in total medals.
Cuba advanced to baseball's gold-medal game.
Pedro Luis Lazo pitched a no-hitter in a 5-0 victory over the United States.
In today's final, Cuba meets South Korea, a 4-1 winner over Japan.
The Americans play Japan for the bronze medal.
In women's basketball, the United States beat Russia, 101-74, and moved to today's final against Italy, a 68-62 winner over Japan.
The American men play Canada and Japan plays the Czech Republic today in the semifinals. (AP)


Boon for Hudson Trolley Project
The Hudson waterfront light rail project received a boost yesterday with the announcement of a $50 million grant from the Federal Transit Administration.
The grant will pay for more engineering and design work and property acquisition.
The project's first phase, a 10-mile stretch between Bayonne and Hoboken, is expected to cost about $680 million.
Construction is scheduled to begin next year.
So far, New Jersey has received about $108 million in Federal money for the trolley project.


BUSINESS DIGEST
A U.S.
Agency Issues Warning on Heart Drug  The United States Heart, Lung and Blood Institute said that a drug sold by Pfizer and Bayer to treat high blood pressure and heart disease should be used "with great caution, if at all," and that the safety of related drugs taken by millions of Americans was unclear.
The warning applied to large doses of the short-acting form of nifedipine, one of 10 drugs called calcium channel-blockers that are taken to control blood pressure and relieve angina pains.
As a class, the drugs are the most widely prescribed in the nation.
Pfizer and Bayer disputed a study on which the warning was based.  [ Page A1. ] US Air Shakes Up Pricing  US Air has radically changed its pricing for flights that connect major East Coast cities and Pittsburgh to most cities in northern and western New York State.
While the new fare structure means savings and added flexibility for some fliers, some weekly commuters must pay fare increases of 75 percent.  [ D3. ] Income Up as Spending Dips  Consumer spending increased only two-tenths of 1 percent in July from June even though personal income surged seven-tenths of 1 percent, the fastest pace in six months.
It fell to 97.38 yen from 99.11 yen on Wednesday and to 1.4672 marks from 1.4781 marks.  [ D4. ] The yield on the 30-year Treasury bond fell to 6.64 percent, from 6.69 percent, bolstered by indications of a slowing economy.  [ D13. ] Insurance Regulation Faulted  A study of 278 members of insurance committees in 10 state legislatures found that nearly one in five members had ties to the industry.
The study says such links often thwart effective regulation of the insurance industry.  [ D3. ] Risks in Implant Negotiations  Efforts to reshape the $4.25 billion settlement on breast implants may soon veer off on a new course, a risky one for both women claiming injuries from the devices and the companies that made them.
News Analysis.  [ D3. ] Marketers Discover Ripken  The closer that Cal Ripken Jr., the Baltimore Orioles' shortstop, comes to breaking Lou Gehrig's major league record for consecutive games played, the better he looks to Madison Avenue as a pitchman.
The streak is generating demand for Ripken from national marketers like General Mills, to appear on boxes of its Wheaties, and General Motors, to help promote the durability of Chevrolet trucks.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D5. ] Insiders Sell; Lam Research Rises  When insiders sell lots of their company's stock, it often means the shares have peaked.
But at Lam Research, insiders have been selling since the shares were at $30 and the stock is now at $60.25.
Market Place.  [ D6. ]


Replacement Pitcher Returns
Dave Pavlas, the replacement relief pitcher who was called a "scab" by Don Mattingly and shunned by the Yankees during his first stint with them in July, will rejoin New York from Class AAA when major league rosters are expanded today.
Mindful that Pavlas's presence could be the kind of distraction that a replacement player has been in undermining the Los Angeles Dodgers this week, Manager Buck Showalter spoke with Mattingly and David Cone.


Corrections
Two pictures yesterday about a forest fire lookout tower in New Jersey were credited incorrectly.
They were taken by William E. Sauro, not Edward Keating.


Contemporary British Treasures From the Royal Academy of Arts
Anyone in the general vicinity of the Guggenheim Museum -- say, within a radius of 50 miles -- should hurry over to the National Academy of Design, the Guggenheim's often overlooked neighbor on Fifth Avenue.
"Contemporary British Architecture," an excellent survey show that has been on view since June, has only two more weeks to run.
Assembled from work first presented at the Royal Academy of Arts in London between 1991 and 1994, the show is an impressive tribute to British architecture's current strength.
It also raises provocative questions about history and modernity and their architectural representation.
The 80 projects on view, selected by Peter Murray and MaryAnne Stevens, fall mostly into two esthetic camps.
The first gallery features period revival designs, like Quinlan Terry's classical New Brentwood Cathedral, Robert Adams's Solar House and other projects of the kind noisily favored by the Prince of Wales.
In the rooms that follow, the focus is on flamboyantly engineered "high tech" projects by such architects as Richard Rogers, Nicholas Grimshaw and Norman Foster.


Ashe Endowment Booth Loses High-Profile Spot
For three years, the Arthur Ashe Endowment for the Defeat of AIDS occupied a high-visibility booth just inside the main gate to the National Tennis Center where it sold T-shirts, caps and pins to raise money for AIDS programs.
But this year the United States Tennis Association moved the nonprofit group to the "Passarelle," the boardwalk that runs from the IRT subway station at Willets Point/Shea Stadium to the tennis center.


Hospital Is Fined by State For 6 Transfusion Errors
The State Health Department said yesterday that "serious systemic problems" at Coney Island Hospital had led to six blood-transfusion errors in the last five years, including one in July that contributed to the death of a Brooklyn paramedic.
The errors arose largely because technicians, nurses and residents disregarded detailed rules for making sure that the right blood reached the right patient, the department said.
Concluding a monthlong investigation into the July incident, the department said it would impose its maximum fine against the hospital -- long considered one of the best of the city's 11 public hospitals -- for each of the 10 violations in the case.
The penalty totals $20,000.


Depicting the Multiculturalism of Queens
Since the 1970's, the Queens Museum of Art has held biennial or triennial exhibitions of work by artists based in Queens.
The most recent entry in this series, "Live/Work in Queens," reflects the borough's transformation into what the show's curator, Christina Yang, calls "the nation's most diverse county," one that includes more than 70 ethnic groups speaking almost 200 different languages.
Four of the eight artists in the show were born in the United States, but the others come from Colombia, China, Korea and Afghanistan.
Not surprisingly, the exhibition seems to revolve around the theme of ethnic identity.
The problem is that the artistic representation of ethnicity too often turns into self-caricature.
The relief paintings of Esperanza Cortes, for instance, evoke the image of the Hispanic woman as wife, mother and martyr by means of an all-too-familiar vocabulary of fractured body parts rendered with sugary realism.
Artists should either come to grips with the sado-masochistic subtext of this imagery or -- better yet -- give it a rest.


Grizzly Brothers Have Bronx Debut


Cowboys Complement Talent With Plenty of Confidence
He played 11 seasons with one team the Atlanta Falcons -- and when safety Scott Case left there seven days ago, he knew there was only one team and one coach he wanted.
The Dallas Cowboys.


Court Says Life Partners Broke Securities Laws
A Federal judge has ruled that Life Partners Inc., a company that is the leader in the business of selling life insurance policies of terminally ill people, has been violating securities laws and must change its practices.
The Securities and Exchange Commission sued Life Partners last year, contending that the company violated securities laws by selling fractional interests of life insurance policies and by failing to disclose that the company's chairman, Brian Pardo, was previously accused of securities fraud and owed money to the Resolution Trust Corporation as a result of an unpaid loan from a failed savings and loan.


Peat Marwick Moves to Garner Some Deal Fees
For years, accounting firms have done much of the heavy lifting involved in corporate takeovers and mergers, but then watched enviously as their investment banking brethren on Wall Street got most of the fees for handling the deals.
Now one of the Big Six accounting firms, KPMG Peat Marwick, is fighting back.
The firm has created a new company, called KPMG Baymark Capital, that will compete with securities firms to advise corporations and help arrange mergers, acquisitions and other deals.
And this week KPMG Baymark obtained a broker-dealer license from the National Association of Securities Dealers.
KPMG Baymark is now free to go ahead, although it is still possible that the Securities and Exchange Commission might raise some warning flags.


Musical History of the Art Called Jazz
Trying to pack the history of jazz into 90 minutes is a thankless task.
But "The Story of Jazz," which opens Bravo's "Masters of American Music" series tonight, covers the basics capably while it gleans insights from interviews with musicians.
More important, it lets the music speak, in a lavish and well-chosen selection from the film and television archives of jazz in America and abroad.
The program's writers, Chris Albertson with the director, Matthew Seig, trace a familiar history.
"The Story of Jazz" follows the music from slave drumming in Congo Square in New Orleans through a series of innovators: Louis Armstrong, Duke Ellington, Count Basie, Billie Holiday, Charlie Parker, Thelonious Monk, Miles Davis and John Coltrane.
It also checks in on local scenes, including Chicago in the 1920's, Kansas City in the 30's and postwar New York City.


Dance Benefit
Molissa Fenley, Ralph Lemon and Doug Varone and Dancers will be in a benefit program on Sept. 9 at 8:30 P.M. at the Danspace Project at St.
Mark's Church, Second Avenue at 10th Street, East Village.
The program will help pay for emergency surgery for Barbara Grubel, a member of Mr.
Lemon's company, who had peritonitis and appendicitis in July.
Tickets are $20.
Information: (212) 674-8112.


Keep in Mind
"JAPANESE FISH PRINTS," a family workshop in which the ancient art of fish-printing is taught by an artist.
Children may create an underwater scene using real fish, rice paper and paint.
Tomorrow, 1 to 3 P.M., at the Dana Discovery Center, 110th Street near Fifth Avenue, Central Park.
A workshop on Sunday (1 and 2:30 P.M.), "Crazy Fish," will teach children how to make fish by using yarn and thread; it is to be taught by a professional embroiderer (for ages 6 and up).
All workshops are free.
Information: (212) 860-1370.
KING MANOR MUSEUM, the 19th-century manor house, is now open to the public on weekends, from noon to 4 P.M.
The house was once owned by Rufus King, a signer of the Constitution.
Suggested admission, $2 for adults and $1 for children.
At King Park, Jamaica Avenue at 153d Street, Jamaica, Queens.
Information: (718) 206-0545.
"THE CIRCUS," a 1928 Charlie Chaplin film in which the Little Tramp joins a circus as a handyman. 72 minutes long.
Tomorrow and Sunday and Sept. 10 at 2 P.M.
At the Walter Reade Theater, Lincoln Center.
All tickets, $2.
Information: (212) 875-5600.


Kindercare Learning Centers Inc.(KCLC,NSC) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 2


Resort Van Service Is Driving Them to Drink
On a recent Friday night, Dawn Assnel and her housemates here in the Hamptons argued about who would be the designated driver for a night of bar-hopping.
So the next night, they did what more than 1,000 other 20-somethings here do every Friday and Saturday: they called a van.
"Now, I can get drunk and not have to worry," said Ms.
Assnel, 26, a clothing designer in Manhattan.


Where Have All the Bosses Gone? Off on Fridays, All Summer Long
So where is everybody?
The calendar clearly says today's a workday, yet the empty offices -- especially those corner offices -- say it's an undeclared national holiday.
As Labor Day approaches, deputies and assistants who spent the month concocting imaginative cover stories for their chiefs finally get to scoot out themselves.
Today's result, especially in places like New York that have tempting escape routes to mountains and shores, will be the summer's most casual Friday.


Laughing, Walking, Eating, Viewing and Saying So Long to Summer
Here is a sampling of activities planned in the New York metropolitan region for the Labor Day weekend:  New York City  Today "13th COMEDY LAUGH-A-THON," Chicago City Limits Theater, 1105 East 61st Street, Manhattan.
Performance by the improvisational group, Chicago City Limits, and guests. 8 P.M. to midnight.
Tickets: $17.50; part of the proceeds benefit the Muscular Dystrophy Association.
Information: (212) 888-5233.
"TWELFTH NIGHT," Celebrate Brooklyn, Prospect Park Band Shell, Prospect Park West and Ninth Street, Brooklyn.
Presented by the Kings County Shakespeare Company. 8 P.M.
Also tomorrow and Sunday at 8 P.M.
Suggested contribution: $3.
Information: (718) 855-7882.
"GREAT FALL MIGRATION BEGINS," New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, the Bronx.
A tour to see butterflies in the gardens. 1:30 P.M.
Also, tomorrow at noon.
Free with garden admission: $3; $1 for children and the elderly; free for children under 6.
Information: (718) 817-8700.
ROOSEVELT ISLAND WALKING TOUR.
A history tour, past such sites as Blackwell House, the Chapel of the Good Shepherd, Octagon Tower and a stone lighthouse.
Sponsored by Adventure on a Shoestring. 4:30 P.M.
Fee: $7.80, including tram fare.
Information and meeting place: (212) 265-2663.
Tomorrow WASHINGTON SQUARE OUTDOOR ART EXHIBIT, the sidewalks on the north and south of Washington Square.
Noon to 7 P.M.
Also Sunday and Monday, same hours.
"100 NIGHTS UNDER THE STARS," South Street Seaport, Pier 17, lower Manhattan.
A free summer series of outdoor performances continues with a rock-and-roll concert at 3 P.M. by Mark (Love Man) Pender.
Other performances this weekend feature the Battery Dance Company (Sunday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.) and a big band concert by the George Gee Orchestra (Monday at 3 P.M.).
Information: (212) 732-7678.
"THE SORCERER'S APPRENTICE," Puppetworks, 338 Sixth Avenue, at Fourth Street, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
A puppet show with music.
At 12:30 and 2:30 P.M.; also Sunday, same times.
Tickets: $7; $5 for children.
Reservations: (718) 965-3391.
"PAPER DOLL CHAINS," Staten Island Children's Museum, 1000 Richmond Terrace, Livingston.
Children can create decorative dolls. 1 P.M.
Free with museum admission: $3.25; free for children under 2.
Information: (718) 273-2060.
"BIG APPLE BALLOON RACE," Great Lawn, Central Park.
Hot air balloons leave from the Great Lawn to race. 5 P.M.
Information: (212) 715-1527.
AUTUMN CRAFTS FESTIVAL, Lincoln Center.
Work by 200 artisans. 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Also Sunday, same hours.
Free.
Information: (212) 677-4627.
Sunday UNION SQUARE FESTIVAL, Broadway, between 17th and 22d Streets. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Sponsored by the Union Square Park Community Coalition.
"H2 O RACES," Staten Island Children's Museum, 1000 Richmond Terrace, Livingston.
A children's water games workshop. 1, 2 and 3 P.M.
Free with museum admission: $3.25; free for children under 2.
Information: (718) 273-2060.
UPPER BROADWAY LABOR DAY FALL FESTIVAL, Broadway from 96th to 110th Streets.
Jon Faddis is to receive the Dizzy Gillespie Memorial Award followed by a jazz concert featuring the Judy Barnett Quartet.
Lord Wellington and his calypso band will perform; also, art exhibits and food vendors. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 764-6330.
Labor Day "BAREFOOT IN THE PARK," Avenue of the Americas at 40th Street.
A free screening of the 1967 film with Jane Fonda and Robert Redford.
Sunset.
Last screening in the Bryant Park Summer Film Festival.
Information: (212) 512-5700.
LABOR DAY PARADE, Fifth Avenue, from 44th to 72d Street.
Begins at 11 A.M.
SAIL TO SANDY HOOK, N.J. on the "Petrel." A 7-hour sail aboard the 70-foot yawl, leaving at 11 A.M. from Battery Park in lower Manhattan.
Fee: $65 per person.
Information: (212) 825-1976.
IMMIGRANT LABOR, IMMIGRANT TRIUMPH.
A walking tour past sites symbolic of the role that immigrant labor played in the growth of New York City.
Sponsored by Big Onion Tours.
Meets at 1 P.M. at the arch in Washington Square.
Fee: $9; $7 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 439-1090.
WEST INDIAN CARNIVAL, Eastern Parkway, between Utica Avenue and Grand Army Plaza, Crown Heights, Brooklyn. 8 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Hudson Valley  Today THE DIAMONDS, Playland Park, Rye, N.Y.
The singers of the classic rock-and-roll songs "Little Darlin' " and "Why Do Fools Fall in Love?" perform. 9:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (914) 921-0370.
FOLK DANCING, Goldens Bridge Community Center Barn, Hall Avenue, Goldens Bridge.
Folk dancing led by Rose and Meir Beer. 9 P.M.
Admission: $6.
Information: (914) 232-5402.
Tomorrow CIVIL WAR WEEKEND, Museum Village, Route 17W, Exit 16 off the Gov.
Thomas E. Dewey Thruway, Monroe, N.Y.
Demonstrations, parades and other activities featuring more than 700 costumed participants. 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Also Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Admission: $8; $6 for the elderly; $5 for children 3 to 15 years old; under 3, free.
Information: (914) 782-8247.
ARTS AND CRAFTS FAIR, Ulster County Fairgrounds, Libertyville Road, New Paltz, N.Y. 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Also, Sunday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. and Labor Day, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $6; $5 for the elderly; $4 for children 4 to 12 years old.
Information: (914) 679-8087 or (914) 246-3414.
MOUNTAIN EAGLE INDIAN FESTIVAL, Hunter Mountain, Route 23A, Hunter, N.Y.
A weekend tribute to American Indian women, with music, dance, lectures, demonstrations and crafts. 11:30 A.M. to 9 P.M.
Also Sunday, same hours, and Labor Day, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $9; $3 for children 5 to 12 years old; free for those under 5.
Information: (518) 263-3800.
NEW YORK RENAISSANCE FESTIVAL, Sterling Forest, Route 17A, Tuxedo, N.Y.
Crafts, jousting matches, food.
Today through Labor Day, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Saturdays and Sundays through Sept. 17, same hours.
Tickets: $15; $13 for the elderly; $6 for children under 12.
Information: (914) 351-5171 or (212) 307-7171.
HAWK WATCHING, Westmoreland Sanctuary, 260 Chestnut Ridge Road, Bedford, N.Y.
Take binoculars if possible. 10 A.M.
Free.
Information: (914) 666-8448.
BIRD WALK, Marshlands Conservancy, Rye, N.Y.
Beginner's bird walk, 4 P.M.
Also Sunday at 8 A.M.
Information: (914) 835-4466.
Sunday WESTCHESTER BLUEGRASS MINI-FEST, Muscoot Farm, Route 100, Somers, N.Y.
A festival with Tony Trischka and Skyline, Out to Lunch, Ninety-Nine Years, Hudson River Valley Boys and the acoustic quartet Orrin Star and the Sultans.
Noon to 4 P.M.
Free.
Take picnic and ground cover.
Information: (914) 232-7118.
GRAPE PICKING PARTY, Greenburgh Nature Center, Dromore Road, Greenburgh, N.Y.
Includes discussion of grapes and vine plants, tour of the exhibition "Natural History of Grapes," picking grapes and making (and sampling) grape juice. 2 P.M.
Tickets: $4.
Information: (914) 723-3470.
POPA CHUBBY, Turning Point Restaurant and Cafe, 468 Piermont Avenue, Piermont, N.Y.
Concert by the blues-rocker. 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
Information: (914) 359-1089.
Labor Day CHESS TOURNAMENT, John Jay Homestead, Route 22, Katonah, N.Y.
A yearly chess tournament, open to players of all levels of skill with spectators welcome.
Sponsored by Max Pavey Chess Club of Mount Kisco.
Registration is 9 to 9:15 A.M., with play continuing until 4 P.M.
Take bag lunch, chess set, board and (if possible) chess clock.
Guided tours of the homestead, with John Jay's chess set on display in the library, noon to 4 P.M.
Free.
Information: (914) 232-5651.
New Jersey  Today NEW JERSEY SHAKESPEARE FESTIVAL, Bowne Theater at Drew University, 36 Madison Avenue, Madison.
"Artists and Admirers," by Alexander Ostrovsky, directed by Bonnie J. Monte.
Tonight at 8 P.M., Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M. and Sunday at 2 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $19 to $30.
Information: (201) 408-5600.
Tomorrow "GOLDEN OLDIES AND DOO-WOP SHOW," Great Auditorium, Pilgrim Pathway, Ocean Grove.
Performances by Emil Stucchio and the Classics, Eugene Pitt and the Jive Five, Fred Parris and the Five Satins, and Speedo and the Cadillacs. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $15 to $20.
Information: (908) 775-0035.
GARDEN STATE OPRY, Villagers Theater, 475 DeMott Lane, Somerset.
A monthly country music revue featuring the Fox Hill Bluegrass Band; Carol Selick and Robin Foss, country singers; Ed Krizni and Billy Phillips, singers and guitarists; Liz Klosowki, a country folk singer, and the Men's Quartet of the Somerset Community Baptist Church. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $7.50; $5 for children.
Information: (908) 274-2748.
MEADOW KIDS' SUMMER CLUBHOUSE, Meadow Theater, Galleria Atrium, Bridge Avenue and West Front, Red Bank.
A show featuring audience participation, songs, games, dancing, improvisations and short plays. 11 A.M.
Tickets: $5.
Information: (908) 758-0099.
Sunday "SCANDINAVIAN FEST '95," Exit 25, off Route 80, Stanhope, N.J.
Music, dancing and food. 10 A.M. to 9 P.M.
Admission: $8; $7 for the elderly; free for those under 14.
Parking, $1.
Information: (201) 347-0900.
FAIR LAWN SUMMER MUSIC FESTIVAL, Memorial Park and Berdan Avenue, Fair Lawn.
A concert by Alex Watkins, with community dancing. 8:30 P.M.
Free, but take your own chairs.
Information: (201) 796-6746.
"OLD-FASHIONED LABOR DAY PICNIC," Museum of Early Trades and Crafts, Main Street and Green Village Band, Madison.
Traditional music, a puppet show and puppet-making by the Patchwork Puppet Theater, a bicycle decorating competition and parade and 19th-century games.
Noon to 4 P.M.
Tickets: $10 per family.
Information: (201) 377-2982.
Labor Day "DESTINY IN SPACE" and "THE LIVING SEA," Liberty Science Center, 251 Phillip Street, Jersey City.
"Destiny in Space," a film about space shuttle missions, shown daily, noon and 2 P.M.; "The Living Sea," narrated by Meryl Streep, with music by Sting, shown daily at 10 and 11 A.M. and 1, 3, 4 and 5 4 P.M.
Museum admission: $9 for adults; $6 for those two to 12; $8 for students and seniors; under two, free.
Film admission: $7; $6 for students and seniors; $5 for children.
There are also combination tickets for admission to the museum, films and special programs that range from $13 to $14.75; $9 to 10.75 for children.
Museum hours daily 9:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.
After Labor Day, open daily, except Mondays, 9:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.
Information: (201) 200-1000.
Long Island  Today "SAND CASTLE CONTEST," Hither Hills State Park, Montauk.
Sign up between 9 and 10:30 A.M. at the park's bathhouse.
Free.
Information: (516) 668-2461.
"NIXON'S NIXON," Springs Community Presbyterian Church on Fireplace Road, East Hampton.
The Playwrights' Theater of East Hampton performs a staged reading of Russel Lees's account of Nixon's last presidential hours.
Directed by Gene Feist, the founder of the Roundabout Theater.
Tickets: $25; includes a discussion and a party afterward.
Today and Saturday, 9 P.M.
Information: (516) 324-5373.
SHINNECOCK POWWOW, Shinnecock Reservation, off Montauk Highway, Southampton.
Featuring food, crafts and performances by the Thunderbird Dancers, a local ensemble, and the Aztec Dancers of Mexico as well as representatives from tribes throughout the United States and Latin America.
Today, tomorrow and Sunday, 10 A.M. to 11 P.M.; Monday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Dance shows at 1 and 7 P.M. tomorrow and Sunday and 1 P.M.
Monday.
Admission: $6; $4 for children and elderly.
Information: (516) 287-2460.
INTERNATIONAL CRAFTS FESTIVAL, Holy Trinity Episcopal Church, 768 Main Street, Greenport. 1 to 5 P.M.
Also tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sunday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Labor Day, 10 A.M. to 3 P.M.
Information: (516) 477-0855 or (516) 289-3880.
Tomorrow "WAKE UP BEACH WALK." Long Island Greenbelt Trail Conference sponsors a four-mile walk from Robert Moses State Park to Democrat Point and back.
Meet at 8 A.M. at the west end of the park's field.
Information: (516) 589-5467.
"ONE DAY IN HISTORY," Havens House, Route 114, Shelter Island.
The Shelter Island Historical Society celebrates the 100th anniverary of the Shelter Island Heights Fire Department with craft and bake sales, children's games and animal shows, and vintage fire trucks.
Admission: $5; $2 for children. 10 A.M. to 3 P.M.
Information: (516) 749-0025.
"ROCK-AND-ROLL WEEKEND," John Drew Theater, Main Street, East Hampton.
The Coasters, the Marvelettes, Gene Chandler, the Passions, Gary Lewis and the Playboys and the Tokens. 7 and 10 P.M.; also on Sunday, same times.
Tickets: $22.
Information: (516) 324-4050.
PICNIC MUSIC, Old Bethpage Village Restoration, Old Swamp Road, Bethpage.
Parlor music; fiddle music accompanying traditional dancers, and choral music; period baseball matches at 1 P.M., a crafts show and foods like clam chowder and sweet corn to augment picnics from home.
Through Monday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $5; $3 for children and the elderly.
Information: (516) 572-8400.
"SIZZLING NINE CHAMPIONSHIPS," Mitchell Park, Charles Lindbergh Boulevard and Hempstead Turnpike, Uniondale.
The United System of Independent Soccer Leagues features the title holders of the Eastern, Western and South Central Divisions.
The semi-finals are at 5 and 7:30 P.M.
The finals are at 4 P.M.
Monday.
Tickets: $9 in advance, $10 at the gate; free for children under $5.
Information: (516) 433-1199.
BUCKWHEAT ZYDECO, Planting Fields Arboretum, Oyster Bay.
A concert by the zydeco master, with the Subdudes; part of the Long Island Summer Festival.
Cajun food will be sold. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $30 and $35 for reserved seats in the festival tent; $15 on the lawn (take a chair).
Information: (516) 888-9000 or 922-0061.
Sunday COMIC BOOK AND BASEBALL CARD SHOW, Coliseum Motor Inn, 1650 Hempstead Turnpike, East Meadow. 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Free.
Information: (716) 672-2913.
Labor Day LABOR DAY FIVE-MILE RUN, Long Beach.
A run for adults and children beginning at 8:30 A.M. at Riverside Boulevard.
Sponsored by the Long Beach Lions Club and the City of Long Beach.
Registration on day of race: 7 A.M. at starting point; fee, $15.
Information: (516) 431-3890.  18th GREAT BONAC 10-KILOMETER FOOTRACE, Springs, East Hampton.
Open to adults and children.
Begins at 9 A.M. at Ashawagh Hall, Fireplace Road.
Registration fee: $15; $13 for children and those over 60.
Sponsored by Stern Family Foundation.
Information: (516) 324-4572.
WHALE-WATCHING CRUISE, Montauk.
A five-to-seven hour cruise sponsored by the Okeanos Ocean Research Foundation.
Leaves at 10:30 A.M. from the Viking Dock, West Lake Drive, Montauk Harbor.
Admission: $30; $15 for those 12 and under; $27 for the elderly and students.
Information: (516) 369-9840.
Connecticut  Today JAZZ CONCERT, outdoors at Mystic Art Association, 9 Water Street, Mystic.
The Michael Coppola Band performs for picnickers. 6:30 P.M.
Tickets: $7.
Information: (203) 536-7601.
LABOR DAY WEEKEND CARNIVAL, Ocean Beach Park, New London.
Today through Monday, 9 A.M. to 10 P.M.
Fireworks on Sunday.
Admission: $2 per hour per carload; maximum of $10 per carload; includes parking and access to the beach.
Information: (800) 510-7263.
COUNTRY FAIR, junction of Routes 171 and 169, Woodstock.
Horse shows, Spam contest, ox team demonstrations, woodchopping exhibition, go-kart racing, animal pulls, chicken barbecues, midway, vegetables, canning, collections, bingo, children's contests, livestock, agricultural exhibits.
Hours: Today, 4 P.M. to 10 P.M.; tomorrow through Monday, 9 A.M. to 9 P.M.
Admission: $5, $3 for the elderly; children free.
Parking $3.
Tomorrow HAT CITY MUSIC SHOW, Marian Anderson Recital Hall, 256 Main Street, Danbury.
Father Frank's Blues Band; Chris Durham and Amanda, jazz; Roger Kaplan and Huger Scene, alternative music; B. Ross Wellman, folk; Mister Vytas, bluegrass; Robb Patterson, folk-rock. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $10.
COUNTRY FAIR, Route 63 south of Goshen Center, Goshen.
Draft horse show, animal pulls, woodchopping contest, arts and crafts, flowers, produce, stage entertainment, needlework, livestock, machinery, men's baking contest. 8 A.M. to 6 P.M., through Monday.
Tickets: $5; $4 for the elderly; free for children.
REVOLUTIONARY WAR RE-ENACTMENT, Fort Griswold State Park, Groton.
A re-enactment of the Battle of Fort Griswold.  10 A.M. to dusk.
Also Sunday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Free.
Information: (203) 445-1729.
COUNTRY FAIR, Quarry Hill Road, Haddam Neck.
Horse shows, road race, animal pulls, oxen parade, baby show, crafts, flowers, produce, livestock, machinery, stage entertainment, midway. 9 A.M. to 10 P.M.
Also Sunday, 7:30 A.M. to 10 P.M., and Monday, 7:30 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $4; free for children.
Sunday UNITED STATES COAST GUARD BAND, Cadet Memorial Field, United States Coast Guard Academy, 15 Mohegan Avenue, New London.
From Tchaikovsky's "1812 Overture" to 1940's swing music. 7:30 P.M.
Free.
Picnickers welcome.
Labor Day NEW HAVEN ROAD RACE, New Haven Green, New Haven.
Men's National 20K Championship. $30,000 purse. 5K and half-mile children's fun run.
Registration: 8:30 A.M.
Information: (203) 481-5933.


Corrections
An obituary on Saturday about Florene May Schoenborn, a benefactor and life trustee of the Museum of Modern Art, misstated the number of paintings she gave to the museum.
Her gifts included five paintings by Matisse and drawings, sculptures and prints by many other artists, not dozens of paintings.


METRO DIGEST
EXPANSION OF WORKFARE FUELS DEBATE
Wearing orange vests, riding in vehicles labeled W.E.P., for Work Experience Program, workfare's official name, 23,000 impoverished adults are cleaning Sanitation Department garages, picking up litter in parks, or performing clerical tasks throughout New York City in exchange for welfare benefits.
Municipal unions, battered by large work force cuts, may see workfare as a threat, but city agencies see it as welcome payback -- compensation for sharp staff reductions.  [ Page A1. ]


St.-Luc Journal; High in the Alps, Brushing the Sky, a Gift of Stars
Jean-Claude Pont, a mathematician and amateur astronomer, has for years been preaching his passions to the people on the mountain of his birth, high in the Swiss Alps.
He has told them of the grandeur of the galaxies, lectured about explosions on the sun and serenaded them about the rings of Saturn and the moons of Jupiter.
And this is how the 194 inhabitants of St.-Luc, who raise cows and grapes in summer and run a ski resort in winter, became dedicated to astronomy.


Esterline Technologies Corp.(ESL,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 31


Where There Is Smoke, There Is an Opportunity
With an entrepreneur's keen eyesight, Richard Wilkens peered through the dense smoke surrounding Westhampton, L.I., and spotted something right alongside the embers of tragedy: the kindling of opportunity.
Mr.
Wilkens markets air tankers.
Not just any old air tankers, but a Russian breed of these birds known as the Ilyushin Il-76.


Mayor Backs Police Role In Melee At a Church
A week after saying he had concerns about police behavior in a melee at a Pentecostal church in South Jamaica, Queens, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday defended the Police Department's role in the incident, in which 34 people were hurt.
Responding to charges from black ministers that the incident was part of a pattern of racism by the department, the Mayor insisted that race played no role.


On Stage, and Off
The Butterflies
Everywhere, this week, there were the unmistakable signs of new theatrical life.
At Circle in the Square, the cast of "Suddenly, Last Summer" gathered to read the Tennessee Williams play and look over a model of the set.
At a small theater off Ninth Avenue, Steve Martin, actor and playwright, sat through the final auditions for his new play, "Picasso at the Lapin Agile." At the Roundabout Theater, a prop man touched up a shag rug that adorns the set of "Company."
In Boston, Ken Ludwig sat in the orchestra of the Colonial Theater, scribbling notes and hungrily counting the laughs in his new play, "Moon Over Buffalo." In Chicago, Julie Andrews and the cast of "Victor/Victoria" were completing their last performances on the road before opening next month at the Marquis Theater, where, in the week after the box office opened, $1 million worth of tickets were sold.
And in Columbus, Ohio, the producers of "Busker Alley" nervously watched a revamped version of their new musical, a tryout attended both by the man who wrote the show's book -- and the man who rewrote it.


INSIDE
New Violence in India
A bomb killed the top official in the Indian state of Punjab and 12 others, including at least three members of an elite security force.
Sikh separatists were suspected.
Page A7.
Medicare, From the Masses
At an emotional meeting in Indiana, people told their congressman of their battles with bureaucracy and their frustration over rigid eligibility rules for Medicare.
Page A20.
Retailers Post Weak Sales
Many of the nation's large retail chains have reported lackluster sales for August, providing further evidence that economic growth continues to be sluggish.
Page D1.


Trail Journal; Cattle Drive From Texas To Montana, 1880's Style
Wearing a cowboy hat and rodeo buckle, Bruce Seidel struck a powerful chord in a Kansas television interview when he drawled that trail food was good, but that his cowboys "don't get to see a lot of cakes and pies."
"That night, the chuck wagon was covered with cakes and pies," Mr.
Seidel, the trail boss, recalled of the small-town hospitality that repeatedly greeted his cowboys as they drove a herd of longhorns from Fort Worth to here.


Rangers Trade Zubov and Nedved
In a continued and perhaps desperate quest for another Stanley Cup championship before the end of the Mark Messier era, the Rangers made a major multiplayer trade yesterday.
They filled two of their biggest present needs while gambling with their future and increasing their payroll.
The Rangers sent two talented young players, Sergei Zubov and Petr Nedved, to the Pittsburgh Penguins.
In exchange, they got two talented older players, Ulf Samuelsson and Luc Robitaille.


Home Video
Ready for Santa  Home video customarily triggers its avalanche of holiday gift sets in late August, and this week Fox kicked off the season with a three-cassette collection: "Star Wars," "The Empire Strikes Back" and "The Return of the Jedi."
Revving up three old standbys for a new promotion calls for innovation.
Fox has done some technical tinkering with the films and has also come up with a game of give-and-take.


Suspended for On-Line Racism
Three state workers were notified yesterday that they would be suspended for three months without pay for distributing offensive and racist jokes across a computerized mail system at the Department of Environmental Protection, The Associated Press reported.


No Dog Days for the Big Deal Makers
The Masters of the Universe, as Tom Wolfe described Wall Street's power brokers, have long been among those who regard Fridays -- and particularly Friday afternoons -- as part of the weekends that fall between Memorial Day and Labor Day.
But the summer of '95 has been a season of mega-mergers and moody markets, forcing even star investment bankers, traders and lawyers to linger longer in their office aeries on the last day of the workweek.


Sports of The Times; Zina's Angel Freed Her To Unretire
IT wasn't the roar of a friendly crowd that made Zina Garrison Jackson postpone her retirement.
And it wasn't the sweet feel of a cross-court winner that changed her mind.
It was the persuasive voice of a higher authority.
"Sometimes I think she is like this little angel that hangs over people or something," Garrison Jackson was saying yesterday.


Corrections
A chart in some editions of Business Day on Wednesday with an article about an $8.5 billion offer by Time Warner Inc. to acquire Turner Broadcasting System Inc. misstated the companies' financial results.
A corrected chart appears on page D5.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  BALKAN PEACE EFFORT GAINS
An American-led peace initiative gathered pace as the Serbs focused squarely on peace even as NATO warplanes continued a second day of air raids.
A1  U.S.
FACES NEW PERILS ON BOSNIA
Ending the Balkan war could be a triumph for the Administration's often criticized foreign policy.
But it would also create perilous new military and political problems for the President.
A1  For the youth of Sarajevo, a new wave of optimism.
A11  Bosnian Serbs say five monitors are alive and free.
A11  LIBERIA WELCOMES END OF WAR
After six years of devastating civil war, tens of thousands of Liberians thronged Monrovia's streets to welcome the return of peace and the leaders who waged the war.
A1  ANXIOUS ULSTER MARKS CEASE-FIRE
The people of Northern Ireland marked the first anniversary of the I.R.A. cease-fire with one question paramount in their minds: How long can the halt in killing last?
A3  BURMESE ADDRESSES WOMEN
The Burmese Nobel laureate Daw Aung San Suu Kyi opened a meeting of private women's groups gathered to shape the issues of the Fourth World Conference on Women.
A9  Plans for nuclear tests hurt France's image in the Pacific.
A3  A political outsider was sworn in as Prime Minister of Rwanda.
A6  New violence flared in a Sikh area of India.
A7  St.-Luc Journal: A Swiss village pursues its love of the sky.
A2  National A12-22  WARNING ON A HEART DRUG
Federal health officials warned that a drug prescribed to treat high blood pressure and heart disease should be used with "great caution, if at all." A1  2 FUHRMAN EPITHETS ARE ALLOWED
Jurors in O.J.
Simpson's trial will hear two snippets of the racially inflammatory interview tapes of Detective Mark Fuhrman.
A1  Excerpts from Judge Lance Ito's ruling on the Fuhrman tapes.
A16  REPRIEVE ON SCHOOL VOUCHERS
A week after the Wisconsin Supreme Court halted a program providing state vouchers for religious-school students, a private fund-raising drive has generated $1.2 million so that about 2,300 students can remain in religious schools.
A12  GANG ROUNDUP IN CHICAGO
More than 30 suspected leaders and street enforcers of Chicago's most notorious street gang were arrested on drug charges.
A13  POLICE RECORDS SUBPOENAED
Federal prosecutors in Philadelphia are said to have subpoenaed records of more than 100,000 arrests as part of a widening investigation of police corruption.
A16  PACKWOOD OFFERS DEFENSE
Senator Bob Packwood's office offered excerpts from his supporters in an effort to cast doubt on some of the women who have accused him of sexual misconduct.
A18  CLINTON STEPS AWAY FROM FIGHT
Faced with the threat of a difficult confirmation fight, the President has again backed away nominating a friend to an judicial post.
A18  MEDICARE AND THE MASSES
A Republican Congressman met with constituents to discuss Medicare financing and met a barrage of fears and complaints.
A22  Trail Journal: An 1880's cattle drive was recreated in the Plains.
A12  Metro Digest B1  COST AND BENEFITS OF WORKFARE
City unions, battered by large work force cuts, may see workfare as a threat, but city agencies see it as welcome payback for staff reductions, especially in maintenance, and believe the city is a cleaner place because of it.
A1  SIEGEL DENIES SEXUAL HARASSMENT
Fighting back tears, Dr.
Bruce Siegel, who resigned as president of the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation, angrily denied that he had sexually harassed employees, at the same time apologizing to a former assistant for "any misunderstanding" created by his actions.
A1  Business Digest D1  Weekend C1-26  Brew pubs and the new wave of beer.
C1  The Long Island Children's Museum.
C1  For Children C19  Theater: On Stage, and Off C2  Film: "World and Time Enough." C8  Music: D'Angelo's riffs.
C5  Restaurants C25  Art: Monkeys at Asia Society.
C1  Lee Krasner revealed.
C6  Bronx museum show.
C21  "Up/Down: Varied Viewpoints," photography.
C20  Queens multiculturalism.
C23  Architecture: British treats.
C5  Books: "The Center Holds," by James F. Simon.
C26  Television: TV Weekend D16  Home Video D16  Sports B7-15  Baseball: O'Neill drives in eight.
B9  Columns: Vecsey on Garrison Jackson B7  Robert Lipsyte B9  On Pro Football B12  Hockey: Rangers trade two players.
B13  Tennis: Agassi wins.
B7  Garrison Jackson advances.
B14  Obituaries D18  Michael Ende, the German author of "The Neverending Story."  Cleveland Robinson, labor leader, civil and human rights advocate.
Bjorn Kjellstrom, orienteer and inventor of the modern compass.
Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials  Harassment-free abortions.
Challenging Beijing's censors.
Guilty or not guilty, 10 to 2?
Letters  Bob Herbert: Power to the banks.
Camille Paglia: A white liberal women's conference.
Joe Domanick: Fuhrman is not an exception.
Chronicle B2  Crossword C6


Torricelli Starts Fund-Raising
Representative Robert G. Torricelli, Democrat of Englewood, is not quite ready to declare that he is officially running for the Senate seat that Bill Bradley is giving up, but yesterday he announced the formation of a 56-member finance committee.
Mr.
Torricelli has $1.2 million left over from his last House campaign, but he said he needs about $7 million more to make the Senate race.
The chairman of the fund-raising committee is Stephen J. Moses, a lawyer in Newark who has served as campaign treasurer for Mr.
Torricelli for the last 12 years.


As Turner Deal Nears, Some at Time Warner Balk
As Ted Turner left New York for his ranch in Montana, lawyers for Turner Broadcasting System Inc. and Time Warner Inc. continued to negotiate a deal yesterday in which Time Warner would acquire Mr.
Turner's company.
One executive close to the discussions said the two companies and Tele-Communications Inc., a key shareholder in Turner, had "agreed to the rough outline of a deal." But other executives cautioned that the fine points of an agreement would take several more days to work out.


It's Another Milestone For Armenian Player
Since he arrived in the United States in January 1993, Sargis Sargsian's life has changed immeasurably.
From the bitter cold and dead-end professional prospects of post-Soviet Armenia, he has moved on to the comfortable confines of a Connecticut home and the soothing climes of Arizona State University.
But Sargsian is not finished with change.
The first Armenian to play in a Grand Slam tennis event is now the first Armenian to reach the third round.
He reached it last night with a remarkable 1-6, 4-6, 6-3, 6-2, 6-4 victory at the United States Open over the 16th-seeded Andrei Medvedev of Ukraine.


CHRONICLE
Fashion designers do all sorts of things for charities -- donate clothes, set tables for gala dinners and write checks.
For "The Fashion Coloring Book," which will be published in mid-October, 31 designers have donated sketches of their clothing designs, and for every $20 book sold, $2 will be donated to the Children's Aid Society.
The project is sponsored by the Fashion Center Business Improvement District in Manhattan and W magazine.


Child of Courage Joins Her Biographer; Pioneer of Integration Is Honored With the Author She Inspired
Their paths crossed in New Orleans 35 years ago by accident, or perhaps through fate: a 6-year-old walking through a screaming mob to integrate a public school and a young psychiatrist whose way into the city that day was blocked by the disturbance.
The child was Ruby Bridges, whose adult life after the anger and danger and drama of integrating William Frantz School all by herself sometimes seemed as still as a torpid summer day in New Orleans.


Rejuvenated Garrison Jackson Discovers Old Form
The theme yesterday at the United States Open, where hazy sunshine turned the hard courts to skillets and a ball-stealing breeze frayed tempers and game plans, was time-warp tennis.
Several surprised losers did not look like their usual competent selves, which was good news for their opponents.
Monica Seles looked like her old self, which was bad news for anyone and everyone in her inexorable path toward this Grand Slam title.
And Zina Garrison Jackson did not look an inkling like the Grand Slam retiree she once thought she would be by the time this event ended.
Instead, the 31-year-old Texan scampered around like one of the teen-agers who had lately made her feel too old for the game.


Reid Detained at Airport
J.
R.
REID of the Spurs was detained by police at the San Antonio International Airport yesterday after a gun was found in his carry-on luggage, a spokesman for the airport said.


The Elements of Peace: Money, Land and Justice
For the first time since the wars of Yugoslavia's destruction began in 1991, the way to an unlovely peace appears to be opening, but several extremely difficult issues remain.


Curtice Burns Foods reports earnings for Year to Jun 24


As Arid August Bites the Dust, Dry-Weather Records Topple
There was electricity in the air at the National Weather Service office in Rockefeller Center yesterday as forecasters waited to see if the bone-dry August that had set one record would capture another before it expired.
As Ignatius Camporeale and Kevin Flynn studied their data, they were secure in the knowledge that through Wednesday there had been 24 consecutive days without measurable rain at Central Park, a stretch that easily surpassed the old August mark for prolonged dryness, set in 1938.


Holiday on Monday
The Labor Day holiday will be observed on Monday.
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Federal, state and municipal offices closed.
POST OFFICE: Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS: Closed.
PARKING: Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION: No refuse or recycling pickups or street cleanings.
FINANCIAL MARKETS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Subways, buses, L.I.R.R. and Metro-North on holiday schedules.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Federal, state and municipal offices closed.
POST OFFICES: Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Trains and buses on Sunday schedule.
CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Federal, state and municipal offices closed.
POST OFFICES: Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Metro-North on holiday schedule.


Corrections
Because of a transcription error, a letter in The Living Section on Aug. 16 about the growing number of brewers of seasonal beers misstated an address for an Internet guide to locally brewed beer.
The address for the New York City Beer Guide on the World Wide Web is:
http://www.nycbeer.org/


Unsettled Agassi Is Stretched To the Limit but Wins in 5 Sets
Off in the twilight zone instead of the Zen zone, Andre Agassi, the defending champion of the United States Open and the No. 1 player in the world, went where he surely didn't expect to go last night: into a fifth set in his second-round match against Alex Corretja of Spain.
The experience was a humbling one.


Citing a Disclosure, Noriega Seeks a New Trial
Lawyers for Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega asked a Federal judge today for a new trial, saying that a major prosecution witness had testified under a secret arrangement between the Government and a Colombian drug cartel and that the deal was never disclosed to the defense or the jury.
Lawyers said the jury, which convicted General Noriega of drug trafficking, should have known about the arrangement under which they say one cartel member testified while another won a reduced sentence.


Nuclear Test Plan Tarnishes France's Image in Pacific
The antique French billboards that once decorated the Restaurant Le Monde are being taken down and hidden away.
The brass lamps, meant to create the ambience of a Paris cafe, have been yanked from the ceiling.
The French menu has been torn up, replaced by one entirely in English.
"We're changing everything, steering clear of anything French," said Simon McGill, a 32-year-old New Zealander and once-dedicated Francophile who fulfilled a dream last October and opened Le Monde, his tribute to French cuisine and culture in the heart of Auckland, New Zealand's most populous city.


Critic's Choice/Film; Of Labyrinthine Plots, Flair and Slick Action
April is the cruelest month?
Ha!
T.
S.
Eliot obviously never spent August searching for a good movie.
The last weeks of summer are the traditional dumping ground for films too weak to go up against midsummer blockbusters.
But there are always exceptions, and this August brought two of the season's smartest, most stylish, most entertaining movies.
"Desperado" and "The Usual Suspects" both have hunky heroes, mazelike plots and slick action: the perfect formula for escapist, dog-day pictures.
"Desperado" owes its flair in equal measure to the director, Robert Rodriguez, and the star, Antonio Banderas.
Though the story is a virtual remake of Mr.
Rodriguez' done-for-a-pittance "El Mariachi," this story of a violent, guitar-playing seeker of justice gains a whole different twist with Mr.
Banderas in the title role.
He plays up his Latin-lover appeal with flowing hair and what another era would have called bedroom eyes.
But "Desperado" shows him to be an actor whose mind is in the right place, too.


For Children
So you're avoiding the beach and you've seen the movie about a pig.
Now what?
You need to do something: it's the weekend calm before the school storm.
These three small suburban museums have exhibitions that should keep children's pesky moods at bay and put parents in a state of near contentment.
The museums are in towns that are also worth exploring, and there is a harbor, an ice cream parlor and a Revolutionary War-era home among other things.
The Museums at Stony Brook  1208 Route 25A Stony Brook, L.I. (516) 751-0066 Recommended for all ages


Genovese Drug Stores Inc.(GDXA,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Aug 18


New York Workfare Expansion Fuels Debate
On a sweltering day, hard against the Williamsburg Bridge, Justino Morado and 14 fellow welfare recipients shoveled and raked caked dirt and filth from a stairway that looked as if it hadn't been cleaned in 20 years.
Mr.
Morado, 42, who is being paid one-quarter the salary of the lowest-level Sanitation Department crew member, said he didn't mind having to do cleanup work to receive a welfare check.
"Nobody should get nothing for free," he said.
A few steps away, another man sweeping the same stairway was less agreeable.
"You get, like, nothing, and you have to kiss their boots," he said.


From Here, There and Everywhere
Things are looking up -- and down -- at the Seagram's Building on Park Avenue, where the Seagram Gallery has a jump on the art season with a small but engaging show of photographs taken from high or low angles.
"Up/Down: Varied Viewpoints," which was organized by Carla Caccamise Ash, brings together diverse images by dozens of American photographers of this century, both celebrated masters and less familiar artists.
The simple, almost simplistic idea behind the show turns out to have considerable critical resonance.
Denounced and derided in the 19th century as amateur mistakes and proof of photography's inartistic nature, shots made from unusual angles became staples of Modernism in the early decades of this century.


D'Angelo Puts His Own Stamp on Songs, Raps and Riffs
D'Angelo, who sold out two shows at Tramps on Wednesday night, stands apart from most 1990's pop Casanovas.
Current rhythm-and-blues teems with singers who want to be the next Marvin Gaye or the next Donnie Hathaway.
They dispense standard come-ons and promises in mellifluous voices, adding a little hip-hop braggadocio.
But most of them imitate their idols' suavity while ignoring their idiosyncrasies: the attempts to reconcile spiritual and carnal desires, the musical experiments, the unswerving obsessions.
D'Angelo has learned from his models' oddities as well as from their slickness.
His early set was short -- barely an hour -- but the music never rushed.
D'Angelo's band started with a slow vamp straight from the 1970's, all glimmering electric piano and percussive wah-wah guitar.
He arrived, unsmiling, to take over the electric piano and keep the groove simmering.
And he sang about longing and lust, with one song about his anger at someone he finds "sleeping with my woman." That song, with its all-profanity chorus, and "Brown Sugar," in which he sang and rapped about being both satiated and eager for more, are clearly from the hip-hop era.
But D'Angelo's music always took its time; riffs oozed up from the bass, the guitarist squeezed out slinky asides, Mr.
D'Angelo's electric piano rippled and chimed.


Mayor Assails School Board Over Safety
With the opening of New York City's public schools just days away, the ongoing battles between Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the Board of Education over classroom staffing and school security took a particularly nasty and personal turn on two fronts yesterday.
The Mayor's aides sharply attacked the board's president over the school budget and made public a subpoena to the Chancellor -- served in his office by four officials of the Department of Investigation on Wednesday night -- to force him to release a draft audit on school safety.


Southern Co.(SO,N) reports earnings for 12mos to Jul 31


Butchered Body Parts And Ideas of Childhood
The works in the exhibition "David Padilla Cabrera y Linda Matalon" are visually very different, but together these two artists make an interestingly textured show at the Bronx Museum of the Arts.
Mr.
Cabrera's small paintings look abstract but are, in fact, shot through with autobiographical references, many to his childhood in a Chicano community (an identity alluded to in the Spanish conjunction used in the show's title).


License Law At Fish Market Is Challenged
A lawyer for 24 companies at the Fulton Fish Market said yesterday that he would seek a court injunction to block New York City from determining who can and cannot work at the market.
Under a new law that goes into effect today, the city has the power to license companies and employees and ban them from the market on grounds that they have criminal backgrounds or that they are linked to crime groups.
The Giuliani administration proposed the statute, saying it was needed to rid the market in lower Manhattan of corruption and exploitation by the Mafia.


Oshman's Sporting Goods Inc.(OSH,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Observer; A Dirge For a Good Man
Labor Day was created to honor the working man, but we don't have the working man anymore.
Instead we have the working couple.
"Why has the working couple replaced the working man, Uncle Bob?"


Suit Over Benefits for Mental Disability
A standard feature of disability insurance policies -- the two-year limit on payments for disability resulting from mental illness -- has been challenged in a lawsuit filed in a Federal court in Manhattan.
The lawsuit involves an employee of the Israel Discount Bank of New York, identified only as "Leonard F.," who is said to suffer chronic depression.
According to the suit, he has about one year of disability benefits remaining but his condition is expected to last far longer.


Smith Corona Corp.(SCO,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


Bruins Give Neely a Contract Extension
CAM NEELY signed a two-year contract with the Boston Bruins yesterday that provides an automatic extension for a third year if his often-injured knee holds up.


Corrections
The Personal Health column on Wednesday, about hormone replacement therapy for men, misstated an affiliation of Dr.
Peter J. Snyder, who said it was not clear whether a decline in testosterone in men starting at the age of 40 or 50 was a condition requiring treatment.
He is with the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, not the University of Pittsburgh.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Purchased the contracts of Mike Hartley, pitcher, and Jarvis Brown, outfielder, from Rochester of the International League.


CHRONICLE
The phone hasn't stopped ringing for JUSTIN GIMELSTOB, the 18-year-old tennis player who won the national 18-and-under championship last month and a wild-card spot in the United States Open.
Since Wednesday night, when he won his first match in the Open, against David Prinosil of Germany, the family says it has received at least 50 phone calls from agents who want to see Justin turn professional.
The Gimelstobs seem unfazed by the attention.
"The agents have been talking to Justin for many years," his mother, Patricia Gimelstob, said before his second match last night, which he lost to Richard Krajicek of the Netherlands, 6-4, 6-2, 6-4.
"But he's not going to turn professional right now."


Judge Rules on I.R.S. Letter
New Jersey's interest would not be served by releasing the full text of a letter from the Internal Revenue Service that challenges the removal of $769 million from the state pension system in 1992, a Superior Court judge ruled yesterday.


Detailed Rules on Executions Released by New York State
On the day capital punishment returned to New York, corrections officials yesterday released regulations governing every aspect of a condemned prisoner's life and death, from the 10 personal photographs he may keep in his final cell, to the number of clocks (4) that must be synchronized, to the exact 29 words a security supervisor is to say once the inmate is executed.
Although Gov.
George E. Pataki acknowledged that any execution is likely to be a long way off, the 29 pages of regulations released yesterday marked one of the first concrete steps toward reinstating capital punishment, 32 years after the last execution here.
The bureaucratic rules are striking in their detail.
They prescribe how many witnesses may view the execution, require examinations of any prosthetic devices before prisoners enter death row and outline what steps officials must take if a stay of execution is issued after the lethal drugs begin to flow.


Dallas Names Are in Inquiry
The names of at least two current and three former Dallas Cowboys have surfaced in an investigation of an airline ticket scheme, according to a television news report.
The report -- made by the Dallas television station KXAS-Channel 5 -- said the current Cowboys Michael Irvin and Charles Haley and the former Cowboys Alfredo Roberts, Everson Walls and Ron Springs had purchased American Airlines tickets at either reduced prices from an agent for the company or were given the tickets by the agent.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL REPORT
KEY GAMES OF TOP TEAMS Miami (10-2) at U.C.L.A. (5-6) This is a chance for Miami, with a new coach (Butch Davis), a new offense (two backs, not one) and 12 new starters, to prove it is the powerhouse of old.
It should have its hands full with U.C.L.A., which has 17 returning starters.
One is a 1,000-yard running back with the intriguing name of Karim Abdul-Jabbar, no relation to the old Bruin basketball hero.
Syracuse (7-4) at North Carolina (8-4) A year ago, after a 6-1 start, Syracuse plunged to 7-4 and did not get a bowl bid.
Now it has good but inexperienced talent.
Its quarterbacks are Keith Downing, a sophomore in for eight plays last year, and Donovan McNabb and Kevin Johnson, both redshirt freshmen.
The starter will be announced at game time.
Whoever it is, he will find that North Carolina will be tough at home.
Michigan (9-4, 1-0) at Illinois (7-5)
With a new coach in Lloyd Carr and a final-play victory over Virginia in last Saturday's Pigskin Clasic, Michigan may not scare Big Ten rivals.
Illinois could make it difficult.
Its linebacker, Simeon Rice, may be the best player in college football.
Colorado (11-1) at Wisconsin (7-4-1) Colorado is another lion of old that could be slipping.
It has lost Coach Bill McCartney, tailback Rashaan Salaam, quarterback Kordell Stewart and wide receiver Michael Westbrook.
The new quartrback is Koy Detmer, a younger brother of the former Brigham Young quarterback, Ty Detmer.
OTHER GAMES EAST Purdue (7-6) at West Virginia (4-5-2) West Virginia could be Miami's major threat in the Big East.
Its offense has nine returning starters, including Chad Johnston, a smart quarterback.
Purdue's veteran team seems outmanned here.
Washington State (8-4) at Pittsburgh (3-8) Washington State, a second-tier power last year, must replace nine defensive starters, but it should handle Pitt.
The Panthers have a workhorse tailback in Billy West, but little offensive depth, and the schedule is rough.
MIDWEST Temple (2-9) at Kansas State (9-3) Kansas State may be headed for another big year because eight defensive starters and the best receivers are back.
Matt Miller succeeds Chad May at quarterback.
Temple will have trouble surviving its first three games -- against Kansas State, West Virginia and Penn State, all on the road.
Cincinnati (2-8-1) at Kansas (6-5) Kansas in a runaway.
The Jayhawks rushed for 247 yards a game last year, and L.T.
Levine and June Henley, the key runners, are back.
A new 3-4 may solve their defensive problems.
SOUTH Florida State (10-1-1) vs.
Duke (8-4) at Orlando, Fla.
A year ago, Duke was 7-0 until a 59-20 beating at Florida State.
This week, Coach Fred Goldsmith of Duke told his coaching staff, "Prepare to win the game. Don't prepare to look good losing." Still, Duke may struggle to stay within four touchdowns of Florida State, whose shotgun offense has helped make it the national preseason favorite.
Mississippi (4-7) at Auburn (9-1-1) Auburn, again an elite team, returns eight offensive starters, including running back Stephen Davis and all five interior linemen.
Mississippi has a good offense and a questionable defense.
Social note: Auburn is coming off probation and Mississippi is going on.
East Carolina (7-5) at Tennessee (8-4) East Carolina has 18 returning starters, Tennessee 15.
Tennessee is in a higher league, especially with its poised sophomore quarterback, Peyton Manning, Archie's son.
Alabama (12-1) at Vanderbilt (5-6) Alabama has won 12 straight at Vanderbilt and should win comfortably again, even though it must replace quarterback Jay Barker and tailback Sherman Williams.
Rod Dowhower, Vanderbilt's new coach, will have Ronnie Gordon pass more.
William and Mary (8-3) at Virginia (9-3, 0-1)  William and Mary is a sacrificial lamb from Division I-AA.
Virginia, which had Michigan beaten last week until the final play, may be the best team in the Atlantic Coast Conference except for Florida State.
Louisville (6-5) at Kentucky (1-10) Howard Schnellenberger left Louisville for Oklahoma, but the new coach, Ron Cooper, inherits a talented team.
Kentucky's new one-back offense has the back it needs in Moe Williams, but who will block for him?
SOUTHWEST Louisiana State (4-7) at Texas A&amp;M (10-0-1) In the last year of the 81-year-old Southwest Conference, the Aggies are off probation and should contend for the national title.
Leeland McElroy may be the best running back anywhere.
Louisiana State's new coach, Gerry DiNardo, has 17 returning starters and a decent offense.
Arkansas (4-7) at Southern Methodist (1-9-1) While Arkansas is hardly a power, it does have 18 starters back, 10 on defense.
Southern Methodist is improved.
It should be because its pass defense last year was awful.
FAR WEST Texas (8-4) x 18 at Hawaii (3-8-1) Texas has worked hard to upgrade its rushing defense.
It had so many injuries last year that it had to use 13 linebackers.
Still, this should not be a tough game because Hawaii is usually an accommodating host.
Arizona State (3-8) at Washington (7-4) Washington, finally off probation, may be back in the Rose Bowl picture if it can overcome offensive problems.
It will try to solve one of them by passing from the shotgun.
Its defense is solid.
Oregon (9-4) at Utah (10-2) With Coach Rich Brooks and quarterback Danny O'Neil gone, Oregon may come down to earth after its near-dream season.
It still has a veteran team, and Utah is not the power it was last year.
MISMATCHES Houston (1-10) at Florida (10-2-1) Florida graduated three defensive linemen to the pros.
If it can fill the gaps there, it will be a national contender again.
Quarterback Danny Wuerffel is one of the best.
Florida should win by seven touchdowns.
Northwestern (3-7-1) at Notre Dame (6-5-1) Coach Lou Holtz is on the hot seat because 6-5-1 seasons leave Notre Dame aghast.
He has weapons in quarterback Ron Powlus and tailback Randy Kinder.
Northwestern has speed, but it is small and the defense is thin.
Notre Dame by five touchdowns.
Pacific (6-5) at Arizona (8-4) A year ago, Arizona expected roses and got thorns.
It has an experienced quarterback in Dan White and its usual tough defense.
While it may be looking ahead to Southern California three weeks hence, it should win here by five touchdowns. 1994 and 1995 records in parentheses; All times Eastern


Simpson Defense Attacks Judge's Ruling on Tapes While Organizing Its Lineup of Witnesses
Still reeling from Judge Lance A. Ito's restrictive ruling on Detective Mark Fuhrman's taped or transcribed interviews, lawyers for O. J. Simpson spent a short court day glowering at the judge, denouncing his decision and trying to introduce new evidence of Mr.
Fuhrman's racial and religious animus.
Judge Ito essentially passed the defense a peace pipe this morning, backing off from a promise to prosecutors by letting Mr.
Simpson's lawyers call out of sequence an additional witness to describe Mr.
Fuhrman's virulent racism.
But for tactical reasons the defense balked, leaving increasingly irate jurors idle for the fourth straight day.


For Riley, Knicks Get $1 Million and a No. 1 Pick
The Knicks agreed to drop tampering charges against the Miami Heat yesterday in an 11th-hour settlement that brought New York unprecedented compensation and paved the way for Pat Riley to sign the most lucrative coaching contract in National Basketball Association history.
The summerlong dispute over the contract status of the game's most high-profile coach ended suddenly, with a flurry of activity.
First, Miami gave the Knicks a first-round draft choice in 1996 and $1 million as compensation for letting Riley out of the last year of his contract.
And last night, the Heat presented Riley with a five-year package believed to be worth nearly $40 million.


An Underdog Begins The Season at Miami
Call it the tyranny of statistics: On paper, not one established team has an easier schedule than the Jets.
They just happen to start their season Sunday against one of the toughest teams in the league, the Dolphins.
At Miami, to boot.
For what it's worth, only the expansion Carolina and Jacksonville teams face clubs with worse 1994 records.
The Jets' opponents were 105-119, a .469 percentage.
The Jets face fewer winning teams than any other nonexpansion club: a grand total of five.
The Jets meet only four teams who were in the playoffs.


Bridge
For more than 40 years, students of the game in the New York metropolitan area have profited by reading "The Biggest Little Bridge Book in the World." This description of the basic principles of the game was first produced by the professors of New York's Card School, including Edgar Kaplan and Peter Leventritt.
It has been updated repeatedly, and has now been reissued by the Beverly Club, 130 East 57th Street.
It is obtainable for $6.50 including mailing.
The revisions, which include Texas transfers, strong two-over-one, the forcing one no-trump response and balancing, were prepared by Alan Miller, who does much of the club's teaching.
On the diagramed deal from a club event, he sat South, playing with Judy Bianco.


Sterling Morrison, 53, Rock Guitarist, Dies
Sterling Morrison, a founding member and a guitarist for the seminal experimental rock band Velvet Underground, died on Wednesday at his home in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
He was 53.
The cause was non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, said his wife, Martha.


CHRONICLE
The personal assistant of JOHN F. KENNEDY JR. denied reports yesterday that Mr.
Kennedy had become engaged.
"It's not true," the assistant, RoseMarie Terenzio, said, referring to yesterday's front-page article in The New York Post, headlined "JFK Jr. Pops the Question." It said he had proposed to CAROLYN BESSETTE, public-relations director for collections at Calvin Klein.


Corrections
An article yesterday about statistics on school violence for the 1994-95 school year in New York City summarized a statement by Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines imprecisely.
The Chancellor's office explained yesterday that when he said schools had made "significantly less progress than I had thought and hoped," he was referring to the schools' collection of data on the issue, not to their level of safety.


DECISIONS ON GIFTS OUTLINED BY DOLE
When Senator Bob Dole returned a $1,000 donation from a gay Republican organization last week, his Presidential campaign staff suggested that voters could judge him by the contributions he keeps.
The advisers said that Mr.
Dole strongly disagreed with the gay-rights agenda of the group whose money he returned, and that he would never knowingly accept money from an organization whose causes he opposed.


Boy Killed in Car Accident
Aaron Hubert Talpass, an 11-year-old Florence boy, was killed on Mansfield Road East early Thursday afternoon when a car in which he was riding hit a tree after swerving to avoid a groundhog, the State Police said yesterday.


Central Park? Beach Volleyball? Where's the Boardwalk?


Executive Changes
ADVANCED MODULAR SOLUTIONS INC., Acton, Mass., named Lyn Benton president and chief executive.
It also named Kenneth H. Olsen, the retired founder of Digital Equipment Corp., as its chairman.
INCYTE PHARMACEUTICALS INC., Palo Alto, Calif., named Denise M. Gilbert chief financial officer.
TEREX CORP., Westport, Conn., said Randolph Lenz, its largest shareholder, had retired as chairman and a board member.


F. K. Willenbrock, Federal Scientist, 75
F.
Karl Willenbrock, an electrical engineer and educator who retired two years ago as a senior scientist in the United States Department of Commerce, died on Aug. 24 at a nursing home in Alexandria, Va.
He was 75 and a resident of the nearby town of Reston.
The cause was heart failure, said Patricia Samaras, a colleague and friend.


Suicide-Ban Appeal
Advocates for terminally ill people urged a Federal appeals panel yesterday to strike down a New York State law that prohibits doctors from helping dying patients commit suicide.
For nearly an hour, three judges from the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit debated with Kathryn Sisk Tucker, a lawyer representing a Seattle euthanasia organization, Compassion in Dying.
Article, page 23.


Israel Land Development Co. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Ernst Home Center Inc.(ERNS,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 29


Holiday on Monday
The Labor Day holiday will be observed on Monday.
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal, state and municipal offices closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS Closed.
PARKING Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION No refuse or recycling pickups or street cleanings.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Subways, buses and Long Island and Metro-North railroads on holiday schedule.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal, state and municipal offices closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed TRANSPORTATION Trains and buses on Sunday schedule.
CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal, state and municipal offices closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed TRANSPORTATION Metro-North on holiday schedule.
Traffic Alert MONDAY  In Brooklyn, Eastern Parkway will be closed between Utica Avenue and Grand Army Plaza from 8 A.M. to 6 P.M. because of the West Indian Day parade.


Big Advance by Frazier Takes Sixth-Seeded Pierce by Surprise
Yet another of her forehands had roared wide, and Mary Pierce threw her head back, clenched her fists and screamed in frustration.
On the other side of the net, Amy Frazier, a young woman with a higher tolerance for her own foibles and a considerably lower profile, continued to go about her business.


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD  Ethiopian Edges Kiptanui in 5,000 Meters
Haile Gebrselassie of Ethiopia turned on the speed with 600 meters remaining in a 5,000-meter showdown against Moses Kiptanui of Kenya that matched the two best long distance runners in the world last night at Olympic Stadium in Berlin.
The Ethiopian then swept to victory with a time of 12 minutes 53.19 seconds that was an Istaf meet record but nearly 10 seconds off his world record.
Kiptanui, one of 21 world champions in the meet, clocked 13:00.90.
With victories, Michael Johnson, Gwen Torrence, Sonia O'Sullivan and Natalya Shikolenko shared 44 pounds of gold for sweeping their events in the Golden Four series that began July 21 at Oslo and included Zurich and Brussels.
In the 100 meters, the world champion, Donovan Bailey of Canada, edged the Olympic gold medalist, Linford Christie, denying the Briton a sweep of the Golden Four.


U.C.L.A. Bracing For the Unknown
The problem that can make coaches crazy at this point of the football season is that, even under ideal circumstances, they don't know what to expect.
And when the scenario they face is less than ideal, when a talented opponent has a new coaching staff and new starters at key positions, the unknown becomes even more of a challenge.
That is the position the U.C.L.A.
Bruins will be placed in on Saturday, when their season begins in the Rose Bowl against the University of Miami.


Battery Charges Against Cox Dismissed
Atlanta Braves Manager BOBBY COX looked relaxed and signed autographs in a Cobb County courtroom yesterday moments before a judge dismissed wife battery charges against him.
Cox, with his wife standing close by his side, told Superior Court Magistrate RICHARD L. FABER that counseling has been a great help to his marriage.
Cox and his wife, PAMELA, were ordered into counseling after the police were called to the couple's home northwest of Atlanta in May.
Pamela Cox told the police that her husband struck her, but she retracted the statement the next day.
Charges of simple battery against Cox, 54, had been delayed for 90 days pending the outcome of counseling for the couple.


It's Only Rock-and-Roll (but I Like It)


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMERICAN BANCORP INC., Wheeling, W. Va., said its American Columbus National Bank unit had agreed to buy two Ohio branches, in Flushing and St.
Clairville, from Banc One Corp.
Columbus, Ohio, for an undisclosed amount.
American will assume about $17.5 million in deposits.
G.
D.
SEARLE &amp; CO., , a unit of Monsanto Co., completed the acquisition of the women's health care product lines of Syntex.
Financial terms were not disclosed.
OWENS-CORNING FIBERGLASS CORP., Toledo, Ohio, which makes advanced glass and composite materials, acquired Falcon Manufacturing of Michigan Inc., a producer of expanded polystyrene foam insulation products in the Midwest, for an undisclosed price.


CHRONICLE
ENID GREENE WALDHOLTZ, a Republican from Utah, gave birth to a daughter, Elizabeth Greene, on Thursday evening in Salt Lake City.
The 7-pound 7-ounce baby arrived three weeks early, said her father, Joe Waldholtz, who is a volunteer in his wife's Congressional office.


Twist in Jewelry Shop Case
The accused mastermind of a botched March 13 jewelry shop robbery in Franklin Township told F.B.I. agents who arrested him at the Canadian border on Wednesday that the store owner, Jeffrey Wolf, had actually planned the robbery, in which Mr.
Wolf's wife was shot to death.
"This guy's going to get away with the perfect crime," Avram David Gottlieb, 36, told agents, said Michael Mason, supervisor of the F.B.I.'s Syracuse office.
Mr.
Gottlieb, captured in Canada last month, was brought back to stand trial for the jewelry shop crime and for an earlier bank robbery in Kansas.


METRO DIGEST


Judge Ito's Restrictive Ruling
After playing the Mark Fuhrman tapes in open court, Judge Lance Ito has decided that only two excerpts, about ten seconds of talk, may reach the O.J.
Simpson jury.
Judge Ito was right to let the public hear the racist, savage speech of the former Los Angeles detective, but he was wrong to allow only two snippets in evidence.
He also ruled too narrowly in excluding Mr.
Fuhrman's statements about fabricating evidence.
Judge Ito began well by letting defense lawyers play a full range of the tapes, out of the jury's hearing.
The anguish caused by the tapes attests to their public importance.
Mr.
Fuhrman's remarks have stirred the Los Angeles Police Department to vows of corrective action and educated the nation about a persistent law enforcement problem.


Flutie Is Facing Elbow Surgery
Quarterback DOUG FLUTIE of the Calgary Stampeders needs surgery to repair a torn elbow tendon and will miss the rest of the Canadian Football League season.


New York State's Jobless Rate Jumps to 7.1%
Employment levels in New York City, New York State and New Jersey were little changed in August, according to Federal data released yesterday.
But the unemployment rate -- a measure of the number of people who have been unsuccessfully looking for jobs -- rose in New York State to more than 7 percent for the first time since April 1994.
The monthly data showed that the unemployment rate rose in New York State to 7.1 percent in August from 6.2 percent in July, and fell in New Jersey to 6.6 percent in August from 6.8 percent in July.


Nigeria Had to Act Against Coup Plotters
To the Editor:
Re "The Fantasy Coup," Bob Herbert's Aug. 14 column on Nigeria: Gen.
Sani Abacha's Government came to office to restore order at the request of Chief Moshood K. O. Abiola and other politicians who were worried by the turmoil of the June 12, 1993, presidential election.


Rykoff-Sexton Inc.(RYK,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 29


The Knicks Get Rich And Riley Gets Richer
The Knicks got richer, but apparently not as rich as Pat Riley.
The settlement yesterday between the Knicks and Miami Heat gave the Knicks a conditional first-round draft choice and $1 million for a coach who had already left town.
Sounds like the best trade the Knicks have pulled off in some time.


2 Commissioners, 2 Styles; To Regulate Taxis, A Pugnacious Ball of Fire
The instant Christopher R. Lynn stepped from his car onto the hot asphalt outside Kennedy International Airport, dozens of cabdrivers recognized him and swarmed to his side.
It was the kind of boisterous throng that often greets a president or governor.
Mr.
Lynn holds a position at least a few links down the political food chain: chairman of the New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission.


Cortines Postpones Any Teacher Layoffs
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said yesterday that he had decided against sending pink slips, as scheduled, to any teachers or other employees who will start the school year next week without permanent assignments.
Coming a day after mayoral aides lashed out at the Board of Education president, Carol A. Gresser, for trying to scuttle budget discussions, the Chancellor's action was intended to calm the relations between the two sides.
It met with mixed results.


Community Isn't Place for All Mentally Disabled
To the Editor:
Marc N. Brandt (letter, Aug. 24) states that "people with mental retardation have become productive citizens in the community." This is true only of the higher functioning mentally retarded.


Summer in the City: The Final Days


2 Are Indicted in Gold-Dust Caper
Hector Oyola, a longtime housekeeper at a Queens jewelry manufacturer, went to work one day last April, the authorities say, swept up the dirt on the floor and carted it away.
No one would have complained except for one problem: the authorities say the dirt had gold in it.


Walter I. Harris, 92; Led Steel Company
Walter I. Harris, the chairman emeritus of the Harris Structural Steel Company, died on Tuesday at his home in Lebanon, N.J.
He was 92.
Mr.
Harris started working at the company, which was founded by his father, George Harris, when he was 13 years old.
He worked there for 72 years.


MEDDLING BY CHINA IS SEEN AS MARRING MEETING ON WOMEN
China continued today to obstruct a meeting of nearly 20,000 women here, leading a senior Western official to warn that its actions as host to the Fourth World Conference on Women threatened to overshadow the event itself.
"It is just out of control and we have protested very strongly," said the official, a delegate to the conference.
"The United Nations has got to move on this," he said, adding that the world body has a responsibility as guarantor of the conference.


4 Charged in Sexual Assault
Two carnival workers were in Hunterdon County Jail yesterday, charged with raping a 15-year-old Franklin Township girl Wednesday in a trailer on the grounds of the Flemington Agricultural Fair.
The girl came to the annual fair with a friend, but was alone when it closed.
She voluntarily went with the two men and two teen-age boys to the house trailer, where the four assaulted her, the police said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-4  BALKAN ENEMIES TO MEET  The foreign ministers of Bosnia, Croatia and the Serb-dominated Yugoslav federation agreed to meet in Geneva next week for the first direct meeting of all parties to the war in more than two years.  1  For the first time in 50 years, German planes risked combat. 2


Louise Lorimer; Actress, 97
Louise Lorimer, an actress who appeared on Broadway, in films and on television, died on Aug. 12 at her home in Newton, Mass.
She was 97.
Ms.
Lorimer began her acting career in 1926 in a revival of the 19th-century drama "East Lynne" in Greenwich Village.
She played a leading role in the 1943 Broadway comedy "Feathers in a Gale" and also appeared in "I Remember Mama" in 1944.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about a for-profit company running a public elementary school in Wilkinsburg, Pa., misstated the size of the elementary school building.
The school, Turner Elementary, is two stories, not four.


The Devil And God At War Over Souls
Practically every other line in Gregory Widen's terminally turgid film "The Prophecy" is an anguished oracular pronouncement about heaven and hell, God and the Devil, angels and humans and a celestial war that involves the stealing of human souls.
The spiritual blather is laid on so thick that the screenplay leaves almost no room for ordinary conversation.
And when the debating halts, it's usually to watch a heart being plucked out of a dead body or a corpse being incinerated.
Just about the only big question that "The Prophecy" doesn't try to answer is how actors of the quality of Christopher Walken, Eric Stoltz and Amanda Plummer could have been dragooned into appearing in such a film.
Mr.
Walken, who plays none other than the Angel Gabriel himself, manages to convey a glinting awareness of the ridiculousness of his situation.
With his hooded, glassy eyes, ravaged Cupid's face and sulfurous complexion, he is visually suited to play a rancid seraph.
But when he speaks, he sounds about as out of place as the young Tony Curtis in knightly drag, declaring, "Yondah lies the castle of my faddah."


2 Commissioners, 2 Styles; At Consumer Affairs, A Subtle, Determined Diplomat
One recent sun-soaked afternoon, several city inspectors dropped by the SoHo sidewalk cafe, Cremcaffe, but they were not there for the iced cappuccino.
The inspectors carted away a dozen tables, chairs and umbrellas because the cafe was operating without a license.
"The guys came in like Rambos," said Denise Dumont, an employee of Cremcaffe.


No Proof Exists That 'Ecstasy' Drug Is Safe
To the Editor:
Re " 'Ecstasy' Drug Tests Employed High Doses" (letter, Aug. 24):


Video Keno Is In Doubt As a Judge Backs Trump
Lawyers for Donald Trump and New York State battled back and forth in court yesterday over the state's plans to introduce a keno-style lottery next week, leaving the game's future in question.
Mr.
Trump, who owns three casinos in Atlantic City, is fighting to stop the game, and a state supreme court justice in Manhattan issued a temporary restraining order yesterday preventing the state from introducing it on Wednesday as planned.
The game, called Quick Draw, is to be played in bars, restaurants and other locations.


Dry Streak Evaporates With Just a Touch of Rain
Rain fell across the metropolitan New York region late Thursday and early yesterday, officially ending a dry streak and reminding people what rain smells like on a summer night, but leaving August the driest on record.
The rain was the first since Aug. 6, and it varied sharply in intensity, with 2 one-hundredths of an inch measured in Central Park and 7 one-hundredths logged at Islip, L.I., the National Weather Service said.


Sloan-Kettering Hospital Plans to Dismiss Its Chief Neurosurgeon
The Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York notified its chief neurosurgeon yesterday that it intended to dismiss him, charging that he had mishandled a brain operation on the mother of one of India's best-known film actresses last May and another brain operation on a patient last December.
The hospital said the neurosurgeon, Dr.
Ehud Arbit, who had been suspended from surgical and administrative duties since June, was to be dismissed -- after exhausting appeals -- on the basis of a review that concluded he had "violated Memorial Hospital's standard of care" in the two cases.


Catholic Schools Pay Teachers Much Less
To the Editor:
One factor in the viability of Roman Catholic schools versus public schools not mentioned is the low-cost services of the women who taught us back in the 1950's.


Carl Overhage, 85; Headed M.I.T. Lab
Carl F. J. Overhage, a retired professor of electrical engineering and former director of the Lincoln Laboratory at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, died on Aug. 7 at St.
Vincent Hospital in Santa Fe, N.M.
He was 85 and lived in Santa Fe.
The cause was a stroke, said Arthur Hemmendinger, a friend, who reported the death.


No Headline
"I had this one lady who had all her papers stolen, and she was just furious about it. She said, 'I'm a taxpayer, and I want these papers to go to the City of Houston. But I can't sit here and watch my newspapers all day.' She was really upset." -- MARK VILLAGOMEZ, a Houston sanitation worker.  [ 6:3. ]


Higher Fees for Drunken Drivers
Those convicted of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs will pay more to attend the mandatory two-day classroom remedial courses, under legislation signed yesterday by Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman.
The added money -- fees rise to $75 a day from $50 for first offenders and to $100 from $75 for second offenders -- will be used to finance programs on drunken driving by the Division of Motor Vehicles.


Some See 'Sex' in the Clouds of 'Lion King'
After a Virginia-based anti-abortion organization complained that the word "sex" appeared spelled out in a cloud during the Disney animated film "The Lion King," a spokesman for the organization said yesterday that the word was so difficult to detect that it might not be construed as a word at all.
"It's kind of iffy," said Rodney Miller of the American Life League, which is based in Stafford, Va.
"Some people see a cloud, kind of wavy lines. It's hard to see even if you slow it down."


Katharine Day; Adviser on Plays, 94
Katharine B. Day, the widow of Clarence Day, author of "Life With Father" and other books, died on Aug. 25 at her home in Manhattan.
She was 94.
After her husband's death in 1935, Mrs.
Day acted as the technical adviser for the Broadway production of "Life With Father" in 1939 and contributed heavily to its sequel, "Life With Mother," in 1948.
Both plays were created by Howard Lindsay and Russel Crouse, working from Day's reminiscences of his youth in New York City in the 1880's.
Mrs.
Day also served as an adviser for the 1947 film adaptation of "Life With Father."


Lasix Makes Debut at Belmont Opener
Belmont Park opened a quiet but historic autumn meeting yesterday with 42 horses running on the newly legalized medication Lasix and with five winning races that would have been closed to them earlier and three of those running on Lasix for the first time.
The season would have been historic anyway because it is built on two months of races leading to the $10 million Breeders' Cup program on Oct. 28, and the barns were already filled with star horses.
But history was given a nudge when the State Racing Commission recently authorized the use of the diuretic Lasix on race day, ending New York's stand as the only state banning it but sharpening the controversy over its effects on performance.


Ex-City Employee Accused of Starting Fire at Brooklyn Hotel
The huge fire that gutted part of the landmark St.
George Hotel in Brooklyn Heights last week, sending hundreds of panicked residents fleeing, was started by a 61-year-old man who was ransacking a vacant section of the building in search of copper tubing he could sell, possibly to support his drug habit, the police said last night.
The suspect, Louis Foressie, retired last year after 27 years as a laborer for the city's Parks Department, the police said.
He also has a long criminal record, including convictions for burglary and drug charges, they said.


A.L. Jumble Spells Out a Wild-Card Race for Yankees
The Yankees are giddily studying the scoreboard and pondering a pennant chase, although they are actually in the new wild-card race.
Nearly every score flashing behind left field at Yankee Stadium affects the Yankees' fate in this format in which teams who win four consecutive games stand apart.
Guess what?
The Yanks have won four straight.
After overcoming Scott Kamieniecki's abominable effort and the loss of a four-run lead, the Yankees beat the Athletics, 8-7, when Mike Stanley's blistering two-out, bases-loaded single off third baseman Craig Paquette delivered the winning run in the eighth inning.


Sports of The Times; The Nurse Who Bridges Iron Horses
DOROTHY F. OLSEN, a retired nurse who worked in New York hospitals and with the Army during its march from Normandy to Berlin in World War II, has witnessed too much human suffering in her 75 years.
She has held the dying, seen the results of one of man's most infamous wars.
She has nursed the victims, even nursed one Nazi who was charged with masterminding a massacre of 50 American prisoners of war in Belgium, a colonel whose uniform patch she procured and has given to the Holocaust Museum so that the world will always remember.


Good Taxi Service Shouldn't Be Riders' Burden; Not for the Tall
To the Editor:
I was delighted to read "Taxi!" (editorial, Aug. 23) and find that you were concerned not only about the quality of New York cabbies but also about the size of the cabs.
I am 6 feet 6 inches tall, 78 years old, and have been wondering how much longer I shall be able to get in and out of cabs.


Good Taxi Service Shouldn't Be Riders' Burden; Streets of Paris
To the Editor:
Re "Taxi!" (editorial, Aug. 23): On one of my trips to Paris I was reminded by a Parisian cabdriver that there are 5,000 different street names in Paris and that a prospective cabdriver has to have lived in Paris for at least five years before being eligible to work in that field.


N.C.A.A. Clarifies Rule to Permit Prayers
The National Collegiate Athletic Association gave football players some leeway yesterday for end zone prayers, prompting Liberty University to drop a lawsuit alleging the organization was discriminating against religious players.
In a clarification of its unsportsmanlike-conduct rule, the N.C.A.A. told coaches and game officials that players can momentarily pray at the end of a play if they do not draw attention to themselves.
Liberty, a Christian college in Lynchburg, Va., founded by JERRY FALWELL, had alleged in its lawsuit that barring players from celebrating touchdowns with prayer violated the 1964 Civil Rights Act.


Selma Burke; Sculptor, 94
Selma Burke, a sculptor of the Harlem Renaissance in the 1920's and 30's, died on Tuesday in New Hope, Pa.
She was 94.
Ms.
Burke came to national attention in 1945 with a 2 1/2-by-3 1/2-foot bronze plaque commemorating President Franklin D. Roosevelt and the Four Freedoms.
She won the commission for it in a nationwide competition, and President Harry S. Truman spoke at the unveiling in September 1945 at the Recorder of Deeds Building in Washington.


Family of 6 Freed From Blaze and Revived
The smoke was so dense that the firefighters who first burst into the East Harlem apartment could not see even an inch in front of them.
But as they crouched and slithered through the four airless rooms, they literally bumped up against the bodies -- six in all, not one of them moving.
The two tiniest shared a front bedroom, and as Capt.
Jim Nichols scooped them into his arms, he shuddered at the stillness of their hearts and the silence of their lungs.


Herbert S. Bridge, 76, Scientist Crucial in Study of Solar System
Herbert S. Bridge, a scientist who had a pivotal role in the exploration of the solar system by unmanned spacecraft and in mapping the solar winds swirling through interplanetary space, died on Wednesday at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
He was 76 and lived in Sudbury, Mass.
The cause was coronary artery disease, his family said.


Why Hold C.I.A. To a Higher Standard?
To the Editor:
Re "Does the C.I.A. Have to Employ Torturers?" (letter, Aug. 26):


Editorial Notebook; Let's Get Big
Whether or not Time Warner succeeds in gobbling up Ted Turner's empire for $8 billion, this season of megadeals among media giants is not over.
Mergers beget mergers, and nowhere is the need for bigness felt more acutely than among the big executives of the entertainment and information world.
But it is far from clear that consolidation will be good for business.
It is even less clear that it will be good for consumers.
The media industry is dominated by men who cultivate their reputations as buccaneers and creators.
The fact is, though, that this summer's deals are designed to reduce risks for their already sizable investments.
That is why two of the biggest "content" providers, Time Warner and Disney, have rushed to acquire television networks -- and why other studios have made deals or are looking for deals to obtain guaranteed outlets for their movies and programs.


Glimmers of Peace in Bosnia
NATO's bombs have brought quick, if precarious, results.
The air campaign was tentatively suspended yesterday after the big guns terrorizing Sarajevo had been temporarily quieted and the Foreign Ministers of Bosnia, Croatia and Serb-dominated Yugoslavia agreed to begin talks in Geneva next week on an American proposal for a compromise peace.
Those are encouraging developments in what has been an intractable war.
But the talks may proceed slowly and progress could be disrupted by provocations from any side.
If meaningful negotiations are now about to begin, however, it is not simply because the West got tough with the Serbs.
It is because the West got tough at a moment when the military and political balance had begun to shift against Serb leaders who wanted to keep fighting.


Benay Venuta, 84, an Actress, Singer, Dancer and Sculptor
Benay Venuta, whose career in show business began as a teen-age dancer in 1925 and ended with a bit part in Woody Allen's 1993 movie, "Manhattan Murder Mystery," died yesterday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 84.
The cause was lung cancer, said her daughter Patricia Winter.


On a Weekend Roll, Rock Music Carves A Place in History
With pomp and feedback, the Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame and Museum was inaugurated today.
For this civic ceremony, Jimi Hendrix played the national anthem and Bob Dylan was quoted with reverence.
As a big red ribbon was cut by an assembly that included Little Richard and Yoko Ono, speakers blared the Rolling Stones' "It's Only Rock-and-Roll (but I Like It").
In a celebratory parade, a high school band marched to the tune of "Respect" and an Elvis puppet 16 feet tall swiveled down the street.
It took more than a decade of fund raising and $92 million in public and private contributions, but rock-and-roll now has the grandest institution in its history.
"You are changing the map of America," Ms.
Ono proclaimed.
"You are changing the map of the world."


Anthony Hopkins as a Brash Yank
When a shy English electronics expert arrives in divided Berlin in the mid-1950's to do classified government work, the British officer in charge offers some bad news: the young civilian, named Leonard Marnham, has been assigned to work for the Americans.
"From now on you take your instructions from the Yanks," the beefy officer says sympathetically.
"That's all right with me," Leonard answers.


Preparing for Takeoff
The total number of female fighter pilots in the United States Air Force, Air Force Reserve and Air National Guard -- 10 -- increased by one yesterday as Governor Whitman swore in Leah Murkami to serve in the New Jersey Air National Guard.
After she completes F-16 training, Ms.
Murkami, 31, will report to the 177th Fighter Group.


Best Ice Cream Sandwich
Like the mousetrap, the standard ice cream sandwich can apparently be improved upon profitably.
Joan Vaccaro, a Pompton Lakes resident, said she spent a week in the kitchen perfecting her chocolate marshmallow sandwich bars recipe.
She won a $500 first-place award in a national ice cream sandwich contest, a dairy industry trade group announced yesterday.
JOE SHARKEY


O'Sullivan Industries Holdings Inc.(OSU,N) reports earnings for Year to Jun 30


Lawyer Says Dr. Siegel Transferred His Accuser
The lawyer for the woman who accused the former president of New York City's public hospitals system of sexual harassment said yesterday that Dr.
Bruce Siegel had harassed his client on a least a dozen occasions, beginning in November 1994, and that she was transferred from his office to another job in the agency after confronting him about his behavior about six weeks ago.
William Pauley, a lawyer for Mary Beth Tully, said Ms.
Tully had filed a complaint against Dr.
Siegel after her transfer because she feared for her job.
The complaint outlined specific incidents of harassment and also included the names of several other women at the Health and Hospitals Corporation who told Ms.
Tully they were harassed by Dr.
Siegel, Mr.
Pauley said.


Draft Audit Says Board of Education Understates Crime in the Schools
The central finding of a draft audit on school safety was less than surprising: the Board of Education understates crime in the schools.
But that did not prevent Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani from using the report yesterday to further his campaign to take control of the public schools.
The much sought after preliminary audit by the State Comptroller's office, which the Mayor's office had pressed school officials to release, concluded that the Board of Education's system for recording safety-related incidents in schools was inaccurate and might be recording less than half the incidents.


U.S. Contends Major Festival Is Run By Mob
A Federal grand jury charged yesterday that one of New York City's most popular street festivals, the Feast of San Gennaro, was controlled by the Genovese crime family.
The grand jury, in two perjury indictments unsealed yesterday, said that the Mafia family siphoned off a significant part of the rents paid by vendors and determined which merchants were allowed to operate at the feast.
The allegations were made two weeks before this year's festival is to open for 11 days in lower Manhattan.


New Jersey Farmers Bemoan The Ravages of a Month's Sun
Howard Grovatt's long arms are roped with veins from a half-century's labor of pulling crops from the soil of Burlington County.
In all those years, Mr.
Grovatt said as the morning sun ushered in another sun-baked day for New Jersey farmers, there has never been a summer when hot weather and dry spells hurt as much as this one.


Forest Fire, 2 Days Old, Out of Control In New Jersey
A wind-whipped forest fire burned for a second day on steep ridges and remote plateaus in the Kittatinny Mountains of northwestern New Jersey yesterday, forcing officials to close a 10-mile stretch of the Appalachian Trail.
The blaze started on Thursday morning near a camping area along the trail and about 12 hours later had been held to a 90-acre mountaintop tract, said Joseph Hughes, assistant state fire warden.
But late Thursday night, a cold front came through, stiff winds began blowing from the northwest and the flames burst beyond control lines that firefighting wardens had established.


Meyer (Fred) Inc.(FMY,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Aug 12


Markets Closed
All financial and commodity markets and banks in the United States will be closed on Monday in observance of the Labor Day holiday.
Most markets overseas will be open.


Volt Information Sciences Inc.(VOLT,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 28


Court Urged To End Ban On Help With Suicide
Advocates for terminally ill people urged a Federal appeals panel in Manhattan yesterday to strike down a New York State law that prohibits doctors from helping dying patients commit suicide.
For nearly an hour, three judges from the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit debated with Kathryn Sisk Tucker, a lawyer representing a Seattle euthanasia organization, Compassion in Dying.
The organization has challenged a similar statute in Seattle.


Good Taxi Service Shouldn't Be Riders' Burden
To the Editor:
Re "Taxi!" (editorial, Aug. 23): Once upon a time New York City cabbies knew their way around the block, spoke English, didn't play the radio, drove a roomy cab and (what you fail to mention) drove safely.
Believe it or not, back in the 1930's drivers carried a little whisk broom with which to dust off the back seat between rides.


The Mets' Comeback Is Not Wasted
The Mets had just lost a game, but the expression on the face of Manager Dallas Green painted success.
The Dodgers escaped with a 6-5 victory Thursday night at Dodger Stadium when Brett Butler crossed with the game-winning run in the ninth inning while Ryan Thompson bobbled the ball twice in center field.
Heartbreaking loss?
Hardly.
A half-inning earlier the Mets had displayed tremendous determination and heart by scrapping for five runs on five hits and an error to turn a 5-0 Dodger romp into a 5-5 nail-biter.


Finding That Hard Work Doesn't Always Result in a Good Job
RICARDO FLORES spent a year mucking through piles of crumpled paper and broken glass, hoping to find a job at the bottom of it all.
It's dirty work, but it beats going to the group home, which was the other option the 17-year-old high school dropout's father offered him.
He chose a year of community service, cleaning up parks along with 15 other youths who graduated last night from Save a Generation, a Bronx-based program that blended boot-camp discipline, academics and counseling.
They're proud to show society that even hard-rock kids raised on tough luck can do the right thing, go back to school and get back on track.


Nets Official Denies Report of Club's Sale
Are the Nets on the market or will their ownership group stay intact?
Around the Meadowlands these days, it depends on whom you talk to.
One club official steadfastly denied yesterday that the franchise would be sold next week to SIDNEY KIMMEL, the founder of Jones New York.


Beethoven and Bach: Vive la Difference!
Concerts at Bargemusic, Olga Bloom's floating concert hall at the Fulton Ferry Landing in Brooklyn, often have more in common with private chamber music readings in a friend's living room than with formal concert hall performances.
The barge is homey and intimate, and has an audience so loyal that Mrs.
Bloom seems to know most of the regulars by name, even at a sold-out performance like the one she presented on Thursday evening.
And if the music is the principal attraction, there are others, too, not least among them a view of the lower Manhattan skyline lighting up as the sun sets, and an upper deck where a concertgoer can spend the intermission watching the river and musing on the program.
The music on Thursday evening gave a listener plenty to think about.
A string quartet of familiar players from the New York chamber music world -- Carmit Zori and Ida Levin, violinists, Robert Rinehart, violist, and Fred Sherry, cellist -- devoted the first part of their program to the opening and closing sections of Bach's "The Art of Fugue," and offered Beethoven's Quartet in C-sharp minor (Op. 131) after the intermission.


Good Taxi Service Shouldn't Be Riders' Burden; London Myth
To the Editor:
Re "London Taxis Put New York's to Shame" (letter, Aug. 29):


Good Taxi Service Shouldn't Be Riders' Burden; Issue New Medallions
To the Editor:
"Taxi!" (editorial, Aug. 23) misses the reason we won't have all the wonderful features you recall: Less than half the fare is available to pay for them.
More than half the fare covers interest and amortization of the medallion, which costs close to a quarter of a million dollars.


Mariners Push Orioles Closer to the Edge
Mariners 4, Orioles 3
Joey Cora hit a rare home run and Dan Wilson also homered last night to help the Seattle Mariners to a 4-3 victory over fading Baltimore, the Orioles' sixth straight home loss.


Reeves Establishes A No-Taunting Zone
Several days ago, the Giants had gathered to watch a league-mandated tape about the new taunting rules.
When the Giants were watching one example of how not to conduct themselves, Giants Coach Dan Reeves became extremely irritated at his players.


On a Slow Train for a Long Ride
She is 19, which is Jennifer Capriati's age, and getting her first taste of success on the women's tennis tour.
Chanda Rubin took the slow train, but there seems to have been an advantage to that.
Slow trains seldom get derailed.
"We never had a need for Chanda to support us," Bernadette Rubin said yesterday, in the shadows of the Grandstand Court, after her daughter's 7-6 (7-5), 6-1 United States Open victory over Gigi Fernandez put her squarely in the fourth-round path of Steffi Graf.
"We were self-supportive. There was never any pressure for us to rush her."


2d Suspect Held in Girl's Killing
The police arrested a second suspect yesterday in the death of a 4-year-old girl who roller-skated into a hail of gunfire intended for drug dealers at a housing project in Brooklyn last Sunday.
Investigators said they also had a clearer picture of the feud between two rival drug gangs in Fort Greene and Brownsville that led to the shootings, at the Prospect Plaza Houses in Brownsville, in which Shamone Johnson was shot in the neck and killed.


25 Arrested in Disturbance in East Village Park
Twenty-five people were arrested after a gathering of anarchists and punk rockers in the East Village turned violent yesterday afternoon.
The police said the youths began hurling rocks and bottles in La Plaza Cultural, a private park at Ninth Street and Avenue C, after officers in riot gear arrived to try to close the park and arrested one youth.
Witnesses said that after the arrest a group of youths charged at the police, one brandishing a wooden spear.
There were about 60 people in the park at the time, and about 75 to 100 police officers responded to the scene, the police said.


500,000 Clients, No Branches
FOR Catholics, it's Lourdes. For bankers these days, it's Leeds.
Representatives of banks from around the world are making the pilgrimage to this industrial city in the north of England for a glimpse of what might be their stagnant industry's equivalent of a miraculous cure.


Pursuing A Grail Less Holy
The curtain rose on a world beyond redemption.
A dead, white, monolithic tree trunk lay flat on the stage.
In the great Act I transformation interlude, it rose slowly to the vertical, like a beam in some unholy construction project.
The decrepitude of the landscape and the austere mix of white, gray and inky black shut out any hint of ordinary "Parsifal" paraphernalia (Grail, shrine, swords, shields).
Touches of religious kitsch did little to dispel the bleakness of the scene, right up to the comically abrupt descent of a peace dove at the end.


Immigrants in New Jersey: An Update


Ellen Wald, Keith Seidenberg
Ellen Jean Wald, a psychotherapist, is to be married today to Dr.
Keith Brian Seidenberg, an ophthalmologist.
Cantor Ellen Zvulun is to perform the ceremony at the Water's Edge, a restaurant in Long Island City, Queens.
The bride, 32, is the daughter of Paja and Lou Wald of Tenafly, N.J.
The bride works at the Staten Island Mental Health Society in New Brighton.
She graduated from Syracuse University and received a master's degree in social work from Hunter College.
Her father is a tax lawyer at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.
Her mother is an interior designer in Tenafly.


ANOTHER CASE CLOSED
I knew Clay Shaw and watched as this big, beautiful man was ruined by Jim Garrison.
Some time after Shaw was acquitted of any wrongdoing, he had a heart attack and died.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


ANOTHER CASE CLOSED
My wife and I had a rental cottage on Dauphine, in the French Quarter of New Orleans in 1967 and 1968, next to Clay Shaw's home.
We saw him many times but were not introduced.
Shaw always said hello and gave a wry half-smile.
I can recall many times when our doorbell rang and I went to the gate to find that someone, usually a man or group of men, was looking for Mr.
Bertrand's house.
We didn't know a "Mr. Bertrand" so we could not say where it was.
Posner says that Bertrand was not Shaw, a fact that I dispute based on firsthand knowledge.
ROBERT G. VERNON Martinez, Calif.


Jennifer M. Walden, Mark S. Weprin
Jennifer Monica Walden, an account executive at Liberty Cable, a cable television company in New York, and State Assemblyman Mark Stuart Weprin, a Democrat from Queens, are to be married this evening in Princeton, N.J.
Rabbi Geoffrey Botnick is to perform the ceremony at the University Cottage Club at Princeton University.
The bride, 28, will keep her name.
She graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y.
She is the daughter of Rose and Jack Walden of East Windsor, N.J.
The bride's father is a senior research engineer at International Flavors and Fragrances Inc., a manufacturer of aromatic chemicals in Union Beach, N.J.
Her mother is a business analyst in Skillman, N.J., for Johnson &amp; Johnson, the health care products company.


Black Professionals Like Me: A Note of Thanks
To the Editor:
"The Comfort Zones of the Young Black Professional" (Aug. 20) is bold, daring, innovative and even revolutionary considering it appeared in a newspaper that is largely conservative, and not doing enough to report the changes taking place in the city.


Safe Haven For Old Cars, Or Junkyard?
James Dulligan's passion for antique cars and trucks began in childhood.
In 1946, at the age of 13, he took $75 he had earned as a paper boy and as a hired hand in a repair shop and bought his first truck, a Packard roadster that was used as a service truck during World War I.
Since then, Mr.
Dulligan has collected and restored many old cars.
He kept some, sold others.
To share his passion, Mr.
Dulligan, now 63 and semiretired from his construction business, co-founded the Antique Truck Club of America and the Antique Car Club of America.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
THE ELECTRONIC REPUBLIC  Reshaping Democracy  in the Information Age.
By Lawrence K. Grossman.
Viking, $24.95.
Ever since the decline of ancient Athens, the opponents of direct democracy have had a ready-made rationale: such government might be nice, but it just isn't practical; representatives are necessary to educate the population and filter out any of its political eccentricities.
But according to Lawrence K. Grossman in "The Electronic Republic," technology is making representative government obsolete.
The public, now able to educate and organize itself with computer networks, no longer wants its will to be filtered through Washington.
Mr.
Grossman examines the implications of this change and offers tentative suggestions so that the new "electronic republic" might avoid the pitfalls that befell Athens.
Not surprisingly, the question that worried Jefferson reappears: If the people have power, will they be up to the challenge of ruling?
Mr.
Grossman answers with a qualified yes; the people, he argues, will probably be no worse than the politicians they now elect.
But he also worries about the decline of a central control, wondering if a "big brotherhood of the entire citizenry" will emerge.
And he fears that the information superhighway -- the people's main tool of liberation -- will become a private toll road for monopolistic corporations.
But it is often unclear whether Mr.
Grossman looks forward to the future or dreads it, and his ponderous, repetitive prose does not help.
He sometimes resorts to fortune-cookie aphorisms: "Everything depends on how the technology is used, by whom and for what purpose." Of course, Mr.
Grossman, a former president of the Public Broadcasting Service and NBC News, is most comfortable when reporting firsthand experiences within the television industry.
But when he suggests that PBS should expand into "democracy's great electronic forum" at the Government's expense, one wonders about his political savvy.
The future may hold direct democracy, but it is hard to envision a larger Government check for PBS.
DOUGLAS A. SYLVA


Just Like Old Times: Henderson The Igniter
As if the Yankees needed another reason to be motivated, Rickey Henderson went out and gave them one yesterday afternoon.
Henderson, the flamboyant former Yankee outfielder, and Jack McDowell, yesterday's Yankee starter, engaged in a sixth-inning shouting match at Yankee Stadium.
The Yankees, it seems, were able to draw more inspiration from it.


3-Day Italian Festival Wins Approval
A street festival that has generated heated debate in Ridgewood can go on for three days, the Mayor's office has ruled.
Deputy Mayor Fran Reiter overruled a vote by Community Board 5 to limit the festival to one day and reinstated an earlier compromise that will allow the event to take place Friday through next Sunday.


Man in the News; Savvy Troubleshooter -- Luis Rojas Marcos
When asked last week if he expected to be the last president of New York City's Health and Hospitals Corporation, Dr.
Luis Rojas Marcos smiled wryly and spoke about the tendency of human beings to try to predict the future.
Speculation, Dr.
Marcos seemed to suggest, is often fruitless.
He would not be drawn into a discussion about what might be.
"I don't have a crystal ball," Dr.
Marcos said.
"I wish I did, but I don't. I'm not going to guess right now."


Aug.27-Sept.2: Say It Again, Pete; Wilson Finds Another Hat to Toss in the Ring
Presidential candidates are always looking for new ways to separate themselves from the rest of the pack.
Some latch onto an issue; others propose new solutions to old problems; still others trek by foot across a crucial state.
Gov.
Pete Wilson of California, whose bid for the Republican nomination has been flagging, went back to Square One last week in an attempt to refocus attention on his candidacy.
He announced, for the fifth time in eight months, that he is running, this particular declaration coming in New York.


Law to Ease Voter Registration Has Added 5 Million to the Rolls
In what political experts say is the greatest expansion of voter rolls in the nation's history, more than five million Americans have registered to vote in the eight months since the National Voter Registration Act was enacted.
Several states report that the act -- popularly known as the "Motor Voter Law" because it permits people to register while obtaining a driving license -- has generated threefold increases, and greater, in the pace of registrations compared with earlier years.


Shannon K. Hogan, Paul J. Warburg
Shannon Keri Hogan, a merchandising coordinator in New York for Takashimaya, the Tokyo-based department store company, was married yesterday to Paul Jason Warburg, a director of the investor relations division of Georgeson &amp; Company, the proxy solicitation firm in New York.
Judge Earl F. Capuano of the Westport (Conn.) Probate Court officiated at the Westport Historical Society.
Mrs.
Warburg, 26, graduated from the University of California at Berkeley.
She is a daughter of Patricia Hogan Stender of San Diego and the late Lieut.
Comdr.
John P. Hogan of the Navy.


Companies Merge; Families Break Up
No country without a revolution or a military defeat and subsequent occupation has ever experienced such a sharp a shift in the distribution of earnings as America has in the last generation.
At no other time have median wages of American men fallen for more than two decades.
Never before have a majority of American workers suffered real wage reductions while the per capita domestic product was advancing.
So on Labor Day this year, as with a lot of Labor Days, most laborers don't have a lot to celebrate.
The median real wage for full-time male workers has fallen from $34,048 in 1973 to $30,407 in 1993.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-13  WOMEN'S LEADERS WARN CHINA  Leaders of the groups meeting in China in advance of the world women's conference said they would end their meeting unless Chinese security forces halted their intensive surveillance.  1


Ideas &amp; Trends; Race, Lies &amp; Audiotape
WHEN Judge Lance A. Ito ruled last week that the jurors in the O.J.
Simpson double-murder trial would hear only 15 seconds of former detective Mark Fuhrman's tape-recorded racist boasts and bile, the nation's ears were still ringing with the unsettling reverberations of a far more thorough sampling of the 14 hours of infamous tape.
No matter what verdict the jury returns, Mr.
Fuhrman's matter-of-fact bragging about police mayhem and misconduct against Los Angeles blacks has taken on a predictably transcendental nature.
Like a rude odor, his comments lie heavy -- 41 stinging epithets in all -- over an already sweaty debate about how much race really figures in American matters of state and manners.


Mandy Dawson, Timothy Murphy
Marion Margery Dawson, the daughter of Marion M. Dawson of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Robert J. Dawson, is to be married there today to Timothy Henry Murphy, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas G. Murphy Jr. of Trumbull, Conn.
The Rev.
Jeffrey H. Walker is to officiate at Christ Episcopal Church.
The Rev.
Ronald Perry, a Roman Catholic priest, is to participate in the ceremony.
The bride, 28, is known as Mandy.
She is a marketing manager at Seventeen magazine in New York.
She graduated from Williams College.
Her father founded Dearfield Associates, a direct marketing company in Phoenix, of which her mother is the president.


INSIDE
INVESTING IT /Page 3  The curious case of Unimar, an investment guaranteed not to survive the millennium.
Street Smarts, by Kurt Eichenwald.
MUTUAL FUNDS /Page 4  Taking the plunge into funds: how do you choose when you're choosing only one?
By Timothy Middleton.
SPENDING IT /Page 8  More nannies are demanding health insurance, and many are getting it.
By Eva Pomice.
SPENDING IT /Page 8  A library for a modern Labor Day.
Off the Shelf, by Barbara Presley Noble.


Add Tomatoes When Dressing Up Pasta
THE fresh, vine-ripened tomatoes sold in every market and farm stand simplify lunch or dinner.
A few of these lush beauties, plus garlic, herbs and other embellishments, can quickly dress some pasta for a meal.
Here are a few possibilities.
The linguine recipe calls for diced tofu, the bean curd high in soy protein that has been in the health bulletins.


Amtrak Keeps Service From D.C. to Chicago
Amtrak's Cardinal train will maintain service three times a week between Washington, Cincinnati, Indianapolis and Chicago, with upgraded double-decker Superliner equipment to be introduced on Sept. 10.
Currently, the Cardinal originates in New York, but connecting service to Washington will be available as of Sept. 10.
The route was originally scheduled to be truncated to a Washington, D.C.-Cincinnati route, as part of the cuts announced last April.
Instead, the Cincinnati-to-Chicago service will be maintained, but the Hoosier State train, now running between Indianapolis and Chicago, will be eliminated as of Sept. 10, replaced by the Cardinal.


Miriam Lefkowitz, Marc J. Heimowitz
Miriam Lefkowitz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome Lefkowitz of Albany, is to be married this evening to Marc Jason Heimowitz, the son of Bonnie Glaiber and Stanley Heimowitz, both of Miami.
Rabbi Paul Silton is to perform the ceremony at Temple Israel in Albany.


The Serene Fortress: A special report.; Many Seek Security in Private Communities
There are no pesky doorbellers, be they politicians or Girl Scouts, allowed inside this community of high ceilings sprouting under the fir trees east of Seattle.
A random encounter is the last thing people here want.
There is a new park, every blade of grass in shape -- but for members only.
Four private guards man the entrance gates 24 hours a day, keeping the 500 residents of Bear Creek in a nearly crime-free bubble.
And should a dog try to stray outside its yard, the pet would be instantly zapped by an electronic monitor.


Now, Colleges Help Parents To Let Their Freshmen Go
To The Editor:
Your article "From AIDS to Volleyball, It's Time for Freshman Orientation" (News and Topics, Aug. 27) didn't mention a relatively new feature of the first days of college life.
Like many institutions, Monmouth University has a separate orientation for parents and even invites them to observe a class if they wish.
I tell them they're not losing a son or daughter, but gaining a university.


Commercial Property: Changing Quarters; Beware: A Dream Space Can Turn Into a Nightmare
THE partners at Anderson, Kill, Olick &amp; Oshinsky figured they had all bases covered last year, when they took three floors that Shea &amp; Gould, another law firm, had occupied at 1251 Avenue of the Americas, at 50th Street.
They knew they would carve 18 offices out of the law library, convert the copier area to a computer room, give the secretaries roomier workstations.
"We even committed a quarter of a million dollars to putting in better lights," recalled Jeffrey A. Moross, the Anderson, Kill partner who honchoed the move.


Of Industrial Things Past
BEFORE the coffee bars had spread to Bedford Avenue, before the artists had assembled their lofts and the musicians their recording studios, even before the Poles had founded their restaurants and the Italians their groceries -- before all that, there was industry in Williamsburg: metal spinners and bottling factories, food distributors and trucking companies.
Now, entire blocks of that industrial village stand barren and silent.
Time stands still as a stone.


Fund Was Misrepresented
To the Editor:
"Funds That Ride the Takeover Wave" (Mutual Funds, July 30), appears to confuse two kinds of investing: speculating on takeover targets and pursuing a disciplined arbitrage strategy designed to realize smaller but more-predictable gains after the public announcement of a merger or takeover.
At the Merger Fund, we do the latter.
Contrary to the impression left by your article, the fund's performance should not be compared with the results achieved in a bull market by investors' pursuing much more speculative strategies.
Our ability to profit from the consolidation of corporate America while maintaining one of the most favorable risk ratings in the industry helps explain the fivefold increase in our net assets the last 18 months.
FREDERICK W. GREEN  Valhalla, N.Y., Aug. 24  The writer is the Merger Fund's president.


Poor Timing
To the Editor:
I was intrigued by the comment of Bill Buzenberg, NPR's vice president for news, relating to "Horizons," the program about minorities.
He said local stations don't attract much money when "Horizons" is on the air, and added, "It's a quarter-of-a-million-dollar program with a very small audience and no financial return." What Mr.
Buzenberg did not say is that local stations (including WNYC in New York) do not put "Horizons" on the air in prime time, a programming decision that affects contributions.


End of the War: An On-Line History
Articles and photos from The Times on the end of World War II are available on line from @times, The Times's service on America Online.
Software and information: (800) 548-5201.


'Read My Clothes!'
Fashion consumers are having fun with clothes that talk back to the fashion world.
The mere trumpeting of a status designer logo is being replaced by a panoply of fashion messages.
It all started in the mid-80's when three European designers -- Franco Moschino, Vivienne Westwood and Karl Lagerfeld -- revived the nonsense ethic of Dada and Surrealism that had inspired Elsa Schiaparelli's humorous designs of the 1930's.
Today, Karl Lagerfeld prints his name in bold letters down the back of stylized sneakers.
While some spoof themselves (bottom, second from left), Jean-Paul Gaultier spoofs Vogue magazine's fashion drawings on a stretch sweater (right).
And T-shirt makers find ways to combine commerce with conscience (left).


Habitats: 119 East 17th Street; Living Over the Store, With a Manhattan Twist
ON the wall in the back of the new cafe is a painting of Anthony Macagnone's mother, Adelina.
In the painting, Adelina Macagnone, for whom the cafe is named, is ladling out soup.


MOVIES THIS WEEK
A mix of vintage films stands out on the week's television roster.
On opposite ends are a history of ancient Pompeli and English public school comody, both excellent.
Ernest B. Schoedsack's drama "The Last Days of Pompeii" (1935), focusing on a blacksmith turned gladiaor (Preston Foster, right in photograph with Basil Rathbone), remains the best version of several that use the title of Edward Bulwer-Lytton's novel, though the connection is dim.
Compact, elaborate and well told, with fine work by Foster and Rathbone (as Pontius Pilate), it has an eye-popping Vesuvius finale (from "King Kong" craftsmen).
Oddly, the picture failed back then.
It's a bargain now - Wednesday at 10:15 A.M. on American Movie Classics.
The role of faithless wife in Henry Hathaway's "Niagara" (1953) fit Marilyn Monroe - as her career ascended - like a slinky, satin glove.
This simmering suspense yarn depicts murderous cunning on honeymoon lane -- a cluster of cottages near the great falls, an atmospheric backdrop.
Joseph Cotton scores as Monroe's bitter spouse.
Jean Peters and Casey Adams are surprised neighbors --Tuesday at 9:45 P.M. and 1 A.M. on American Movie Classics.
George Sidney's "Scarmouche" (1952) is a knockout swashbuckler, via Rafael Sabatini's story of revenge and royal intrigue in 17th-century France, Steward Granger is perfectly cast as a bold, roguish carnival player, aided by Eleanor Parker, Janet Leigh, Mel Ferrer and Nina Foch.
The production is gorgeous, the pace crackles.
Bulls-eye -- Sunday at noon on Cinemax.
Frank Launder's "Happiest Days of Your Life" (1950), is a British bundle of joy.
Margaret Rutherford heads a girls' school and Alastair Sim runs one for boys.
Expect confusion, and sly hilarity, as the two schools shift premises.
At one point Joyce Grenfell (as Miss Gossage, the games mistress) swings a gong to signal lunch.
"Easy, Gossage," chides Rutherford.
"You're not announcing a film."-- Monday at noon and 4 P.M. on Bravo.
Howard Thompson


All-Purpose Material
To the Editor:
Steve Pond neglected to mention a common consequence of the post-production rush: the trailers and television advertising campaigns for many films are edited prior to the completion of a score, causing studios to turn to their libraries for the music cues they need.
Hence, not only was "Die Hard" sold using Beethoven's Ninth Symphony; "The Joy Luck Club" was promoted to the strains of Sibelius's Fifth, and virtually everything else to Carl Orff's "Carmina Burana." RICHARD MARTIN  Wantagh, N.Y.


Aug.27-Sept2; Recognize Anyone?


For 130 Arab and Israeli Teen-Agers, Maine Camp Is Where Peace Begins
Together again in the Maine woods, the two 16-year-old boys, one a Palestinian Arab, the other an Israeli Jew, took up the argument they began when they met at camp three years ago.
"In 1948, the U.N. gave the Jews the right to build their own country -- what Israel is today," said one of the boys, Yehoyada Mande-el, who is known as Yo Yo and lives in Israel.
"It's a fact. We were happy. We were ready to settle for this. But the Arabs said 'no.' "


Using Ill-Gotten Gains To Aid Police Forces
Bergen County police departments will be getting some much-needed extra money from an unlikely source: criminals.
Charles Buckley, the acting County Prosecutor, said last week that his office would distribute more of the assets seized from criminals to local law-enforcement agencies to help them buy computers, communications equipment and bulletproof vests.


Brooklyn Men Held in Robbery-Killings
They were particularly depraved murders that, the authorities said, might have qualified for the state's new death penalty if they had occurred a few days later: a woman and her teen-aged daughter tied up in the basement of their Brentwood, L.I., home, beaten by two men who ransacked the house and stabbed them many times in a nightmare that continued for hours last Tuesday night.
"These guys are predators," Lieut.
John Gierasch, commander of the Suffolk County Police homicide squad, said last night in announcing the arrests of two young Brooklyn men in a murder case that he said might have qualified for the new death penalty had it occurred three days later.
"They showed no remorse," he said.
"They're everybody's nightmare."


ALSO INSIDE
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 2 Roman ruins, stark landscape: The ghosts that haunt industrial Williamsburg.
INSIDE QUEENS 3 The ticket master of the U.S.
Open makes sure the right names get the right seats.
MOVIE CLOCK 27 What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 28 Celebrating Satchmo in Corona; a lecture on female curators; beach volleyball around town.
GOOD EATING 28 A tour of the Upper East Side; the luxurious Stanhope Hotel; the cheerful Caffe Grazie.
SOAPBOX 29 A teacher explains why she took a buyout.
And letters.


Lara J. Kalkus, John Purchase
Lara June Kalkus, the daughter of June and Peter Kalkus of New Vernon, N.J., is to be married there today to John Layton Purchase, a son of Eva and David Purchase of Newcastle-under-Lyme, England.
The Rev.
Thomas C. Sheffield, a Presbyterian minister, is to officiate in the garden at the home of the bride's parents.
The bride, 26, graduated from the University of Colorado at Boulder and received an M.B.A. from the University of Denver in May.
Her father is the chief executive of the Lamar Companies, a real estate investment concern in Morristown, N.J.
Her mother is a managing director of the Kalkus Foundation, an educational fund in Morristown.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.


Sports of The Times; The Super Key: Deion May Be The Difference
AS the National Football League season opens, those who enjoy jumping to its Jan. 28 conclusion in Tempe, Ariz., are wondering which team will win Super Bowl XXX there.
Most of the early voting involves the 49ers, the Cowboys and the Dolphins.
But on this season's opening weekend, it's still too early to predict the Super Bowl champion because a baseball player will make the difference.
Deion Sanders is dancing on multimillion dollar offers from the 49ers, the Cowboys and the Dolphins.


Leslie Romoser, Robert Khuzami
Leslie Ruggles Romoser, an interior designer, is to be married today to Robert S. Khuzami, an assistant United States attorney.
The Rev.
John Widdows, an Episcopal priest, is to officiate at the Old Spurwink Church in Cape Elizabeth, Me.
The bride, 29, graduated from the Parsons School of Design and works in New York.
She is a daughter of Robert A. S. Romoser of New Buffalo, Mich., and the late Jean R. Romoser.


Two Lovers, Two Germanys: Bonds Torn Apart by the Wall
FOR AN EVENT THAT shattered one epoch and shaped another, the collapse of the Berlin wall in 1989 has attracted remarkably little attention from film makers.
That surprises Margarethe von Trotta, whose new film, "The Promise," is the first and so far only full-length feature to deal with the wall's legacy.
Her film, which has been sold to 20 foreign counties, opens in New York on Friday. (Another movie set in Berlin, "The Innocent," which opened in New York two days ago, uses the wall only as a backdrop for a story of love and espionage.)
"When we started to work on 'The Promise' in 1990, we thought there would be so many other directors out there doing the same thing," the German-born Miss von Trotta said by telephone from Rome, where she now lives.
"We thought this film would be only one part, one stone in a mosaic of films that would tell this story. So now it comes out, and we're all alone. No one else had the courage to do it. I think it had something to do with my distance. I've been living in Rome for six years, and I'm not paralyzed by it."


Patriots Might Be the Team to Lead A.F.C. to Promised Land
Entering last season, cornerback Maurice Hurst seldom wore his New England Patriots apparel outside his home for fear that someone would recognize him and start ridiculing him and the team.
That usually happens when a player's team dwells in the National Football League's cellar.
But things have changed.
Since the Patriots won their last seven games of the 1994 season to finish 10-6 and receive an American Conference wild-card playoff spot, their visibility and cachet have skyrocketed.


Food by Mood: Upper East Side
CAFFE GRAZIE ++  (212) 717-4407; 26 East 84th Street; $; American Express
This cheerful little Italian cafe has a bright, lemon-colored dining room with halogen track lights, neighborly tables and flowery banquettes.
The staff is alert and friendly, and the food is fresh and well prepared.
The menu emphasizes salads, pastas and light entrees.
To begin, there are cold pasta salad combining penne with vegetables in a pesto dressing; grilled chicken, sliced and served over Caesar salad, and arugula dotted with raisins and walnuts and topped with goat cheese.
Pastas and main courses include penne in a fresh tomato sauce with basil and chunks of mozzarella; porcini-and-cheese ravioli under a tomato sauce with smoked mozzarella; linguine and shrimp in a sauce of white wine and capers; pan-roasted salmon with mustard sauce and broccoli florets, and sauteed chicken with shiitakes with lemon sauce and roast potatoes. ($25 and Under: 5/27/94)  HURRICANE ISLAND ++  (212) 717-6600; 1303 Third Avenue, near 75th Street; $; all major credit cards
This engaging seafood restaurant and bar with a nautical theme inside is a good place to get sweet, flavorful lobsters at reasonable prices.
They usually range from one and a half to four pounds and are served with large portions of homemade cole slaw and sweet potato fries.
Of course, you could go instead for the peppery lobster salad with bitter greens and sweet potato chips, lobster pot pie or the lobster roll.
Other seafood preparations include grilled tuna steak with basil-cucumber relish; blackened swordfish with lime-cilantro butter; grilled salmon with lemon butter sauce and braised fennel; deep-fried catfish, or baked sole flavored with dill.
Also available are herb-roasted chicken, grilled sirloin steak with fries, and the Hurricane burger. ($25 and Under: 4/2/93)  ISTANBUL KEBAP +  (212) 517-6880; 303 East 80th Street; $; American Express
This small Turkish outpost is a family-run establishment tastefully decorated with colorful rugs adorning the white walls, copper lanterns and hanging plants.
The food is tasty, well seasoned and inexpensive.
For starters, try the coban salad, a combination of chopped tomatoes, onions and kirby cucumbers; cubes of sauteed calf's liver served with chopped onions; stuffed grape leaves, and patlican, or a baked eggplant and homemade yogurt mixture with garlic and olive oil.
Lamb is a staple in Turkey, and among the renditions offered here are adana kebab, minced lamb seasoned with peppers and grilled on skewers; pirzola, succulent baby lamb chops; etli bamya, okra, lamb, tomato and onions, and yogurtlu kebab, a casserole of pita triangles, chopped lamb, onions, yogurt, paprika and tomato. (Article: 11/3/89; revisited: 6/15/94)  LENOX ROOM ** (212) 772-0404; 1278 Third Avenue, near 73d Street; $$$; all major credit cards
The lastest venture of Charles Palmer, an owner of Aureole and Alva, and Tony Fortuna, most recently from Mad 61 and the Monkey Bar, Lenox Room was designed to be smartly casual with food to match the mood.
A selection of the "tasting hors d'oeuvres" is a wonderful introduction to the menu.
They might include little plates of smoked salmon wrapped around a glorious pillow of creamy mousse with marinated cucumbers; crisp sweetbread medallions; spicy seafood in a lime, coriander and olive oil dressing, and foie gras and lentil terrine with Madeira jelly.
Freshly shucked oysters and clams, steamed shrimp, caviar and lobster also make terrific starters.
For main courses, try roast rack of lamb with rosemary, accompanied by ratatouille; grilled tuna with lemongrass and shaved fennel; grilled duck breast brushed with a cumin glaze and paired with a spring roll, or wood-grilled fillet of beef with a wild mushroom jus and potato-eggplant tart. (Review: 6/16/95)  MEZZALUNA +  (212) 535-9600; 1295 Third Avenue, near 75th Street; $$$; no credit cards
This upbeat postage-stamp Italian is designed with whimsy and style: colorful drawings and collages on one wall, a painted-sky ceiling, designer plates and chairs, and marble tables.
The trattoria-style fare is pure, simple and flavorful.
To begin, try tuna carpaccio; bresaola of beef with a fennel salad dressed with lemon and olive oil; a sprightly salad of grilled shrimp and scallops on a bed of chickory with grapefruit and pink peppercorn, or croquettes of mixed vegetables served with mixed greens and goat cheese.
Superior pastas include tagliatelle tossed with zucchini, olive oil and fresh mint and rigatoni combined with eggplant and aged ricotta.
Among grilled entrees are herb-flavored chicken paillard with balsamic vinegar over mixed greens; and sliced sirloin steak on a bed of arugula with black peppercorns. (Article: 10/19/90)  PETALUMA *  (212) 772-8800; 1356 First Avenue, at 73d Street; $$; all major credit cards
The grand cafe setting of this expansive East Side restaurant with an exposed kitchen provides a convivial and stylish backdrop for a relaxed meal.
The menu features salads, pizzas, pastas and grilled items.
Among starters are tomatoes and mozzarella with basil and balsamic vinaigrette; grilled wild mushrooms and mixed greens with Parmesan shavings, and smoked salmon on a bed of arugula with olive oil and lemon.
Fragrant, smoky pizzas come with various toppings.
Two of the choices are pizza margherita with tomato, basil and mozzarella, and quattro stagioni with prosciutto, mushrooms, olives and artichokes.
Pastas and main courses include grilled salmon with steamed vegetables; grilled chicken with creamy mustard sauce; grilled swordfish topped with tomato, olives and capers, and sauteed calf's liver with onions, served with polenta. (Review: 2/1/91; revisited: 1/20/95)  YURA &amp; COMPANY ++  (212) 860-8060; 1645 Third Avenue, at 92d Street; $; American Express, Mastercard, Visa
Not only is Yura &amp; Company a thriving bakery and takeout establishment, but also it serves breakfast, lunch and dinner.
The setting is farmhouse cute with a wood slat ceiling, an old wood hutch and lampshades made of colanders.
Waffles with warm maple syrup are a treat for breakfast.
The luxurious, soothingly serene setting, extremely gracious service and inventive American cooking of Scott Cohen make this one of the more appealing dining rooms on this side of town.
To begin, there is corn flan with steamed crayfish and succotash or tartar of dill-cured salmon with a garnish of caviars and croutons.
Among the entrees are veal chop with a pot pie of wild mushrooms, baked sea bass in a potato crust with an oyster sauce, and roast salmon in a honey-mustard glaze. (Review: 5/1/87; Diner's Journal: 11/25/94) Luxury's Lure THE STANHOPE HOTEL * (212) 288-5800; 995 Fifth Avenue, at 81st Street; $$$$; all major credit cards
The luxurious, soothingly serene setting, extremely gracious service and inventive American cooking of Scott Cohen make this one of the more appealing dining rooms on this side of town.
To begin, there is corn flan with steamed crayfish and succotash or tartar of dill-cured salmon with a garnish of caviars and croutons.
Among the entrees are veal chop with a pot pie of wild mushrooms, baked sea bass in a potato crust with an oyster sauce, and roast salmon in a honey-mustard glaze. (Review: 5/1/87; Diner's Journal: 11/25/94)


SUNDAY, September 3, 1995; GLOBE-TROTTING: The Shrinking World
At the Window of the World theme park in Shenzhen, a Chinese boom town near Hong Kong, homebound natives and curious foreigners can navigate the globe -- 128 spots on it, at least. (Some 5.5 million have since it opened in 1994; there is a similar park in Beijing and another is about to open in Canton.) Stroll into the park via the Golden Gate Bridge and you'll wind up in World Square.
Ogle Michelangelo's David and the Venus de Milo, together at last.
Pass into the Area of Asia and move from Mount Fuji to the Taj Mahal, from the Borobudur of Indonesia to the Angkor Wat of Cambodia, and still have time for tea at Katsura Palace.
Is that the Sydney Opera House on the horizon of the Area of Oceanica?
Mon Dieu!
Up ahead in the Area of Europe, it's l'Arc de Triomphe and the Houses of Parliament (above), all in a row.
Race across Kenya's Safari Park.
But don't forget to pet the Sphinx on your way out of Africa.
Hey!
Manhattan's colliding with Washington and the Rushmore boys (right) aren't raising an eyebrow.
Take a snap.
Hurry!
So much to see.
So little time.


Tarrytown Concerts Gain a New Director
PATRICIA WATERS of Irvington, who last season gave one of the Tarrytown concerts sponsored by Friends of the Warner Public Library, has succeeded Dom Cerulli as music director of the series.
"Dom will be a hard act to follow," the pianist said, "but I am enthusiastic about the recitals we have lined up. In this era of financial uncertainty in the arts, it is reassuring to know that, through community commitment and generosity, we can continue to present high-quality performances, many by Westchester artists, entirely free of charge."
The cycle of seven monthly programs begins next Sunday at 2:30 P.M., as the Khimm/Linden Duo -- consisting of the violinist Christina Khimm and the pianist Lea Linden -- plays Vivaldi, Beethoven, Chopin and Wieniawski.
The library is wheelchair accessible; the information number is 631-7734.


Where It's Green Despite the Drought
DESPITE the dry growing conditions and the effect on produce, business has been brisk -- even frenetic -- this summer at weekly farmers markets held in several locations around the county.
Last Saturday at this hamlet's train station on East Hartsdale Avenue, 3,000 shoppers crowded around tables of locally grown fruits and vegetables with the fervor of a crowd at a bargain-basement sale.
Word had spread on the sweetness of this year's corn and the tartness of the early varieties of apples.
Even commuters on their way to other destinations dashed from trains stopped in the station to make their purchases before traveling on.
Local politicians, meanwhile, took advantage of the crowds to meet the local populace, and regulars to the farmers market like Faith Saunders of Yonkers told first-timers like Randy and Paul Farr of Elmsford: "Buy that corn! Try those apples!"


Self-Destruction?
To the Editor:
There are several reasons why the British-American theater is failing.
First, instead of sophisticated, well-written and acted plays, productions now pander to the lowest common denominator -- the nontheatergoer who probably sees one legitimate show a lifetime.


BASE LINE
Score a fashion point -- wear white this fall.


Beatriz Garcia Hidalgo, Peter Fritsch
Beatriz Garcia Hidalgo, the daughter of Rosarito Martinez Hidalgo of New York and Ramon Garcia of Bayamon, P.R., was married yesterday to Peter Roome Fritsch, a son of the Rev. and Mrs.
Theodore P. Fritsch of North Chatham, Mass.
The bridegroom's father assisted the Rev.
Charles T. Newberry 3d in performing the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Harwich, Mass.
The officiants are ministers of the United Church of Christ.
Mrs.
Fritsch, 30, is the director of investor relations at Grupo Dina, a manufacturer of trucks and buses in Mexico City.
She graduated from Hunter College.


At Midyear, Office Market Holds Its Own
STEADY, but less spectacular than activity in 1994, is how commercial real estate brokers in Westchester assess leasing activity at midyear.
"No question, there has been an upkick in the market judging from the steady absorption of empty space," said Carl Austin, head of the 25-year-old brokerage company of Austin Corporate Properties in White Plains.
Yet, on the minus side of the ledger, Mr.
Austin warns that more corporate downsizing is still possible.


Crime
Ever since Hurricane Andrew leveled parts of southern Florida and the freebooters swept in to make a killing from the misery, I've been waiting for Carl Hiaasen to get hopping mad and deliver one of his blustering comic rants.
Well, here it comes.
STORMY WEATHER (Knopf, $24) is a loose piece of writing, but the narrative is driven by gales of laughter and rage.
"You understand there's no law to speak of," says a cynical salesman who made a fortune selling the rickety trailers that collapsed in the storm.


Unsold Co-op Shares
To the Editor:
Jay Romano's Aug. 19 article on "Unsold Co-op Shares" was a good overview of the why and how of this type of security.
However, it is important to note that many proprietary leases specify the condition that the holder of "Unsold Shares" must be a registered broker dealer under Section 359e of the New York State Business Law.
It is generally accepted that the purchaser of these shares need be a professional owner dealer and as such must comply with the licensing requirements of Section 352h (escrow) as well.


dirytricks@campaign96.org
SENATOR BOB DOLE MAY BE older and more Republican than the average Internet surfer, but you have to hand it to him -- he's right out there on the World Wide Web with a home page for his Presidential campaign, at what is an appropriately official-seeming address, http://www.dole96.org.
Cool!
Check it out:
"This page is here to offer information about Dole's candidacy, his views and what you can do to help," it says.
Nice picture of Dole, too.
Do we detect a sort of self-deprecating humor in the image of the candidate next to a Dole fruit logo?


Tanya A. Malott, Stuart M. Lawson
Tanya Arianne Malott, a fashion and wedding photographer in New York, was married yesterday to Stuart Max Lawson, a vice president and the corporate bank head for Citibank in Milan, Italy.
The Rev.
John Gilchrist performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Castello di Vincigliata in Fiesole, Italy.
Mrs.
Lawson, 28, graduated from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Constance Biaggini Guittard and James Spencer Malott, both of San Francisco.
Her father is an architect there.
Her mother is a broker at Hill &amp; Company, a real estate agency in San Francisco.


Long Road to Handicap Permit Is Paved With Tickets
Here's one for the annals of parking nightmares:
Kenneth Rosenblat, a paraplegic, has amassed 15 tickets, totaling $775, for parking his van, a white 1992 Ford Econoline with New Jersey handicap plates, in a loading zone on 45th Street between Fifth and Madison Avenues.


Food by Mood: Upper East Side
CAFFE GRAZIE ++  (212) 717-4407; 26 East 84th Street; $; American Express
This cheerful little Italian cafe has a bright, lemon-colored dining room with halogen track lights, neighborly tables and flowery banquettes.
The staff is alert and friendly, and the food is fresh and well prepared.
The menu emphasizes salads, pastas and light entrees.
To begin, there are cold pasta salad combining penne with vegetables in a pesto dressing; grilled chicken, sliced and served over Caesar salad, and arugula dotted with raisins and walnuts and topped with goat cheese.
Pastas and main courses include penne in a fresh tomato sauce with basil and chunks of mozzarella; porcini-and-cheese ravioli under a tomato sauce with smoked mozzarella; linguine and shrimp in a sauce of white wine and capers; pan-roasted salmon with mustard sauce and broccoli florets, and sauteed chicken with shiitakes with lemon sauce and roast potatoes. ($25 and Under: 5/27/94)  HURRICANE ISLAND ++  (212) 717-6600; 1303 Third Avenue, near 75th Street; $; all major credit cards
This engaging seafood restaurant and bar with a nautical theme inside is a good place to get sweet, flavorful lobsters at reasonable prices.
They usually range from one and a half to four pounds and are served with large portions of homemade cole slaw and sweet potato fries.
Of course, you could go instead for the peppery lobster salad with bitter greens and sweet potato chips, lobster pot pie or the lobster roll.
Other seafood preparations include grilled tuna steak with basil-cucumber relish; blackened swordfish with lime-cilantro butter; grilled salmon with lemon butter sauce and braised fennel; deep-fried catfish, or baked sole flavored with dill.
Also available are herb-roasted chicken, grilled sirloin steak with fries, and the Hurricane burger. ($25 and Under: 4/2/93)  ISTANBUL KEBAP +  (212) 517-6880; 303 East 80th Street; $; American Express
This small Turkish outpost is a family-run establishment tastefully decorated with colorful rugs adorning the white walls, copper lanterns and hanging plants.
The food is tasty, well seasoned and inexpensive.
For starters, try the coban salad, a combination of chopped tomatoes, onions and kirby cucumbers; cubes of sauteed calf's liver served with chopped onions; stuffed grape leaves, and patlican, or a baked eggplant and homemade yogurt mixture with garlic and olive oil.
Lamb is a staple in Turkey, and among the renditions offered here are adana kebab, minced lamb seasoned with peppers and grilled on skewers; pirzola, succulent baby lamb chops; etli bamya, okra, lamb, tomato and onions, and yogurtlu kebab, a casserole of pita triangles, chopped lamb, onions, yogurt, paprika and tomato. (Article: 11/3/89; revisited: 6/15/94)  LENOX ROOM ** (212) 772-0404; 1278 Third Avenue, near 73d Street; $$$; all major credit cards
The lastest venture of Charles Palmer, an owner of Aureole and Alva, and Tony Fortuna, most recently from Mad 61 and the Monkey Bar, Lenox Room was designed to be smartly casual with food to match the mood.
A selection of the "tasting hors d'oeuvres" is a wonderful introduction to the menu.
They might include little plates of smoked salmon wrapped around a glorious pillow of creamy mousse with marinated cucumbers; crisp sweetbread medallions; spicy seafood in a lime, coriander and olive oil dressing, and foie gras and lentil terrine with Madeira jelly.
Freshly shucked oysters and clams, steamed shrimp, caviar and lobster also make terrific starters.
For main courses, try roast rack of lamb with rosemary, accompanied by ratatouille; grilled tuna with lemongrass and shaved fennel; grilled duck breast brushed with a cumin glaze and paired with a spring roll, or wood-grilled fillet of beef with a wild mushroom jus and potato-eggplant tart. (Review: 6/16/95)  MEZZALUNA +  (212) 535-9600; 1295 Third Avenue, near 75th Street; $$$; no credit cards
This upbeat postage-stamp Italian is designed with whimsy and style: colorful drawings and collages on one wall, a painted-sky ceiling, designer plates and chairs, and marble tables.
The trattoria-style fare is pure, simple and flavorful.
To begin, try tuna carpaccio; bresaola of beef with a fennel salad dressed with lemon and olive oil; a sprightly salad of grilled shrimp and scallops on a bed of chickory with grapefruit and pink peppercorn, or croquettes of mixed vegetables served with mixed greens and goat cheese.
Superior pastas include tagliatelle tossed with zucchini, olive oil and fresh mint and rigatoni combined with eggplant and aged ricotta.
Among grilled entrees are herb-flavored chicken paillard with balsamic vinegar over mixed greens; and sliced sirloin steak on a bed of arugula with black peppercorns. (Article: 10/19/90)  PETALUMA *  (212) 772-8800; 1356 First Avenue, at 73d Street; $$; all major credit cards
The grand cafe setting of this expansive East Side restaurant with an exposed kitchen provides a convivial and stylish backdrop for a relaxed meal.
The menu features salads, pizzas, pastas and grilled items.
Among starters are tomatoes and mozzarella with basil and balsamic vinaigrette; grilled wild mushrooms and mixed greens with Parmesan shavings, and smoked salmon on a bed of arugula with olive oil and lemon.
Fragrant, smoky pizzas come with various toppings.
Two of the choices are pizza margherita with tomato, basil and mozzarella, and quattro stagioni with prosciutto, mushrooms, olives and artichokes.
Pastas and main courses include grilled salmon with steamed vegetables; grilled chicken with creamy mustard sauce; grilled swordfish topped with tomato, olives and capers, and sauteed calf's liver with onions, served with polenta. (Review: 2/1/91; revisited: 1/20/95)  YURA &amp; COMPANY ++  (212) 860-8060; 1645 Third Avenue, at 92d Street; $; American Express, Mastercard, Visa
Not only is Yura &amp; Company a thriving bakery and takeout establishment, but also it serves breakfast, lunch and dinner.
The setting is farmhouse cute with a wood slat ceiling, an old wood hutch and lampshades made of colanders.
Waffles with warm maple syrup are a treat for breakfast.
The luxurious, soothingly serene setting, extremely gracious service and inventive American cooking of Scott Cohen make this one of the more appealing dining rooms on this side of town.
To begin, there is corn flan with steamed crayfish and succotash or tartar of dill-cured salmon with a garnish of caviars and croutons.
Among the entrees are veal chop with a pot pie of wild mushrooms, baked sea bass in a potato crust with an oyster sauce, and roast salmon in a honey-mustard glaze. (Review: 5/1/87; Diner's Journal: 11/25/94) Luxury's Lure THE STANHOPE HOTEL * (212) 288-5800; 995 Fifth Avenue, at 81st Street; $$$$; all major credit cards
The luxurious, soothingly serene setting, extremely gracious service and inventive American cooking of Scott Cohen make this one of the more appealing dining rooms on this side of town.
To begin, there is corn flan with steamed crayfish and succotash or tartar of dill-cured salmon with a garnish of caviars and croutons.
Among the entrees are veal chop with a pot pie of wild mushrooms, baked sea bass in a potato crust with an oyster sauce, and roast salmon in a honey-mustard glaze. (Review: 5/1/87; Diner's Journal: 11/25/94)


LOVE SONG '95
Please don't confuse The New York Times Magazine with the Sports Illustrated swimsuit issue.
This "Love Song '95" article is not why I buy your paper.
RABBI YEHUDA ROSTKER Far Rockaway, Queens


Protester Among 'Very Radical'
I guess I'm one of the "the very few radical people" that one Sag Harbor merchant in the story about the Vuitton old-car show in Sag Harbor said are against the event.
Your reporter somehow missed the fact that more than 700 people had by that time signed a petition against the event.
Sag Harbor's total year-round population is 2,100.
By my count, a third of the population of Sag Harbor has to be called "very radical." The number, by the way, continues to rise.
The story also referred to the Chamber of Commerce-sponsored crafts fairs at Marine Park; a benefit for the Bay Street Theater, which also closed Marine park for two days and brought in several hundred extra bodies; an antiques show at the Whaling Museum, as well as an event next door on the grounds of the Old Customs House.
That's in addition to the antique show at Mashashimuet Park, and oh, yes, the flea market at the Whaling Museum, both August events.


Sports of The Times; The Seasons And Symbols Butt Heads
LABOR DAY is when the seasons and the causes collide like football suicide squads covering a kickoff.
In the days before the traditional worker's holiday, the biggest display of emotion in a sporting arena came in Los Angeles, where fans gave a lusty cheer for a former replacement player aptly named Busch.
The real Dodgers had made it obvious that they did not appreciate this minor leaguer filling a spot on the roster.
When Busch was inserted at the tag end of a laugher, the fans gave him a standing ovation.


A Day of Dancing, By the Hundreds, On Hitler's Grave
POLITICS AND DANCE HAVE A strong association in Germany.
The mammoth spectacles staged in Berlin's Olympic Stadium in 1936 by the German dancer Mary Wigman, for example, loom as some of this century's most indelible images of propagandistic art.
This week, a distinguished rebel of American modern dance, Anna Halprin, journeys to Berlin at the invitation of the new International Peace University there to stage an ambitious dance event commemorating the signing of the Potsdam Treaty 50 years ago, ending World War II, by Truman, Churchill and Stalin in the nearby Cecilienhof Palace.


A Breakthrough Put on Hold
IF THINGS HAD GONE According to plan this year, the violinist Rachel Barton would have continued to build her career, performing widely and recording her second CD.
Instead, the 20-year-old Ms.
Barton remains at home here, undergoing a grueling rehabilitation after a commuter train accident last January in which she lost her left leg.
"She was one of the fine, young, talented violinists coming out," said Zubin Mehta, who in 1993 collaborated with Ms.
Barton in the Tchaikovsky Violin Concerto.
"I said, 'Well, we'll see after five or six or seven years how she develops,' when this terrible lightning struck her."


Nonstop Fire News Challenged Channel 12
SHORTLY after the blaze in Westhampton broke out on Aug. 24, News 12 Long Island began nonstop coverage that was to continue for 30 hours.
The local television team helped to frame people's perceptions of the wildfires that destroyed 7,000 acres of pine woods, damaged a dozen homes andwere labeled the largest in the state since 1908.
By the 31st hour, 18 reporters; 34 photographers, editors and truck operators; 31 production employees; and 41 members of the studio technical staff had worked 12- to 24-hour shifts blanketing not only Channel 12's regular Nassau and Suffolk County viewing area but providing footage that was seen internationally.
Pat Dolan, the news director, reported from Chopper 12, which, with an NBC helicopter, provided aerial shots of the fire.


The Whole Earth Is at Stake, but It's Just a Game
Desperado  Antonio Banderas, Steve Buscemi, Salma Hayek, Joaquim de Almeida, Cheech Marin, Quentin Tarantino Directed by Robert Rodriguez R 106 minutes
A lone mariachi, or guitar-toting troubadour, walks into a small Mexican border town and pretty much kills everyone there, to avenge the death of his lady love in "El Mariachi," a 1992 film, at the hands of bloodthirsty drug lords.
When the otherwise nameless mariachi (Mr. Banderas), usually looking good in his black bolero jacket, needs bandaging up, he turns to Carolina (Ms. Hayak), who runs a bookstore in a town in which no one reads.


Carmen Mathews, Environmentalist And an Actress, 84
Carmen Sylva Mathews, an actress, environmentalist and philanthropist who established a summer camp for disadvantaged children, died on Thursday at her farm in Redding, Conn.
She was 84 years old.
Ms.
Mathews was born in Philadelphia and trained at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art in London.
She made her first professional acting appearance with the Stratford-on-Avon Shakespearean Company before moving back to the United States.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
French Fast Food Comes to Forest Hills  In the 33 years that Peter Colthup owned Cafe Europa on 54th Street, between First and Second Avenues, one of the most popular items on the menu was brioche, a staple of French breakfasts, which he described as "a yeast dough with butter and eggs, a lot like a croissant or challah bread."


LOVE SONG '95
Although I am not familiar with this year's song, I did love the list of summer songs from 1955 to the present.
When I fell in love in August 1966, it was to the Lovin' Spoonful's "Summer in the City." I still get a pang when I hear it.
It's great to know that there will always be a summer song.
Thanks for the memories.
DEBRA SCHATZ New York


In Malcolm Case, Quotation Marks Won
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis (column, Aug. 25), in his defense of the journalist Janet Malcolm's honesty, is blind to the principle placed at risk by Ms.
Malcolm's legal strategy.
Away from the gossipy aura the Masson v.
Malcolm libel case acquired, the question of who said what was always less important than the threat to the accepted definition of a "quotation."


Marianne Hicks, Robert H. Folk 2d
Marianne Richmond Hicks, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred H. Hicks of Westbury, L.I., was married yesterday to Robert Harry Folk 2d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Folk of New Cumberland, Pa.
The Rev.
Richard Guice performed the ceremony at the United Methodist Church in Westbury.
The couple graduated from Franklin and Marshall College.
Mrs.
Folk, 25, received a master's degree in museum studies from George Washington University.
She is a research associate and project coordinator at Omega Group Inc., a market research and consulting company in Bryn Mawr, Pa.
Her father is the president of Hicks Nurseries, a Westbury business founded by his ancestor Isaac Hicks in 1853.
Her mother, Marilyn B. Hicks, retired as a librarian at the Green Vale School in Glen Head, L.I.


Wyoming Wasn't First to Grant Suffrage
To the Editor:
Wyoming was not the "first jurisdiction in the world to grant" women suffrage, as an Aug. 27 news article asserts.
New Jersey granted women (as well as free African-American men and women) the right to vote in its first State Constitution.


Aug.27-Sept.2; What Johnny Can't Read
The spinners of ancient fairy tales knew that one way to capture a kid's imagination was to scare the child silly with ghosts, goblins and witches.
Some modern writers figure that it helps to present adults as villains or to include material that could gross out a young reader's parents.
For older readers, writers have long dropped the strictest of taboos against references to sex.
In the interests of encouraging literacy, most schools and their libraries don't have much of a problem with any of those approaches.
But increasingly, according to the anti-censorship group People for the American Way, political and religious groups, most of them conservative, do.


Some Lessons on Labor From a Boss of Few Words
AS a teacher, I am neither a boss nor a worker in the conventional sense.
Many of my students are workers, though -- and, boy, do they complain about their bosses.
They also complain about the pay, the customers and the job conditions, but mainly they complain about what they see as the fundamental unfairness of having to take orders from someone else.
When I was their age, I studied unfairness with one of the most eloquent teachers I have ever had, even though he said little more than 20 words to me the whole time.
It was 1965, and I had been hired by Sears in my home town of Baton Rouge, La., to install appliances, but since I was just a 20-year-old college kid working for the summer, the supervisor assigned me to Mr.
Andrews, who was older (somewhere in his 40's), shorter (built like a fireplug) and always seemed to be angry.


Running on the Fastest Track
I SING THE BODY ELECTRONIC  A Year With Microsoft on the Multimedia Frontier.
By Fred Moody. 311 pp.
New York: Viking. $23.95.


Dashing Imports That Saved a Bad Summer
THIS weekend is traditionally the last hurrah for summer, a time to get in the final full measure of activity before school and other new schedules ensue.
So rather than running on about things that should be done for the future, this may be a good time for reflection, a look back at how great some things were.
Some rather outstanding plants excelled during the rather blah summer of 1995, which the record books are now beginning to show had more than its normal share of a combination of heat, humidity and drought.
Through all these climatic adversities, several plants proved to be stalwarts.
Most of them are rather new to this part of the world although they have been around their native lands for quite some time.


Port Authority Uses Buyouts To Cut Its Costs
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey has taken a step forward in efforts to close its budget deficit and hold the line on its tolls and commuter railway fare, announcing that it has cut its costs by $20 million through a buyout program.
The authority said in an announcement released yesterday that under the program, 301 of its 9,100 workers had agreed to early retirement.
The reductions are part of a push by Gov.
George E. Pataki of New York and Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey to revamp the agency.
Both governors say the authority is poorly run.


Corrections
The Market Watch column last Sunday, about insider trading laws, misstated the given name of a securities law professor at the Duke University School of Law.
He is James Cox, not Jack.


Cara A. Goldberg, Aaron S. Ahola
Cara Ann Goldberg and Aaron Saul Ahola, associates at New York law firms, are to be married today in Thompson, Conn.
Rabbi Paul H. Levenson is to officiate at the Lord Thompson Manor.
The couple, both 26, received their law degrees from the University of Michigan.
She works at Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges, and he at Cleary, Gottlieb, Steen &amp; Hamilton.


Marina Zaikovskaya, R. F. Scudder
Marina Zaikovskaya, until recently the managing director of MIG's Etc., a Moscow company that offers civilians rides on Russian fighter aircraft, was married on Friday to Robert Fry Scudder, the chairman and chief executive of Brightstar, an international business research company in North Brunswick, N.J.
The Rev.
Dr.
Robert Bennett, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the home of the bridegroom's parents in Lake Placid, N.Y.
Mrs.
Scudder graduated from the People's Friendship University and received a Ph.D. in language teaching methodology from the Pushkin Russian Language Institute, both in Moscow.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Vitaly Kulesh of Moscow.
Her father, who is retired, was the chief test pilot for the TU-144 Project, a Russian supersonic aircraft, at the Tupolev Design Bureau in Moscow.


Club Pushes Dancing, Not Drinking, Owner Says
To the Editor:
While I don't want to be unappreciative of basically positive press coverage in "The Comfort Zones of the Young Black Professionals," as the owner of Cafe Wha?
I take extreme offense at the implication that we encourage dancing in order to get our patrons to drink more.
Our philosophy is exactly the opposite.
We never try to encourage our patrons to buy drinks.
In fact we go to great lengths to prevent our customers from drinking too much -- it can only lead to trouble.
We never think in terms of maximizing drink sales, we think only in terms of maximizing the good time of our customers.


Correction
A small map last Sunday with the On the Map article about the Horse Park of New Jersey located Upper Freehold incorrectly.
The township is in Monmouth County, not Bergen County.


Hiring A Firm to Remodel
THIS summer, inspectors from New York City's Department of Consumer Affairs conducted a sting operation designed to ferret out home-improvement contractors doing business without the required contractor's license.
The inspectors, at times posing as homeowners, solicited home-improvement work from a number of contractors who had been the subject of complaints by unsatisfied customers or who had had prior run-ins with the department.
In all, 127 unlicensed contractors fell into the department's trap -- and last month 25 of them ended up taking alternative means of transportation back home after the department seized their vans, trucks and cars and held them ransom until the contractors paid their fines and obtained the proper licenses.


BEST SELLERS: September 3, 1995
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
3
FROM POTTER'S FIELD, by Patricia Cornwell. (Scribner, $24.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta on the trail of a serial killer in Central Park.
2
2
8
BEACH MUSIC, by Pat Conroy. (Talese/Doubleday, $27.50.) An American living in Rome returns to South Carolina and tries to cope with his troubled past.
3
3
6
MEMNOCH THE DEVIL, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The vampire Lestat is snatched from the world by a mysterious adversary who claims to be the Devil.
4
5
79
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
5
4
6
LIGHTNING, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $24.95.) The happy marriage of a lawyer and her husband is suddenly changed after she gets a routine checkup.
6
6
19
THE RAINMAKER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $25.95.) A young man barely out of law school tries to expose a corporation's multibillion-dollar scam.
7
7
160
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
8
9
2
FOR THE ROSES, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $23.) A late-19th-century woman with a checkered past investigates her identity, resulting in romance.
9
12
3
BELGARATH THE SORCERER, by David and Leigh Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $25.95.) A fantasy about the start of a 7,000-year-long global conflict.
10
11
63
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
11
8
10
ROSE MADDER, by Stephen King. (Viking, $25.95.) Fleeing an abusive husband, a woman seeks happiness in a strange city by creating her own myth.
12
1
STORMY WEATHER, by Carl Hiaasen. (Knopf, $24.) A hurricane sweeping across southern Florida leaves in its wake troubled tourists and con artists.
13
10
6
DANGEROUS TO KNOW, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (HarperCollins, $24.) A journalist investigates the death of her former husband, a philanthropist.
14
13
10
THE WITNESS, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $21.95.) A public defender who seems happy in her work and her marriage is plunged into a morass of bigotry and hate.
15
14
8
DISNEY'S POCAHONTAS. (Mouse Works, $6.98.) The romance of an American Indian princess and an Englishman, told in words and pictures.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
8
TO RENEW AMERICA, by Newt Gingrich. (HarperCollins, $24.) The Speaker of the House describes his solutions to the country's problems. (+)
2
3
78
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
3
5
11
A GOOD WALK SPOILED, by John Feinstein. (Little, Brown, $23.95.) A sportswriter reports on the P.G.A.
Tour in 1993 and 1994. (+)
4
2
11
NEW PASSAGES, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $25.) How changing social conditions and longer life expectancies are affecting our lives.
5
4
4
BEYOND ALL REASON, by David Smith with Carol Calef. (Kensington, $18.95.) The former husband of Susan Smith, the woman convicted of killing their two sons, tells of their life together.
6
7
14
SPONTANEOUS HEALING, by Andrew Weil. (Knopf, $23.) Ways in which the body heals itself. (+)
7
6
6
SLEEPERS, by Lorenzo Carcaterra. (Ballantine, $23.) The true story, the narrator claims, of four boys in a reformatory and the revenge they later take.
8
9
36
SISTERS.
Essays by Carol Saline.
Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of sisters.
9
8
4
MY OLD MAN AND THE SEA, by David Hays and Daniel Hays. (Algonquin, $19.95.) A sailing yarn about a father-and-son voyage from Connecticut around Cape Horn.
10
1
IN THEIR NAME, edited by Clive Irving. (Random House, $25.) The Oklahoma City bombing: the stories of those it affected, told in words and pictures.
11
14
8
WHEN ELEPHANTS WEEP, by Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson and Susan McCarthy. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The emotional lives of animals.
12
1
DARK SUN, by Richard Rhodes. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $32.50.) How and why the hydrogen bomb was made.
13
10
14
DAVE BARRY'S COMPLETE GUIDE TO GUYS, by Dave Barry. (Random House, $21.) A humorist explains the strange ways of a species of males called "guys."
14
11
29
THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House, $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the lives of all Americans.
15
12
4
THE LIARS' CLUB, by Mary Karr. (Viking, $22.95.) A poet recalls her childhood as a member of a troubled family in East Texas during the early 1960's.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
119
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Relationships. (+)
2
3
24
THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra. (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $14.) How to "generate wealth in all its forms." (+)
3
3
STOP AGING NOW! by Jean Carper. (HarperCollins, $24.) Ways to combat aging and resist disease. (+)
4
15
HOW TO ARGUE AND WIN EVERY TIME, by Gerry Spence. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) A lawyer describes ways to win arguments at home and at work. (+)
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Aug. 19, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk (*) indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
A dagger (+) indicates that some bookstores report receiving bulk orders for a book.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) BEHIND THE WHEEL AT CHRYSLER: The Iacocca Legacy, by Doron P. Levin. (Harcourt Brace, $25.) A Detroit reporter interprets Chrysler under Lee Iacocca's management as a company far better at making sales and deals than cars.
THE BROTHERS: The Hidden World of Japan's Richest Family, by Lesley Downer. (Random House, $25.) How a poor country boy, starting in 1947, accumulated many, many billions of dollars, and how his reclusive offspring are doing; winkled out by a tenacious British journalist.
THE FIRST MAN, by Albert Camus. (Knopf, $23.) Camus's autobiographical novel, long suppressed by his family for fear of offending bloody-minded intellectuals, renders his deep attachment for the Algeria he grew up in and his refusal to choose violence; it appeared in France only last year.
GALATEA 2.2, by Richard Powers. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $23.) Ingenious, ambitious and cerebral, this novel concerns a novelist (same name as the author's) who works to perfect a machine intelligence that can learn literature and sustain belief in purpose and meaning.
GARDENS OF REVELATION: Environments by Visionary Artists, by John Beardsley. (Abbeville, $60.) An irresistible excursion by an art historian into the work of folk artists who created, mainly from found objects, junk and concrete, worlds nobody had ever seen except themselves.
AN ITALIAN EDUCATION: The Further Adventures of an Expatriate in Verona, by Tim Parks. (Grove, $22.) By sending his children to school in Italy and carefully watching them become Italians, Mr.
Parks studies the rules that govern a society other than his native England.
KONIN: A Quest, by Theo Richmond. (Pantheon, $27.50.) A British film maker's tactful, thoughtful re-creation, through documents and interviews, of his ancestors' town in Poland as it was before 1939, when German troops changed it forever.
LOST IN PLACE: Growing Up Absurd in Suburbia, by Mark Salzman. (Random House, $22.) A refreshing memoir of a teen-ager's search for happiness through kung fu in the 1970's; the jokes are mostly on the author, who is remarkably free from the customarily licensed resentments.
ON GOLD MOUNTAIN, by Lisa See. (St. Martin's, $24.95.) An engaging, energetically researched account of Fong See, a shrewd immigrant who prospered in 19th-century California, and the biracial family he left behind him (which includes his great-granddaughter, the author).
RL'S DREAM, by Walter Mosley. (Norton, $22.) This emphatic modern-day fable of nurturance and dying is a Deep South tale set in New York, inhabited by a black musician, his white lover and the ghost of a mythic blues singer.
VIRTUALLY NORMAL: An Argument About Homosexuality, by Andrew Sullivan. (Knopf, $22.) The author, who is the editor of The New Republic, reflects reasonably on society's dealings with the minority of which he is a member; he thinks society could do a lot better.


A Ticket Blitz Hits Sidewalk Cafes
Responding to complaints from local residents, community boards and licensed outdoor cafe owners, the Department of Consumer Affairs recently conducted an enforcement blitz.
The department seized the sidewalk furniture of three Manhattan sidewalk cafes found repeatedly to be operating without licenses: Cremcaffe, 65 Second Avenue; Jour et Nuit, 337 West Broadway; and Brasserie Felix, 340 West Broadway.


Colleen M. Quinn, John A. Amster
Colleen Marie Quinn, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Leo F. Quinn of Boca Raton, Fla., was married there yesterday to John Albert Amster, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Morton Amster of Hartsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
Peter Quinn, a Roman Catholic priest who is a cousin of the bride's father, performed the ceremony at the Chapel of St.
Andrew.
Mrs.
Quinn Amster, 26, is a reporter for New York magazine in New York.
The bride graduated cum laude from Middlebury College and received a master's degree in journalism from Northwestern University.
Her father is an orthopedic surgeon in private practice in Boca Raton.


It's a Hacker Meeting, So Hide Your Phones
Razor and Curious George showed up.
Angstrom and Tigerboy and Cameo came, Rebel and Master Chemist, and the revered Emmanuel Goldstein.
And there were dozens more, the illicit apparatus for filching pay-phone calls secreted deep in the pockets of shredded jeans, the hand-held Newton minicomputers at the ready.
In the heart of the kind of big corporation they love to steal from, some of the naughtiest scamps of cyberspace gathered on Friday night for a monthly Manhattan ritual that transforms their normally ethereal interfacing into a meeting of flesh.


Without a Fight
THE STRANGE DEATH OF THE SOVIET EMPIRE  By David Pryce-Jones. 456 pp.
New York: Metropolitan Books/ Henry Holt &amp; Company. $30.


The Whole Earth Is at Stake, but It's Just a Game
Mortal Kombat  Christopher Lambert, Linden Ashby, Cary-Hiroyuki Tagawa, Robin Shou, Bridgette Wilson, Talisa Soto and Trevor Goddard  Directed by Paul Anderson PG-13 95 minutes
The Earth's future is at stake in a high-tech adventure fantasy.
The good guys (led by a benevolent god) use their human skills to foil a superhuman bad guy with a sorcerer's magic at his fingertips and a goon named Goro, who has 20 fingertips.
In a tournament held every generation, the Earth could fall into the hands of the bad guy, who would turn everybody into doomed, despairing slaves in a dark and ugly world.


At the Olcott, A Penthouse Of Cards
It is 1 P.M. on a Tuesday, and the largest room in the penthouse is packed with foursomes playing duplicate bridge.
Murray Seiler, a retired lawyer, made his four-heart contract and snapped a kernel of advice to an opponent: "You should have sloughed a spade." At 91, Mr.
Seiler is acknowledged as one of the strongest players in the Manhattan Bridge Club.
In a smaller room across the hall, three tables of women -- all of a certain age -- are taking a bridge lesson.
"I'm not going to let you make that bid," chides Jeff Bayone, their instructor, as Elaine Cohen puzzles over a complex hand.
Mrs.
Cohen, a retired movie production administrator who took up the game last year, changes her bid, and Mr.
Bayone nods his approval.


The Green Grass of Gridirions Begins to Make a Comeback
As college and pro football teams undertake the first big weekend of the season, grass has become a growing choice over artificial-turf playing surfaces.
Concern over player injuries and the development of new types of grass that can withstand heavy use have spurred the renewed commitment to grass.
Fifteen of the 30 teams in the National Football League, including expansion franchises in Jacksonville and Carolina, now have grass fields.
In recent years, three teams -- the Chicago Bears, the Kansas City Chiefs and the New England Patriots -- have changed their playing surface from artificial turf to grass.
In doing so, they have joined such recent collegiate converts as Oklahoma, California, Alabama, Arkansas and Tennessee.
The three major league baseball parks built in the past several years -- in Baltimore, Cleveland and Arlington, Tex. -- all have grass fields.


Joanna Minikes, Aaron Sirulnick
Joanna Minikes, the daughter of Michael and Cheryl Minikes of New York, is to be married today to Aaron Todd Sirulnick, a son of Sanford Sirulnick and Carol Sirulnick Lasky, both of New York.
Rabbi Saul Teplitz is to perform the ceremony at the summer home of the bride's parents in East Hampton, L.I.
The bride, 24, graduated from the University of Vermont.
Until recently she was a writer in the New York publicity office of Savoy Pictures Entertainment, a film company.
Later this month she is to become a writer at Clein &amp; White, a public relations agency in New York.
Her father is the treasurer and a senior managing director of Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, the New York investment bank.


On the Highways: 11 Spots to Avoid
A look at trouble spots you may encounter in the next week -- or month, or months -- courtesy of Transcom, an interstate transportation agency. 1.
ROUTE 95 -- Teaneck.
Southbound right lane ramp closed on local and express roadways.
Through next Sunday. 2.
ROUTE 4 -- Fort Lee.
Eastbound left lane and ramp to northbound I-95 closed, through October. 3.
ROUTE 3 -- Rutherford.
Various lanes closed at night for repaving, until the end of the year. 4.
OLD MOUNT PLEASANT AVENUE -- East Hanover and Livingston.
Passaic River bridge is closed for replacement, through December. 5.
ROUTES 1-9 -- Essex County.
Southbound traffic has been shifted to new northbound express lanes between the Pulaski Skyway and I-78.
Wilson Avenue exit is closed. 6.
INTERSTATE 287 -- Bridgewater, between Route 22 and Foothill Road.
Work zone setup.
Various lanes closed, until further notice. 7.
EAST DUKES PARKWAY -- Hillsborough.
Road closed for bridge replacement, through December. 8.
ROUTE 1 -- Woodbridge.
Right northbound lane on Garden State Parkway closed.
Through Sept. 14. 9.
ROUTE 9 -- Woodbridge and Sayreville.
Edison Bridge over Raritan River.
One southbound lane closed Monday through Thursday, 10 P.M. to 8 A.M., and Sunday, 9 P.M. to 8 A.M.
For repaving; through Oct. 11. 10.
ROUTE 1 -- Plainsboro.
Shoulder is closed in both directions between Scudders Mill Road and Forrestal Road. 11.
ROUTE 1 -- West Windsor.
Northbound shoulder is closed between Nassau Park Boulevard and Alexander Road, until 1996.
The northbound Duck Pond Run jughandle turn is permanently closed.


Quality of Grief
To the Sports Editor:
As a young boy in the 1950's, I remember Mickey Mantle with affection, though of a more detached nature than that of most of my peers.
It took a conversation with the theater set designer Sam Leve to clarify what I believe is the saddest aspect of Mantle's death.
Sam, who immigrated here from Russia as a boy, indignantly pointed out that in America, the slugger's death received much more attention than Albert Einstein's had in 1956.


Allison D. Kluger, Mark F. Shaw
Allison Dale Kluger, a daughter of Barbara H. Kluger of New York and the late Alan C. Kluger, is to be married today to Mark Forrest Shaw, the son of Lynn and Karl Shaw of Tenafly, N.J.
Rabbi Arthur Schneier is to perform the ceremony at the St.
Regis Hotel in New York.
The bride, 29, is a producer in Long Island City, Queens, for Q2 Television, a cable shopping channel.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.


In Defense of Charles Eames
To the Editor:
While I was pleased to see the Book Review allot so much space to a book on the Eameses' work, I was greatly distressed to read that same review, in which Paul Shepheard offers a benign, largely favorable opinion of "Charles and Ray Eames: Designers of the Twentieth Century," by Pat Kirkham (Aug. 6).
Mr.
Shepheard seems to overlook the flawed basis of the book in his review: Ms.
Kirkham has clearly set out to knock Charles Eames from his position as one of the great American minds in design, and in her haste stumbles over obstacles of fact and fitness.


Hard Labor
MOST Americans are not working on this Labor Day weekend. Casino employees are.
The 45,000 men and women who deal the blackjack games, maintain the slot machines, greet the customers, cook the meals, mop the floors and otherwise keep Atlantic City's 12 casinos running 24 hours a day typically work holidays, often pulling long, hard shifts at night or in early morning when most other people are doing anything but work.


Mets Get in Hole and Can't Get Out
Reid Cornelius would like to have his name included when the Mets sit down during the off season to figure what their starting rotation will be in 1996.
Whether he will get serious consideration is another issue.
After the right-hander turned in a dominating performance at the Class AAA level, where he was 7-0 with a 0.90 earned run average, the Mets wanted to see what he could do in the big leagues.
So far, not much.


In 401(k)'s, It's Great To Be Young And Bold
YOUNG laborers are no slackers in the savings department, but they still have trouble taking a long view when investing their newfound money.
At age 29, Jennifer Shine-Hayward of Norfolk, Mass., has socked away $30,000 in the 401(k) retirement plan at Xerox, where she is an account executive.
But when she reviewed her account statement earlier this year, it gave her a jolt.
Ms.
Shine-Hayward found that her investment gain for 1994 was only $150, or about half of a percent.
"I would have earned more in a savings account or a money market fund," she said.


Karin E. Berger, Jonathan C. Sadow
Dr.
Karin Elise Berger, a daughter of Lila Berger and Dr.
Lawrence A. Berger of Bay Shore, L.I., is to be married this evening to Jonathan C. Sadow, a son of Sandra and Arthur Sadow of Chestnut Ridge, N.Y.
Rabbi Moshe Gottesman is to perform the ceremony at Congregation Beth Sholom in Lawrence, L.I.


SUNDAY, September 3, 1995; A QUESTION FOR: Ron Popeil
Q: In this age of the infomercial, what sales techniques have you retained from the days of the live sell?
A: The techniques are not the same.
They're a little bit softer for infomercials.
I've gone by many titles: King of Hair, King of Pasta, King of Dehydration, or to use a more colloquial phrase, a pitchman or a hawker.
I don't like those phrases, but I am what I am.
Pick a product, any product on your desk.
Introduce the product.
Tell all the problems relating to the product.
Tell how the product solves all those problems.
Tell the customer where he or she can buy it and how much it costs.
Do this in one minute.
Try it.
You know what it sounds like?
It comes out like this: Brrrrrrrrrrr.


Riley Back in Spotlight And Back at the Helm
Aboard a cruise ship called the Imagination, he emerged from behind gold-sequined curtains and walked tautly onto the stage of the Dynasty lounge.
Immaculately tailored, he talked about his old job, his new job and his enduring image of a championship parade.
This one, he said, traveled down Biscayne Boulevard.


Peeking At the Playbook As Season Kicks Off
A strange thing happened in the National Football League on the way to defining the team of the 1990's.
The entire landscape of pro football changed.
We have free agency.
We have Alvin Harper in Tampa Bay and Mark Stepnoski in Houston and Ricky Watters in Philadelphia and Andre Rison in Cleveland.
Three years ago those players could not have willingly left their former teams.
This is the result of the labor agreement that the league signed in June 1993.
That agreement set the stage for a numbing $1.6 billion television contract.
With pro basketball and major league baseball currently under labor strife and pro football already America's most popular sport, the N.F.L. is set this season to reach unforeseen heights in fan interest and in dollars.


Coming This Fall: Paper Aims To Catch a Thief (and Readers)
New Jersey has a new newspaper, and it is not for fans of stylish writing or catchy graphics.
The monthly tabloid -- called simply Wanted, and based in Freehold -- is to begin nationwide distribution in November, but a few trial issues have been published.
They have the utilitarian, glaring-light-bulb look of a police-station waiting room.
Wanted's major topic is "the nation's most dangerous criminals." The subjects of the page 1 photos are grim-faced and shiny with sweat in grainy police mug shots atop ID numbers.
"$10,000 REWARD for Wanted Cop-Killers," reads a front-page headline above shots of a dour fat man and a grimacing woman with beaded hair.


'Graham Greene: The Enemy Within'
To the Editor:
In a reply (Letters, July 23) to my review of his book "Graham Greene: The Enemy Within," Michael Shelden suggests that my "snide" commentary ignores his "hard evidence." Amusing.
I said that very little of the evidence he adduces to "prove" Greene a monstrous fake would stand up in court.
Are we seriously expected to believe that were Greene still alive, he could not successfully have sued this biographer to hell and back for defamation?


Michelle Rubin, Russell Silberglied
Michelle Beth Rubin, the daughter of Laura and Leonard Rubin of Cranford, N.J., is to be married today to Russell Carl Silberglied, a son of Marilyn and Robert Silberglied of New City, N.Y.
Rabbi Ronald Hoffberg is to perform the ceremony at the Short Hills, a catering hall in Short Hills, N.J.
The bride, 25, is the children's program coordinator at the Jewish Community Center of Southern New Jersey in Cherry Hill.
She graduated from the University of Wisconsin and received a master's degree in social work from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is the assistant executive director of the Jewish Community Centers Association in New York, a membership organization for Jewish community centers and for Y.M.-Y.W.H.A.'s in North America.
Her mother is a special education teacher at the Passaic County Technical and Vocational High School in Wayne, N.J.


A Powerful Fund-Raiser Who Also Oversees State Contracts
Charles A. Gargano is hardly a household name to the average New Yorker.
But to state business leaders who gave millions of dollars in political contributions to elect George E. Pataki Governor last fall and to many of those same business people now seeking multimillion-dollar contracts from the Pataki administration, Charles A. Gargano is a crucial name to know.
Mr.
Gargano is the colorful, sometimes controversial, immensely successful chief fund-raiser who collected $14.5 million to finance Mr.
Pataki's upset victory last fall and who continues to be chairman of $1,000-a-plate Republican fund-raising events.


Honk When You Laugh


Satchmo's on a Stamp, So the Music's Starting
THE small, unassuming red brick house at 34-56 107th Street in Corona was the home of Louis Armstrong from 1943 to his death in 1971.
Those were crucial years, during which Armstrong formed his seminal jazz group, the All-Stars, and recorded "Hello, Dolly!" and "Mack the Knife."
On Thursday, the house will be host to another landmark event: the New York debut of the Louis Armstrong commemorative stamp.
"The Stamp Dedication at Satchmo's Home" starts at 11 A.M. and features a block party with music by Arvell Shaw and the Louis Armstrong Legacy Band, composed of musicians who played with Armstrong.
There will be free pizza and soda, and speeches from the likes of the Flushing postmaster.
And a special cancellation mark designed by a local fifth grader will be unveiled.
The event is sponsored by the Louis Armstrong Archives at Queens College, which plans to turn the house into a museum by 1998, and the United States Postal Service.


Relatively Speaking
Unlike many documentaries that look at the wide divergence between animal life and our own, the National Geographic Special "THE NEW CHIMPANZEES" instead celebrates common traits we share with those primates before the genetic tree branched.
Linda Hunt, who narrates the film by Catherine McConnell and Cynthia Moses, tells us that 97 percent of our genetic material is shared with the chimpanzees, "and it shows." Field researchers explain similiarities in vignettes of chimp culture showing team hunting, paramilitary drills, maternal teaching and communal mourning over a death -- WEDNESDAY at 8 P.M. on NBC.
Susanne O'Connor


A Publisher Builds a Home for the Lost Soul of Rockaway
For 15 years, Leon Locke has collected pieces of Rockaway history.
Crammed inside the tiny, dingy newsroom of The Wave, a century-old weekly covering the Rockaway peninsula that is published by Mr.
Locke, are the bittersweet reminders of a place that may seem to have lost its soul.
Among the memorabilia: a railroad tie from the Ocean Electric Railway; a sign for the IND Rockaway Shuttle; a 16-foot-tall brass lamp that lighted the concrete promenade of the midway in the old Rockaway Playland; a photograph of firemen standing in the rubble after the great Seaside fire of 1892; and postcards of women in yellow and blue dresses, perched on the Rockaway sand, beckoning, "I wish you were here."


Golf Club's Restaurant Stirs Debate
THE sign in front of the public golf club here still bears the words "Public Restaurant" in small letters.
But the restaurant is gone, and the City Council and club members are debating if it can be replaced.
The Rye Golf Club, which features an 18-hole golf course and an Olympic-size swimming pool, is open to all Rye City residents.
Membership fees range from $175 to $1,500.
About 3,000 of the city's 15,000 residents are members, according to the club manager, Terri Silverman-Jessen.
The club is self-sufficient financially.


One Satisfied Customer
To the Editor:
I was astounded by Matt Wolf's article on the West End, "Is London's Broadway Growing Irrelevant?"  [ Aug. 13 ] , in which he implied that theater is almost superfluous to the London scene.
He neglected to mention Patrick Marber's "Dealer's Choice," which examines compulsive gambling in a white-hot father-and-son battle.
Down from the Vaudeville Theater where "Dealer's Choice" is playing, there is "Indian Ink" at the Aldwych, Tom Stoppard's look at two societies, India and England, that coexist but never connect.


How Ya Gonna Keep 'Em Down on the Farm?
To the Editor:
Having been raised in a small farming community in northeastern Vermont in the 1950's and 60's, I feel compelled to respond to Maxine Kumin's review of four books (Aug. 6), each of which, in its own way, laments the disappearance of the family farm.


Corrections
A picture layout last Sunday about luxury services misstated the name of a Los Angeles store where designer gowns can be rented; it is One Night Affair.
The layout also misstated the store's telephone number; it is (310) 474-7808.
In the same layout, the source of a photograph of a Cuban cigar was omitted; it was Cigar Aficionado magazine.


Audit Agency For Mexico Is Proposed
Promising to scale back his own authority and confront rampant Government corruption, President Ernesto Zedillo says he will support the creation of an independent agency to oversee public spending.
In his first state of the nation address, Mr.
Zedillo said on Friday that he would soon propose a constitutional amendment to establish a comptroller's office under the legislature with an autonomous professional staff and wide powers to audit the federal Government.


Sag Harbor Plan: C'est a Rire
The first question raised by your report  [ Aug. 20 ]  on Vuitton Luggage's planned invasion of Sag Harbor next June is whether the reporter kept a straight face when Vuitton's C.E.O., Michael Burke, compared the East End village to St.
Tropez.
Burke kvelled over the success of a Vuitton promotion held in the Frencdh resort cum theme park, which he characterized as "very protective of its heritage." C'est a rire, as they would say there.
Like Sag Harbor, St.
Tropez used to be a charming, real-life fishing village.
Like St.
Tropez, Sag Harbor is increasingly under pressure from summer tourism that threatens to destroy the last vestiges of its original character.
However, before Sag Harbor follows St.
Tropez into Disney World self-parody, many citizens (over 900 anti-Vuitton petition signatures to date and counting) and an increasing number of merchants (the Chamber of Commerce has withdrawn its earlier "pro" position) are organizing a pre-emptive rescue.


They Must Have Tickets
FOR nearly 12 months a year, Philip J. Molite is just your average Queens guy.
He plays pickup basketball in the St.
Francis Prep schoolyard in Fresh Meadows, takes his family to the beach and gets his hair cut not far from his house in Flushing. (The barber, Karol Fisher, doesn't even know for sure what Mr. Molite does for a living.)
But two weeks on either side of Labor Day, Mr.
Molite is transformed into a most important person, an archetypal New York figure: the gatekeeper to the hottest ticket in town.


23-Point Final Quarter Rescues Crimson Tide
Alabama 33, Vanderbilt 25
No. 11 Alabama avoided losing its first-ever game under National Collegiate Athletic Association probation last night by scoring 23 fourth-quarter points to beat Vanderbilt, 33-25, in a season opener at Nashville.


Searching for the Union Label In the Ideas of Workplace Books
YOU know you've either sold out or crashed through the envelope of middle age when you plan to spend Labor Day fixing posole for a crowd of country-house guests.
Forget planting yourself in front of the stereo to listen over and over, in the manner of a "Louie, Louie" marathon, to Pete Seeger singing "Union Maid" ("There once was a union maid, who never was afraid, of goons and ginks and the company finks and the deputy sheriffs who made the raid . . .") and "Talking Union" ("Take it easy boys, but take it"), occasionally throwing in the Marianne Faithfull cover of John Lennon's "Working Class Hero."
There are signs of life at the A.F.L.-C.I.O.
There are unions attracting new members, especially in service industries that organized labor has traditionally ignored.
There are young people drawn to careers as organizers.
But even an optimist would be strained to say the movement is as robust as the lyrics to "Talking Union" or "Union Maid."


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
HARLEM  Now Open for Viewing: Status of Women Curators
Though women have held long held jobs as museum curators, few have landed top jobs in the field.
This is the subject of a slide lecture, "Surviving or Thriving? The Status of Woman Curators Today," on Saturday at the Museum of the City of New York, delivered by Dr.
Kendall Taylor (left), director of Art Management Associates in Washington.
"It is one of the few professions that woman went into early on but have not reached the top of the field," said Jane McNamara, a program specialist at the museum.


Julie Larsen, Golf's 'Late Bloomer,' Sees Her Career Flower
GROWING up here in northern Westchester, Julie Larsen made her mark early as a star all-round athlete.
At John Jay High School in Cross River, she excelled in field hockey, basketball and softball, one sport for each season of the school year.
Then in the summer she switched to tennis, working in the tennis shop at the Waccabuc Country Club and playing well enough to win the women's club championship while she was in high school.


Now, Drought Triage. And Waste Not the Water.
It has been so hot and dry this summer that even the weeds are dying.
Buckhorn plantain, a bane to lawn-lovers, is shriveling up in the straw-colored grass at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx.
"It's so dry the leaves crumple in your hand," said Wayne Cahilly, the manager of the arboretum and grounds there.
"Japanese knotweed is in a dead wilt."


Historic Adirondack Camp Is Now a Museum
After years of deterioration, the Adirondack "great camp" that served as President Calvin Coolidge's summer White House in 1926 is being restored and has been opened to the public.
White Pine Camp was built in 1907 and 1908 for the New York businessman Archibald White.
Situated on a ridge overlooking Osgood Pond, near Paul Smiths and Saranac Lake, the 35-acre estate contains 20 buildings, including an owner's cabin, a dining hall, four sleeping cabins, two boathouses, a tennis house, indoor bowling alleys and a Japanese teahouse.


Amid Decay, Tenants Seek To Organize
Celsa Magris was giving a visitor a tour of her Sunset Park apartment.
There is no front door knob, just a hole.
A candle illuminates the bathroom, since the ceiling collapsed and was replaced without a light fixture.
Murky water stands in the bathtub, which does not drain.
The toilet in Margarita Gonzalez's apartment next door does not flush.
On the floor below, a large hole gapes in the bathroom ceiling of Juana Figueroa's railroad flat.
Windows in several apartments and the common hallways are shattered.


Not Just A Man's World
To the Editor:
I enjoyed Bernard Holland's article about aspiring conductors, "Making Music Through Sleight of Hand and Eye"  [ Aug. 13 ] , until the final paragraph, which stated: "You can make a lot of money at it, meet girls and gather all the fame you can handle." Mr.
Holland obviously assumes that all conductors are male.
I am currently the associate conductor of the second national tour of "Miss Saigon" and, last time I checked, very female.


Lisa Parlato, Eugene LeDonne
Lisa Marie Parlato and Eugene LeDonne, both lawyers, were married yesterday in Brooklyn.
Msgr.
Cosmo Saporito officiated at St.
Ephrem's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
LeDonne, 34, is the senior human resources counsel for Allied Signal Inc., an aerospace and automobile products company in Morristown, N.J.
She graduated from Princeton University and received her law degree from the University of Michigan.
She is a daughter of Caroline Parlato of Brooklyn and the late Pat A. Parlato.
The bride's father was a maintenance man for the Parks Department in Brooklyn, which named a Manhattan Beach playground in his honor.
Her mother is a secretary at Public School 102 in Brooklyn.


Business Best Sellers
HARD COVER +1.
TO RENEW AMERICA by Newt Gingrich. (HarperCollins, $24).
The Speaker of the House describes his solutions to the country's problems. +2.
THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS by Deepak Chopra (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $12.95).
How to "generate wealth in all its forms." +3.
HOW TO ARGUE AND WIN EVERY TIME by Gerry Spence (St. Martin's, $22.95).
A lawyer describes ways to win arguments at home and at work. +4.
MARY KAY: YOU CAN HAVE IT ALL by Mary Kay Ash (Prima, $22.95).
Advice from an entrepreneur. 5.
THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE by Philip K. Howard (Random House, $18).
How government regulations are fettering Americans. 6 A PENNY SAVED by Neale S. Godfrey (Simon &amp; Schuster, $18.95).
Lessons in family budgeting, inspired by business: what's a fair price for mowing the lawn? +7.
THE BEARDSTOWN LADIES' COMMON-SENSE INVESTMENT GUIDE (Godin/Hyperion, $19.95).
Tips for successful investing from 16 Illinois women. +8.
FIRST THINGS FIRST by Stephen R. Covey et al. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23).
Ways to organize your life. +9.
THE TAKEOVER by Stephen W. Frey (Dutton, $19.95).
A novel in which Wall Street investment bankers scheme about monster deals and murders. +10.
THE DISCIPLINE OF MARKET LEADERS by Michael Treacy and Fred Wiersema (Addison-Wesley, $25).
A discussion of competitive business strategies.
PAPERBACK +1.
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE by Stephen R. Covey (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12).
Principles for success. +2.
CREATING A NEW CIVILATION by Alvin Toffler and Heidi Toffler (Turner Publishing, $7.95).
A proposal for reshaping society to meet 21st century conditions. +3.
RE-ENGINEERING THE CORPORATION by Michael Hammer and James Champy (Harper Business, $13).
Business innovation. +4.
THE 1995 WHAT COLOR IS YOUR PARACHUTE?
By Richard Nelson Bolles (Ten Speed, $14.95).
Advice about careers. +5.
KNOCK 'EM DEAD by Martin Yate (Adams, $9.95).
A 1995 edition of the job seekers' manual.
Rankings are based on August sales figures of 3,050 bookstores and of wholesalers serving 28,000 hard-cover retailers and 38,000 paperback retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets).
The numbers are statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above. + Some bookstores report receiving bulk orders of these titles.


Jessica J. Wait, Noel M. Jennings
Jessica Joan Wait, the senior vice president of marketing and sales at Continental Asset Management, insurance-company advisers in New York, was married yesterday to Noel Michael Jennings, an account executive at Dean Witter Reynolds, the securities brokerage firm, also in New York.
The Rev.
Mario C. Costa performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer in New York.
Mrs.
Jennings graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
She is a daughter of Joan D. Wait of Albany and the late Kevin P. Wait.
Her father was a commercial real estate broker in Albany and a former mayor of Brookville, L.I.


Douglas B. Lowey, Ellen S. Bloom
Ellen Suzanne Bloom, a daughter of Mrs.
Samuel Romirowsky of Boothwyn, Pa., and Barry D. Bloom of Yardley, Pa., is to be married today to Douglas Bennett Lowey, the son of Representative Nita M. Lowey and Stephen Lowey of Rye, N.Y.
Rabbi J. Harold Romirowsky, the bride's stepgrandfather, is to perform the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride, 26, is a lawyer in New York.
She graduated from Muhlenberg College and received her law degree from Widener University.


In a Suburban Border War, The Enemies Are Allies Too
To The Editor:
Joe Sharkey's column "A Suburban Border War, With Real Guns" (Jersey, Aug. 20), about the dispute between Waldwick and Allendale over the noise from Waldwick's police pistol range, includes one very large misperception.
Mr.
Sharkey suggests that the Allendale police don't use the range, when in fact they do.
If that borough is serious about its opposition, perhaps it could stop using the range.
Of course, then it would have to use the Bergen County Police Academy range in Mahwah and pay its officers overtime to travel there.


In Melbourne, Classic Cuisine Is Thriving
MELBOURNE is probably the most European of Australian capitals.
Its plan follows the classic 19th-century grid pattern with broad, tree-lined avenues, down the center of which rumble Melbourne's much-loved electric trams.
Dignified and sedate, the city still boasts many handsome buildings dating from its period of splendor and prosperity following the 1850's gold rush.
Its suburbs spread around the shores of Port Phillip Bay, and the city itself retreats inland to the banks of the Yarra River.
Melbourne prides itself on being the fashion and shopping capital of Australia, but it is also a cultural center.
Late spring (October and November) ushers in a burst of cultural activity as the Melbourne Festival presents concerts, opera, theater and ballet, and celebrates Melbourne's gracious gardens.
The end of summer (February and March) brings diversions of a different kind with the annual Food and Wine Festival: three weeks of tastings, seminars, market tours and cut-price lunches at many of Melbourne's best-known restaurants.


Liberties; Eustace Silly
A friend writes:
There is a sensation of autumn in the air, and I have passed several anxious days pondering the sensibility of feminism.
I feel as flustered as a dowager with an unruly poodle.


Nigel S. MacEwan, Judith S. Beavers
Judith Sperry Beavers, a decorator in Darien, Conn., and Nigel Savage MacEwan, a financial executive in New York, were married yesterday in Darkharbor, Me.
The Rev.
David Boulton performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
MacEwan, 57, graduated from Bradford College and from the New York School of Interior Design.
She is a daughter of the late Elizabeth G. Ross and the late Edward G. Sperry.
Her grandfather the late Dr.
Elmer A. Sperry founded the Sperry Gyroscope Company in New York.


One Way To Cut Costs
To the Editor:
Regarding your article on National Public Radio, "At NPR, All Things Reconsidered"  [ Aug. 13 ] , in the face of Government cutbacks, NPR should consider one idea that would save it money and enhance its international news coverage, namely, having the Voice of America's highly reputed foreign correspondents provide international news and analysis for it.


Don't Fear Disabilities Law
To the Editor:
Because of Louis Pechman's essay "A Level Playing Field or a Quagmire?" (Viewpoint, July 30), employers will continue to see people with disabilities as burdens requiring special treatment rather than as the individuals qualified to do all the types of work there are.
Mr.
Pechman exploits the warped concept of merit that prevails in this country to make employers question whether people with disabilities deserve this special treatment.


French Tow Ships off Site Of Atom Test
The French Navy today towed two protest ships away from the site of planned French nuclear protests in the South Pacific after seizing the vessels and arresting dozens of their passengers and crew, including an American congressman and the leader of a Polynesian independence movement.
Word that the independence leader had been arrested led his supporters to set up roadblocks on the outskirts of Papeete, the capital of French Polynesia, snarling traffic for more than 12 hours and forcing tourists trying to reach the international airport to abandon taxis and return to their hotels.


Tracy Kramer, Benjamin Seckler
Tracy Kramer, a daughter of Janet and Earl Kramer of New York, is to be married today to Benjamin David Seckler, a son of Clare Seckler of Harrison, N.Y., and the late Dr.
Stanley G. Seckler.
Rabbi David Small is to perform the ceremony at Chesterwood, the historic home and studio of the sculptor Daniel Chester French in Stockbridge, Mass.
The couple graduated from Harvard University, she magna cum laude and he cum laude.


Peering Into the Murky Jobs Crystal Ball for 2015
WHAT should today's toddlers be thinking of doing when they are unable to drag out graduate school any longer and must enter the work force, say around 2015?
Although the Government predicts hot jobs 10 years into the future, there is little solid information on trends beyond 2005.
There is, however, plenty of informed speculation by demographers and futurists.


Add Tomatoes When Dressing Up Pasta
THE fresh, vine-ripened tomatoes sold in every market and farm stand simplify lunch or dinner.
A few of these lush beauties, plus garlic, herbs and other embellishments, can quickly dress some pasta for a meal.
Here are a few possibilities.
The linguine recipe calls for diced tofu, the bean curd high in soy protein that has been in the health bulletins.


United States Airports Tighten Security
Getting through United States airports may be a little slower these days because of tightened security.
Passengers should allow extra time before flights and assume that people who come to see them off or to meet them will be kept away from gate areas.
Backup meeting places should be arranged.
On Aug. 10 most airports were raised from Level 1 to Level 2, meaning extra surveillance, on the 4-level scale developed after the gulf war.
Transportation Secretary Frederico Pena said the action was taken on the advice of unidentified Federal law-enforcement officials, but he would not cite any specific cause.
An official who did not wish to be identified linked the move to tensions arising from the arrests in the United States of a Palestinian leader (set to be deported to Israel) and a Jordanian suspect in the World Trade Center bombing, as well as to the approaching end of the trial of nine defendants in that bombing.


Add Tomatoes When Dressing Up Pasta
THE fresh, vine-ripened tomatoes sold in every market and farm stand simplify lunch or dinner.
A few of these lush beauties, plus garlic, herbs and other embellishments, can quickly dress some pasta for a meal.
Here are a few possibilities.
The linguine recipe calls for diced tofu, the bean curd high in soy protein that has been in the health bulletins.


Burmese Blues
To the Editor:
The experiences of the Beckers in Burma does not surprise me, and this is one of the main reasons our company tries to send a full-time staff guide from our Bangkok office to escort each of our monthly groups of North Americans to Myanmar.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 The ticket master of the U.S.
Open makes sure the right names get the right seats.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 Roman ruins, stark landscape: The ghosts that haunt industrial Williamsburg.
MOVIE CLOCK 11 What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 12 Celebrating Satchmo in Corona; a lecture on female curators; beach volleyball around town.
GOOD EATING 12 A tour of the Upper East Side; the luxurious Stanhope Hotel; the cheerful Caffe Grazie.
SOAPBOX 13 A teacher explains why she took a buyout.
And letters.


Aug.27-Sept.2: The Last Czar; Nicholas's Fate Still Troubles Russia
Not that there had been much doubt before, but DNA tests have finally proven that the bones dug out of a forest clearing in the city of Yekaterinburg in 1979 are those of Russia's last monarch, Czar Nicholas II, executed with his family in a barrage of bullets and bayonet strikes on Lenin's orders in July 1918.


Ex-Judge Asking For Dismissal of Lawsuit
A former Hudson County judge whose printed attack on an unwed mother fueled a national debate on welfare has asked that her suit against him be dismissed.
Lawyers for Judge Eugene Kenny, who called Debbie Rivera a "leech" and a "deadbeat" in The National Enquirer in 1992, argued that Judge Kenny's characterization was not libelous because it was accurate.
"We're alleging that everything in the story is true," said Corinne Mullen, the Hoboken-based attorney for Judge Kenny.
A hearing on the request for dismissal will be held Sept. 15.
Ms.
Rivera, now 31, of Jersey City, appeared before the judge in small-claims court in 1991, claiming that a Union City check-cashing store had shortchanged her $340 on her welfare check.
Judge Kenny ruled against the mother of four, then lectured her for not having a job and accused her of having children out of wedlock to increase her welfare payments, an outburst for which he was dismissed from the bench.


Wasn't Susan Lucci in Seattle, Too?
Erica Kane was busy this summer: becoming addicted to pain killers, doing her television talk show ("The Cutting Edge"), visiting her daughter Bianca and working at her marriage to Dmitri, lest it end the way her first six did.
She hardly had time for a vacation.
But Susan Lucci did.
Ms.
Lucci, who has played Erica on ABC's "All My Children" for 25 years, got away to her house in the Hamptons in early August.
Meanwhile, Erica was visiting Bianca in Seattle.
"We always try to find something that fits in with the current story line,"said Agnes Nixon, the show's creator and longtime head writer.
"Erica went off on a public appearance tour recently for her talk show. It was referred to, and we taped a couple of phone conversations before she left. Erica also had a nervous breakdown once and went off for a sort of rest cure."
When a film ends, movie actors can take it easy, sleep late and enjoy being between pictures.
Actors on prime-time television series go on hiatus for months.
But soap operas, or daytime dramas, are on the air with new scripts 5 days a week, 52 weeks a year: no breaks, no reruns.
What do those actors do about vacations?
Stars can negotiate their own personal contracts, but most contract players get the same vacation allotment as many other working people cross the country, which, according to the American Federation of Television and Radio Artist, is two to three weeks and four holidays a year.
How is this time away managed?
Like Ms.
Lucci, other soap opera characters are often temporarily written out.
And that can be a challenge for the writers.
"It's constantly a juggling act," said Juliet Law Packer, one of two head writers of CBS 'As the World Turns."
One of that show's cast members, Larry Bryggman, spent August in the New England countryside.
That was possible because his character, Dr.
John Dixon, had just lost a malpractice case and was so devastated that he went away to visit his son.
He needed some time to think.
"Other characters got postcards from him," Ms Packer points out.
"You don't want the audience to worry too much."
But there are complications.
When Dr.
Dixon returns to the fictional town of Oakland, he expects to see his daughter and his two ex-wives there.
Trouble is, those actresses would like vacation time themselves.
Anna Stuart, who plays Donna Love Hudson, the wealthy busnesswoman on NBC's "Another World,", spent two and a half weeks this summer on what she calls "the Southern tour," visiting relatives from North Carolina to Florida.
While she was enjoying the beaches, her character was purportedly in New York buying a wedding dress.
For two and a half weeks?
Does a woman with Donna's complicated life have time like that?
"I'm praying that they will write something into the script explaining that," said Ms.
Stuart, a few days before her departure, "and the fact that I'm not taking Matthew." Matthew is her character's considerably younger fiance.
Finding new reason for people to disappear is part of a soap writer's job.
"One of the most common is relatives that have moved away and there's a problem they have to go and help with," Ms.
Parker said.
"Doctors go to conferences. Politicians and lawyers go to the state capital. Next year I know we will send people to the Olympics."
Ms.
Parker added: "Sometimes you want to have a character do something zany, to say, "I'm going to go off to ride a camel." Or a moose. But the audience feels cheated that they can't go along for the ride. The trouble is, you can't get a moose into a studio."


Wolfgang, Yes; Woodstock Jr., No
What's in a name?
Ask Hans Peter Hainen and the answer will be just about everything from the Nazi past in Germany to the worst nit-picking of its modernity.
His specialty is names, the names that people may call their children, the names that ethnic Germans accumulated in Siberia, the names that people may acquire when they marry and those they may inherit from their forebears.


Carol Wilkinson, Daniel Shoenholz
Carol Ann Wilkinson, the daughter of Seta and Charles F. Wilkinson of Istanbul, Turkey, was married yesterday to Daniel Eric Shoenholz, a son of Stephen P. Shoenholz of Tenafly, N.J., and Deborah A. Crane of Chestnut Ridge, N.Y.
The Rev.
Ian Sherwood, an Anglican priest, performed the ceremony at the Crimean War Memorial Church in Istanbul.
The couple, both 24, graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, where the bridegroom was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
He is an analyst in the marketing and analysis department of Capital One Financial Corporation, a credit card company in Falls Church, Va.


Livery Cab Driver Is Wounded In a Chase After a Fare Beater
A livery-cab driver was shot and critically injured early yesterday morning as he and other drivers chased a fare beater they suspected of being a robber through a remote industrial area in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, the police said.
The wounded man, Carlos Taverez, 33, was one of about 30 drivers who responded to a radio distress code broadcast by Eddie Reyes, a driver for Brooklyn Car Service, the police said.
They said Mr.
Reyes had picked up a fare on Myrtle Avenue about 1:30 A.M. and became alarmed when he realized that the ride would end in a dark, sparsely populated location at the corner of Johnson Street and Morgan Avenue.
Livery-cab drivers are frequently robbed by passengers who direct them to such areas.


Aug.27-Sept.2: The Golden Door; A Census Surprise: A Lot of Americans Turn Out to Be Immigrants
They may not all be tired.
Or poor.
But, as the Census Bureau indicated last week, they keep coming.
In a report that stunned some demographers, the bureau said that foreign-born residents -- immigrants, refugees and undocumented aliens -- made up 8.8 per cent of the population, a post-World War II record.
Researchers said the increase is explained partly by declining birth rates among native-born Americans, and mainly by increased immigration.


Sarah A. Keating, Hugh N. Chetwynd
Sarah Ann Keating, the daughter of Constance Keating and Dr.
Kenneth Keating of Wilmington, Del., is to be married today to Hugh Nigel Chetwynd, a son of Denyse Chetwynd of Johannesburg and John Chetwynd of Bordon, England.
The Very Rev.
Stephen J. Connell is to perform the Roman Catholic ceremony at the St.
Joseph on the Brandywine Church in Greenville, Del.
The bride, 28, and the bridegroom, 27, are on the staff of the Council of Europe, the international human-rights organization in Strasbourg, France.
She is a program coordinator in the modern language section, and he is an adviser on European cooperative programs.
The bride graduated from Vassar College and received a master's degree in international affairs from Johns Hopkins University.
The bridegroom graduated from the University of East Anglia and received a master's degree in international affairs from Bristol University, both in England.


Cast Into the Lake of Fire
THE ASHES OF WACO  An Investigation.
By Dick J. Reavis.  320 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $24.
WHY WACO?
Cults and the Battle for Religious Freedom in America.
By James D. Tabor and Eugene V. Gallagher.
Illustrated. 252 pp.
Berkeley:  University of California Press. $24.95.


Correction
A picture caption on Aug. 27 accompanying an article about Brian Wilson of the Beach Boys misidentified a member of the group, shown at far right.
He was David Marks, not Al Jardine.


SUNDAY, September 3, 1995; SOUNDS OF SILENCE: Golf Hooks The Airwaves
Imagine the barbecue sizzling, a cold one in your hand, kids frolicking in the pool and the radio alive with the sounds of . . . golf?
Golf play-by-play on the radio?
Well, yes.
The new Radio Golf Network (45 stations across the country; WEVD in New York) is alive.
But is it well?
If you thought there could be no sport less conducive to radio than hockey, you'd be wrong.
Listen: long periods of silence punctuated by an occasional reverent rendering of a golfer's lie.
Radio Golf has brought back the venerable voice of Jack Whitaker, which has its appeal, but. . . .
Mind if we just play through?


Job Advice for 2005: Don't Be a Farmer, Play One on TV
THE next decade looks good for travel agents, private detectives and subway operators.
But don't even think about becoming a butcher, watchmaker or ship fitter.
So says the Federal Bureau of Labor Statistics, which periodically borrows a standard commercial computer model of the economy, massages the numbers a bit and then grinds out predictions of where the jobs will be.
The 25 fastest-growing job categories to the year 2005, along with the 25 fastest-shrinking ones, are displayed here for your edification.


Fresh Princess


Corrections
A caption in Fashions of The Times, Part 2 of the Magazine last Sunday, about a fashion model whose picture was placed into various party scenes with a computer, misidentified a drag queen shown standing behind Quentin Crisp.
The performer was Brandywine, not Lady Bunny.


THE PERFECT RALLY
It seems that Joyce Maynard has yet to fully understand tennis -- or life (Hers: "The Perfect Rally," Aug. 13).
The person on the other side of the net is your opponent, not your partner!
JENNIFER WEHRLE St.
Louis


Why Not Unconcealed Guns
IN a move that Gov.
George W. Bush declared would make his state "a better and safer place to live," Texas last week overturned a 125-year-old law that banned its private citizens from carrying guns.
A new law will allow any adult Texan without a history of mental illness or felony convictions to secure a permit to wear a concealed weapon.
Texas thus becomes the ninth state in the past two years and the 28th overall to make carrying concealed weapons a basic right of the citizenry.
But with the surge in these new laws, many a result of increasing fears of crime and Republican takeovers of state legislatures, one question has been strangely absent from the often emotional debate over their passage:


South Bend Shocker: Notre Dame Goes South
All is not well at Notre Dame.
This was more than just an opening-game loss for the Fighting Irish.
This was a shocker.
Coming off a disappointing 6-5-1 season last season, Notre Dame began what was planned as a resurgent campaign this afternoon by losing at home, 17-15, to Northwestern, a team that was expected to be easy prey.


Lisa Mary Hamm, R. K. Greenawalt
Lisa Mary Hamm, a reporter for The Associated Press, and Robert Keefer Greenawalt 3d, a principal consultant for Price Waterhouse in New York, are to be married today in Picture Rocks, Pa.
The Rev.
Mark Brumbach is to perform the ceremony at the Picture Rocks United Methodist Church.
The bride, 35, has been the A.P.'s Caribbean correspondent in San Juan, P.R., and later this month is to become an editor on the news agency's international desk in New York.
She graduated from Glassboro State College.


A Beacon for Ships, and Now for History Buffs
Stormy seas produced dangerous riptides and closed many New Jersey beaches to swimming last month, but they turned out to be a boon for Twin Lights, the castle-like lighthouse set on the 200-foot bluff overlooking the entrance to Sandy Hook.
Usually, travelers streaming along Route 36 to Jersey Shore beaches spot the strange battlements and brooding stone towers from the road below but don't stop to investigate, said Thomas Laverty, the lighthouse curator.
"They think we're a prison or some institution," he said.
"But they're too busy having fun or too tired to find out."


Natalie Wilensky, Keith Jacobson
Natalie Beth Wilensky, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Larry E. Wilensky of Atlanta, is to be married this evening to Keith David Jacobson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Malvin Jacobson of Westport, Conn.
Rabbi Arnold Goodman is to perform the ceremony at the Ahavath Achim Synagogue in Atlanta.
The bride, 31, is an associate in the New York office of Jones, Day, Reavis &amp; Pogue, the law firm in Cleveland.
She graduated cum laude from Dartmouth College and received her law degree from the University of Virginia.


'Graham Greene: The Enemy Within'
To the Editor:
I knew Graham Greene intimately for 47 years, from 1944 until his death in 1991.
In 1959-60 we went round the world together, just the two of us.
Michael Shelden's claims in his biography, if one call it such, of Greene that he was anti-Semitic and homosexual are as far from the truth as his suggestion that Greene might have committed the Brighton Trunk Murder.
The kind of offhand references to Jews that Mr.
Shelden quotes from Greene's 1930's writing were common at the time in England, as I, who am Jewish, well remember.
T.
S.
Eliot was famously guilty of them.
They did not necessarily mean, and certainly did not in Greene's case, that the author was anti-Semitic.
Had Greene been so, neither of us would have wanted the other's friendship.


ON THE TOWNS
An opinionated guide to cultural and recreational goings-on around the state this week.
To submit items for consideration, write to On the Towns, Sunday New Jersey Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036, or send a fax to (212) 556-7219.
MUSIC


Queens? It Seems Worlds Away At U.S. Open
Pete Sampras walked right by it.
So did Bill Cosby.
More significantly, though, so did thousands of regular people also attending the United States Open tennis tournament.
Spectators from all over the world last week buzzed around the dozens of carts and stalls selling Nike and All Sport Body Quencher, carts promoting Infiniti cars and tennis magazines.
But only a handful of people drifted by the Discover Queens cart.


Ms. Parkey And Mr. Sheridan
Carole Elizabeth Parkey, the daughter of Janet Wilson Parkey of Abilene, Tex., and Dr.
Paul J. Parkey of Fort Worth, is to be married today to Christopher Sheridan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Sheridan of Yonkers.
The Rev.
C.
Roger Butler is to perform the ceremony at St.
Mary's Episcopal Church in Red Bank, Pa.
Ms.
Parkey, 26, will keep her name.
She is an assistant to the chairman of the Sidney Frank Importing Company, a beverage importer in New Rochelle, N.Y.
She graduated cum laude from the City University of New York, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her mother is an associate principal of Abilene High School.
Her father is a physician in general practice in Fort Worth.


Fast-Food Workers Allowed to Wear Braids
Three students have won the right to wear braids to work at Wendy's Old Fashioned Hamburgers after a manager briefly banned the hairstyle as "prone to bugs and lice."
On their side, the students had the corporate logo, featuring a red-haired girl with braids, and Virginia health regulations, which recommend braids as a hair restraint for food handlers.


'For Colored Girls' May Be for the Ages
AT FIRST, THE POET AND Novelist Ntozake Shange was uncertain about reviving her Broadway show, "For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide/When the Rainbow Is Enuf." Hadn't she already done that in 1993 in Houston?
According to her count, that was the 20th anniversary of her "choreopoem" about the lives of black women that she had originally recited in bars and coffeehouses in San Francisco.
In 1975 in New York, seven actresses (including the author) had danced and sung it at the New Federal Theater, before Joseph Papp took it to his Public Theater and from there to Broadway.


Seeking the Unusual In Tying Wedding Knot
THE bride wore white and carried a long stick to ward off seagulls.
That actually did not occur.
But only because the bride and groom had already retired to the safety of the lighthouse long before the gulls flew over.


K. A. Grossman, David S. Wachen
Kimberly Anne Grossman, a daughter of Rozelle and Barry Grossman of Potomac, Md., is to be married this evening to David Scott Wachen, a son of Elizabeth and Dr.
Harry Wachen of Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Joseph P. Weinberg is to perform the ceremony at the Four Seasons Hotel in Washington.
The bride, 29, is an associate at Arent, Fox, Kintner, Plotkin &amp; Kahn, a law firm in Washington.
She graduated cum laude from Duke University and received her law degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is the regulatory counsel for the Antitrust Division of the Justice Department in Washington.
Her mother is the vice president of Elmore Inc., a commercial real estate company in Potomac.


Choosing Heroes
To the Sports Editor:
For Robert Lipsyte ("When You Wish Upon a Star," The Times, Aug. 18) to speak of Mickey Mantle and Mike Tyson as heroes and in the same breath is, well, blasphemy.
To compare, even remotely, the sound-bite boxer, matched up against opponents of his (Don King's) choosing, with the enduring achievements of Mickey Mantle doesn't cut it.


A Cheerful Center for Sick Children
AT the Connecticut Children's Medical Center under construction in Hartford, the countertop in an examination room is aqua, the walls are a light gray, and the finishing touches are a bright array of reds, greens and yellows.
In all, about nine colors are used repeatedly in the building, most of them cheerful, giving the appearance of a hotel more than an institutional setting said the project's director W. Norman Curtis, a senior vice president at Connecticut Health Systems, the holding company for the new hospital.
"They were selected for their soothing qualities," he said, "to grab the attention of children. We're trying to create an environment where a child is comfortable."


The Cosmic Egoist
EDWIN HUBBLE  Mariner of the Nebulae.
By Gale E. Christianson.
Illustrated. 420 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $27.50.


Stickball Classic; The Pull of Home And Home Plate
The old buddies from Ravenswood had been playing pinochle every Friday night for years when Al Rapone decided the game didn't quite capture the essence of their youth.
"Wouldn't it be nice," Mr. Rapone wondered aloud, "if we could have a stickball game?"


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


The Man Who Filled America's Family Album
THE PHOTOGRAPHER Alfred Eisenstaedt -- Eisie to all who knew him as more than a byline -- epitomized the ambitions of the most influential magazine of the 20th century, Life.
Like Life in its heyday, from the World War II years into the 1960's, Eisenstaedt's pictures seemed to reflect the essence of American optimism and self-confidence, pausing only briefly to report on unrest elsewhere in the world and on the less sunny side of the United States' rapidly growing consumer society.
By the time he died, on Aug. 23 at the age of 96, his place in the pantheon of modern photojournalism had long since been secured, even though the magazine he worked for and helped define had passed into a sad, mutated oblivion nearly 25 years earlier.


Jacqueline Gaines, William W. Stitt
Jacqueline Gay Gaines, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Noyes Gaines of Palm Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to William Worrell Stitt, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Earl Stitt of Wheaton, Ill.
The Rev.
Mary Moore Gaines, an aunt of the bride, performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas Episcopal Church in White Sulphur Springs, W.Va.
Mrs.
Stitt, 31, graduated from the Brown Institute in Minneapolis.
Her father retired as the chairman of GNB, an automotive and industrial battery company in Princeton, N.J.
Her mother, Gay Hart Gaines, is the chairwoman of Gopac, the Republican political action committee in Washington.


MEETING OF WOMEN SAYS SURVEILLANCE BY CHINA MUST END
With the United Nations Fourth World Conference on Women about to open, leaders of the parallel forum here delivered an ultimatum to their Chinese hosts today, warning that if security forces did not cease their intense surveillance of participants within 24 hours, they could close the forum down.
With nearly 30,000 women from around the world gathered here for a bonanza of networking and workshops, the demand by leaders of the Non-Governmental Organizations Forum on Women intensified a sense of crisis among United Nations and other officials that their long-planned conference could be ruined by unruly hosts.


With Gotti Away, the Genoveses Succeed the Leaderless Gambinos
With John Gotti and scores of other organized-crime members behind bars, law enforcement officials say that New York's mob families are undergoing a major power realignment, elevating to the top rung of the Mafia a man who is best known for walking around his neighborhood in his pajamas.
Federal and state officials say that since Mr.
Gotti, the head of the Gambino family, was convicted of murder and racketeering in 1992, the rival Genovese organization has supplanted the Gambino family as the most powerful Mafia group in New York and the nation.


Victoria L. Miller, Harold S. Y. Nam
Victoria Lee Miller, a daughter of Joyce O. Miller of Ho-Ho-Kus, N.J., and the late Ream V. Miller, was married yesterday to Harold Sung Yoon Nam, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Woo Hyun Nam of Del Mar, Calif.
The Rev.
Bob Bard, a nondenominational minister, performed the ceremony at the Bel Air Bay Club in Pacific Palisades, Calif.
The bride, 27, is an associate in Los Angeles at McKinsey &amp; Company, the management consulting firm.
She graduated magna cum laude from Brown University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She and the bridegroom received M.B.A.'s from Harvard University.
Her father retired as the general tax manager for the Shell Oil Company in New York.


Louise A. Dunn, Daniel S. Blander
Louise Adrianne Dunn, a daughter of Roger and Mary Dunn of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday to Dr.
Daniel Seth Blander, the son of Barbara and Dr.
Charles Blander of Swampscott, Mass.
The Rev.
Dr.Elizabeth Whalley, a minister of the Universal Life Church, officiated at Estherwood, a residence on the grounds of the Master's School, a girls boarding school, in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
Mrs.
Blander, 25, graduated from Scripps College and received a master's degree in social work from the University of Pennsylvania.
The couple both work in Philadelphia, she as the assistant director for curriculum counseling at Penn's School of Medicine and he as a resident in urology at the university's hospital.
Dr.
Blander, 27, graduated from Princeton and received his medical degree from a joint program of Dartmouth College and Brown University.


A Lesson in Civility From Bradley and Kean
What passes for political discourse appears to have reached a low point that has chased two thoughtful public figures from the stage: Senator Bill Bradley, a Democrat, and former Gov.
Thomas H. Kean, a Republican.
They say they are weary of seeing personal invective replace rational political discussion, and have decided to pass up running for the Senate next year.
Mr.
Bradley, who will finish his third term, said he would then look for other opportunities to affect public policy.
For Mr.
Kean, whose family includes former members of the Senate and House of Representatives, the Bradley decision offered what supporters called his clearest shot at realizing a longstanding dream.
But he demurred, saying political moderates are not welcome in Washington these days.


Aug.27-Sept.2; E-Mail
The Week in Review's electronic mail address is review@nytimes.com


If You're Thinking of Living In: Somers; A Quiet Place in the Country
ONE of the first things Gary Deinstadt said he noticed about Somers was that "it's a lot darker than other places I've lived."
"The streets are dark and quiet at night," he said, "and people are very respectful of each other's privacy."


The Great Reminiscer
WRITING WAS EVERYTHING  By Alfred Kazin. 152 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.


Fued Over a Home for Wayward Cars
James Dulligan's passion for antique cars and trucks began in childhood.
In 1946, at the age of 13, he took $75 he had earned as a paper boy and as a hired hand in a repair shop and bought his first truck, a Packard roadster that was used as a service truck during World War I.
Since then, Mr.
Dulligan has collected and restored many old cars.
He kept some, sold others.
To share his passion, Mr.
Dulligan, now 63 and semiretired from his construction business, co-founded the Antique Truck Club of America and the Antique Car Club of America.


A Ticket Blitz Hits Sidewalk Cafes
Responding to complaints from local residents, community boards and licensed outdoor cafe owners, the Department of Consumer Affairs recently conducted an enforcement blitz.
The department seized the sidewalk furniture of three Manhattan sidewalk cafes found repeatedly to be operating without licenses: Cremcaffe, 65 Second Avenue; Jour et Nuit, 337 West Broadway; and Brasserie Felix, 340 West Broadway.


History You Can Eat
SUE CLIFFORD, a Warren County farmer, got the snap bush bean seeds from her mother, Maria Falcone, an Italian immigrant who smuggled them through Ellis Island in 1926.
Ms.
Clifford recently gave Joe and Bobbi Cavanaugh a jar of the mottled dried beans.
Calman Lajvort, an Edison gardener in his 80's, slipped the Cavanaughs seeds passed down for generations in Hungary.
They produce a purple shell bean the size of a lima with a hickory-smoked taste, fine for stews, and a rich-tasting dark-pink oval tomato, juicy as a watermelon.


Jennifer Manner And Eric Glasgow
Jennifer A. Manner, an associate at the Washington law firm of Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer &amp; Feld, and Dr.
Eric Glasgow, a National Research Council Fellow at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., were married on Wednesday at the Ram's Head Inn on Shelter Island, L.I.
Rabbi David Greenberg performed the ceremony.
Ms.
Manner, 30, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the State University at Albany and received her law degree from New York Law School and a master's degree in international and comparative law from Georgetown University.
The bride is a daughter of Joyce and Dr.
Maurice Manner of Larchmont, N.Y.
Ms.
Manner's father is a professor emeritus of business and economics at Marymount College in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Her mother retired as a teacher of business education at St.
Barnabas High School in the Bronx.


Is B.I.D. Plan One Too Many?
Wally Shapiro, who has run a Red Hook warehouse for 41 years, supports a plan to create a business improvement district that would levy fees on businesses to pay for private security, sanitation and marketing.
"The B.I.D. would give us services the city is supposed to supply, but doesn't have money to adequately provide," he said as he walked past the stacks of carpets, tungsten and potpourri he stores.
Damian Lubrano, who has watched the staff of his Barge Autobody shop on Coffey Street dwindle to 6 from 22, questioned what he would get for his money.
"We have a good Sanitation Department and a good Police Department and they have always worked with us," said Mr.
Lubrano, who was born and raised in Red Hook.
"What business owner wants a new tax?"


No Preservation Without Representation!
THE POWER OF PLACE  Urban Landscapes as Public History.
By Dolores Hayden.
Illustrated. 296 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press. $30.


Sea Gulls, Scourge of the Coastal Runways
IT'S "High Noon" at mid-morning at Groton-New London Airport.
Onto the runway strides James Cowley, lean, erect, mustache flowing, shotgun cradled.
He stares at the enemy, a small flock of sea gulls enjoying the sun reflecting off the macadam.
The gulls stare back at him, fearless, unmoving.
James Cowley raises the shotgun.
A shell bursts in the air above the gulls, with a flash of light, a big bang and then a series of smaller bangs.
The gulls take to the air, flying as a unit down a short distance of runway, then settling back to resume doing what they do best: Staring at James Cowley.


Finnish Gems in a Luminous Setting
MY acquisition of two classic 1930's chairs by Alvar Aalto, Finland's greatest modern architect and designer, was the inspiration for a 10-day drive through southern Finland last summer.
I wanted to see more of Aalto's work, and planned a route that included a score of his finest buildings plus towns and churches from every period of Finnish history.
What I didn't expect was the abundant natural beauty of the Finnish countryside.
When the sun emerged after a day of rain, it seemed to shine with a special intensity and to linger till nearly midnight.
Scattered settlements punctuated vast expanses of lakes and forests.
Everywhere I went there were stacks of fresh-cut birch logs, the scent of pine and the glint of light off water.
Wildflowers carpeted meadows of luminous green.
Five million Finns inhabit a country that is only slightly smaller than Germany, and during the brief summer, in a sort of reverse hibernation, there's a mass exodus from the towns to remote islands and lakeside cottages.
This leaves the rest of the country open to the few tourists who want to explore Finland's rich architectural heritage.
After a week in Helsinki and the industrial city of Tampere, I rented a car and drove in a 750-mile loop round the southern third of the country.
My route took me west to Turku, Finland's first capital, north along the Gulf of Bothnia to Rauma, east to the lake country around Savonlinna, and back along the Russian border to the old town of Porvoo, a half-hour's drive from Helsinki airport.
The roads were excellent and the signs (in Finnish and Swedish) almost too numerous, with country lanes as prominently marked as major highways.
At every turn, there were signs warning of elk, which seem to outnumber cars away from the towns.
Nearly everyone, even at rural gas stations, spoke good English and was happy to point the way.
One of the nicer surprises was a daily radio news broadcast in Latin, presented as a public service by two classics professors in Helsinki.
It seemed very accessible after hours of chatter in Finnish.
Two detours off the main road from Helsinki to Turku offer a crash course in Finnish history.
The first, beside the Hanko road, is the tiny stone church of Lohja.
Within the rough brick and stone walls is a medieval picture gallery.
The painted rosettes and tendrils are as fresh as the flowers outside, and the biblical scenes have the unsophisticated vigor of present-day graffiti.
Every surface is covered in ornament or storytelling.
Churches like this, the only survivors of an era that used wood for its secular buildings, inspired the romantic historical revival that heralded Finland's independence movement a hundred years ago.
Sixty miles farther on is the turnoff for Paimio, and the innovative sanatorium that brought Alvar Aalto international fame.
In his 50-year career, from the 1920's through the 1970's, Aalto infused the cool white geometry of modernism with the organic forms and the warmth of nature.
Each of his varied buildings has a human scale and an easy practicality, and the sanatorium works almost as well today as when it was built.
Visitors are welcome to walk around the white stucco buildings, climb the daffodil-yellow stairs and admire the splashes of color that make the communal areas feel more like a hotel than a hospital.
Aalto designed all the furniture and lighting, and introduced balconies that give patients sweeping views of the surrounding forests.
Another gem of modern architecture, in a large cemetery in the eastern suburbs of Turku, is the Resurrection Chapel of Erik Bryggman, Aalto's contemporary.
It is open daily except during memorial services.
Sanctuary and nave are lighted from a window wall that frames a Japanese landscape of lichened pines, mossy rocks and dewy foliage.
Creeper climbs the wall behind the altar, and a symbolic tree of life is inlaid in wood on the pulpit.
Light reflected off the terrazzo floor casts a sheen over the stained pine benches; the pleated folds of the walls and the curved battens around the organ animate this plain concrete structure.
Repeated fires destroyed the old quarters of Turku, and little of interest remains besides a cathedral and an over-restored castle.
I headed north to the pleasant old town of Uusikaupunki to see its quartet of distinctive windmills and the hugely entertaining Bonk Museum.
In a country that prides itself on its cutting-edge technology, and where almost everyone seems to have a cellular phone, a group of pranksters have mounted an elaborate hoax: a celebration of machines that never worked.
Monty Python might have hatched the plot: A turn-of-the-century inventor is supposed to have imported Peruvian anchovies, harnessed them to generate electricity and then ground them into a condiment that he sold to the crowned heads of Europe.
Riveted boilers and massive flywheels, dials and copper piping evoke the spirit of the Industrial Revolution.
Attendants earnestly draw your attention to a fabricated page from the Scientific American describing Pare Bonk's amazing inventions, and explain the functions of a dozen lovingly crafted engines.
Rauma, 20 miles north, is the largest surviving wooden town in Finland and was designated a World Heritage Site by Unesco.
Few of the individual buildings are remarkable; rather, it is the expanse, harmony and lack of commercialism that give the town its engaging period flavor.
Granite outcrops punch through the orderly rows of painted wooden houses, and the market square is enlivened by the overscaled baroque cupola on the oddly two-dimensional city hall.
I continued north, past Pori to the village of Noormarkku, to see one of Aalto's masterpieces: the Villa Mairea, which he designed in 1937 for his patron, the industrialist Harry Gullichsen, and his wife, Maire.
The modestly scaled wood-and-stucco facade and porch hint at the free flow of space within, from the skylighted cloakroom to the expansive living room.
The core of the house feels like a stylized forest, with its wood-strip floor and ceiling, cane-wrapped columns and a sculptured staircase leading to the bedrooms.
Of all the great 20th-century European houses, it is closest in spirit to Frank Lloyd Wright in its fusion of structure and landscape and in its finely crafted details.
But there are none of Wright's theatrical gestures; this house was made to fit its owners as comfortably as an old, well-cut suit.
Driving inland toward Jyvaskyla, I stopped to visit two lovely mid-18th-century churches, at Keuruu and Petajavesi.
Both are triumphs of carpentry, with towering belfries, intricate vaulting and naive paintings.
In contrast, Jyvaskyla is a graceless, brutally modernized city, with expressways, ramps and one-way streets that seem designed to lead you astray.
But it was Aalto's hometown, and within its borders are some of his earliest buildings (a workers' theater and a clubhouse), several university buildings, and a major museum that plays host to exhibitions and conferences on his work.
A FEW miles south is one of Aalto's finest civic projects: the all-brick town hall and library for the community of Saynatsalo.
Turf-covered steps lead up to a grassy courtyard; a narrow stair ascends to a council chamber that's as dark and cozy as a sauna.
It expresses the spirit of shelter that's needed during long, dark winters.
I spent a memorable Midsummer Night in Savonlinna, a town surrounded by water, 120 miles east of Jyvaskyla, on an old-fashioned lake steamer, decked with birch boughs, cruising around a shore on which every village and weekend cottage had its celebratory bonfire.
Flames flickered against a still brilliant sky, and rival steamers raced ours with a frantic blast of whistles and cheers from passengers lining the rails.
Driving south from Savonlinna, skirting the Russian border, I passed Aalto's Church of the Three Crosses in Vuoksenniska; and Imatra, with its romantic resort hotel, the Valtion, on the edge of a waterfall.
The white-walled church, with three distinct areas that can be separated by soundproof screens to accommodate different uses, reveals its organic delights slowly, expanding like a plant in the soft light.
By contrast, the hotel is as theatrical as a 19th-century Bavarian castle.
Beyond the port city of Kotka is Langinkoski, a log cabin that was built a century ago as a fishing lodge for the Czar.
Finland was then an autonomous duchy of the Russian Empire, and the St.
Petersburg aristocracy would spend rustic vacations there.
The cabin is preserved as it was in 1917, and it is easy to imagine the Czar and Czarina putting themselves into the shoes of their humbler subjects, doing their own cooking, sleeping in narrow cots and strolling through the surrounding woods.
By chance, I had saved the best till last.
Porvoo is the second-oldest town in Finland, and one of the prettiest, least spoiled in Europe.
Brightly colored wooden houses cluster around the medieval cathedral on its hilltop, and cobbled streets provide a constantly shifting perspective of fences, gables and courtyards.
A row of dark red fishermen's huts borders a stretch of the river that divides the town.
Eating out in Finland is often monotonous, but the Wanha Laamanni, an 18th-century inn beside the cathedral, puts a fresh spin on salmon, herring and other familiar fare.
On my last night there I was invited, along with a table of young Icelanders, to attend a village wedding in an upstairs room of the inn.
She was plump and giggly; he was thin and serious in a borrowed morning coat.
Shyly the newlyweds danced to the fiddle and concertina.
I marveled, as I did so often on this trip, at Finland's skill in preserving its lead in modern design without squandering its traditions.
If you go
Prices below are calculated at 4.15 Finnish marks to the dollar.
The dialing code for Finland is 358.
What to See
The stone church at Lohja is open from 9 A.M. to 4 P.M. in summer, 10 A.M. to 3 P.M. in winter.
The Paimio Sanatorium can be visited at the staff's discretion; telephone (21) 809-4239.
The Resurrection Chapel of Erik Bryggman outside Turku is open year round; Tuesday and Wednesday 8 A.M. to 4 P.M., Friday and Saturday 8 A.M. to 3:30 P.M.
The Bonk Museum is at 2 Siltakatu, Uusikaupunki, (22) 841-8404.
Open daily 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. in summer, Tuesday through Sunday noon to 5 in winter.
Admission $6.
The Villa Mairea north of Noormarkku can be visited by arrangement with Anna Teponoja, (39) 625-546, for a minimum of five people.
The Alvar Aalto Museum, 7 Alvar Aalto Street in Jyvaskyla, (44) 624-809, is open Tuesday through Sunday 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission $2.
Aalto's Church of the Three Crosses, in Vuoksenniska, is open from 9 A.M. to 8 P.M. in summer, otherwise 10 A.M. to 3 P.M.
The Langinkoski Imperial Fishing Lodge, outside Kotka, (52) 228-3300, is open daily May through September, 10 A.M. to 7 P.M., other times by appointment.
Admission $3.50.
Places to Stay
A breakfast buffet is usually included in the room price.
The Ruissalo Spa, 15 Ruissalo, Turku, (21) 260-5511, doubles as a health resort for elderly people and serves simple meals.
Double room, $150.
The Hotel Kalatorin Majatalo, 4 Kalatori, (38) 822-7111, in Rauma is well designed and friendly, with a good restaurant.
Out of season, doubles cost $120 on weekdays, $92 on weekends.
Dining
The Wanha Laamanni restaurant, 17 Wuorikatu, (15) 523-0455, in Porvoo, serves excellent Finnish dishes.
Dinner for two with wine, $50 to $85.


Christiane Baker, Bruce Schneider
Christiane Alexandra Baker, a daughter of Jeannemarie Gelin Baker and Dr.
William F. Baker of Riverside, Conn., was married yesterday to Bruce Michael Schneider, a son of Lois Kass Schneider and Alvin H. Schneider of Monmouth Beach, N.J.
Rabbi Benjamin Z. Rudavsky officiated, and the Rev.
Gilbert D'Souza, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony at the New York Yacht Club in Newport, R.I.
Ms.
Baker, 26, is keeping her name.
She is a television producer at Bloomberg L.P., the financial-news information company in New York.
From 1991 to 1994 she was the director of regional media for the press office of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
She graduated from Barnard College.
Her father is the president of Thirteen/WNET in New York.
Her mother is a family therapist in New York and Riverside and an adjunct professor of family therapy at the Columbia University School of Nursing.


LOVE SONG '95
I really loved the article, but one song that should have been on your list wasn't.
For teen-agers who graduated from high school around 1965, it managed to "tangle heartstrings" on beaches, at dances and at parties.
A summer without hearing it wasn't summer.
That song is, of course, "Theme From 'A Summer Place.' " DIANE GUIDERA MCNICHOLAS Ramsey, N.J.


Debra M. Nazar, James G. Villa
Debra Monaghan Nazar and James Gerard Villa, lawyers in Brooklyn, were married yesterday in Toledo, Ohio.
Municipal Judge Arlene Singer of Toledo officiated at the Toledo Club.
The bride is also the secretary to a New York City Bar Association committee that brings together lawyers specializing in the development of legal systems in central and eastern Europe.
She graduated from Washington University in St.
Louis and received her law degree from the University of Toledo.
She received a master's degree in international and comparative law from the University of Brussels.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edwin L. Nazar of Toledo.


For the Love of the People
IT'S 8 A.M. on a sunny Monday at the entrance to the Christopher Street subway station.
The only people who don't seem cranky are Aubrey Lees and Arthur Schwartz, the candidates.
Their wide-awake good humor seems vulgar.
They jab pictures of themselves captioned "new energetic voices" at the poor souls rushing to work with water bottles, leather backpacks, cell phones, briefcases, newspapers, coffee containers, muffins, the weekend mail and faxes.
It's a wonder how many people smile and take the campaign fliers, promise to vote, even wish them well, how few dismiss them with a drop-dead look and a contemptuous wave-away.


Aircraft Carrier May Give Way To Missile Ship
After 50 years as the global symbol of America's military might, the aircraft carrier may soon be shoved off center stage by a new warship that would be able to rain 500 missiles within a matter of minutes on targets hundreds of miles away, without risking pilots' lives.
Prospects for that ship, which is still on the drawing board but could be in the fleet within five years, raise questions about how many new carriers the Navy will need.
A carrier costs $4.5 billion to build and $440 million a year to operate.
The new ship, essentially a floating missile barge, might cost only $500 million and just tens of millions a year to run.


4 Held in Killing of Woman, 79
Four teen-agers were charged with second-degree murder yesterday in the death of an elderly Brooklyn woman who was killed as her bedridden husband listened to her cries from their second-floor bedroom.
The woman, Anna DeBicary, 79, was asphyxiated during an attempted robbery on Wednesday morning, said Deputy Inspector William Allee of the Brooklyn detective squad.


Anne McKeehan, John Dickerson
Anne Benton McKeehan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard B. McKeehan of Knoxville, Tenn., is to be married today to John Frederick Dickerson, a son of Nancy Dickerson Whitehead of New York and C. Wyatt Dickerson of Washington.
The Rev.
Dr.
Friedrich Schilling, a Presbyterian minister, is to perform the ceremony in the Chapel at the University of Virginia in Charlottesville, Va.
The Rev.
James English, a Roman Catholic priest, is to participate.


John S. Rose and Elizabeth Gross
Elizabeth Annie-Torten Gross, an associate at McKinsey &amp; Company, the management consultants in New York, is to be married today to John Stephen Rose, a McKinsey partner and a leader of the firm's media consulting practice.
Rabbi Samuel Barth is to officiate in Roxbury, Conn., at the weekend home of the bride's mother, Merle Gross-Ginsburg, and stepfather, Barry Ginsburg.
The bride, 32, graduated from Rice University and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father, Bernard Gross of Highland Park, N.J., is the president of Illuminating Experiences, a manufacturer of lighting fixtures there.
Her mother, who lives in New York, retired as a senior vice president of the Edward S. Gordon Company, the New York real estate leasing concern.
The bride is also the stepdaughter of Ballard Hutkin Gross.


No Headline
"I will read to them. I will form a circle and they will speak. These children have nothing to do with budgets." -- SUSIE DURANT, teacher, planning the first day of school for her first graders at P.S. 15.  [ 29:1. ]


Ethnic Cleansing Didn't Start in Bosnia
LAST Monday's deadly attack on a Sarajevo market finally did the trick.
After years of "to bomb or not to bomb?" fretting, the United States and its NATO allies crossed the threshold into large-scale involvement in the Balkan war.
This new phase will probably fan American domestic debate over whether, how and how much to be involved.
Curiously, both sides of the debate have something in common: a posture of moral superiority.
One side, aghast at the war's frequent episodes of "ethnic cleansing," rape and massacre, insists something must be done, while the other, equally aghast, tends to dismiss the war as another of the world's nasty conflicts, outside the realm of vital American interests and thus better left to others.


The Whole Earth Is at Stake, but It's Just a Game
The Show  Craig Mack, Dr.
Dre, Naughty by Nature, Run DMC, Slick Rick, the Dogg Pound, Notorious B.I.G., Warren G and the Wu-Tang Clan Directed by Brian Robbins R 90 minutes
Rap music can now claim a concert film of its own.
From interviews with rap superstars to performance clips emerges a portrait of hip-hop culture, its evolution and mores.
Rappers are seen as ghetto griots, bearing witness to the harsh realities of inner-city life.
It is a world that abounds in incongruities: loyalty to the "hood" is prized almost as much as making money.


On Call: Your Personal Interpreter
THE telephone rang, and Shiva Bidar picked up the receiver.
"Have you ever had a baby?" asked the voice at the other end of the line.


Unwanted, Unloved, And Even Killed
Women in southern Indian face some of the starkest forms of the kind of violence and discrimination that will be topics at the Fourth World Conference on Women, which opens in Beijing tomorrow.
In a country where goddesses are worshiped by millions, most girls are born into a life of deprivation, often fed less than boys, denied education and married as children.
Many fetuses are aborted simply because they are female.
In Tamil Nadu, a southern Indian state, women's groups are battling a tradition in some communities of killing newborn females when there is already a girl or two in the family.
Some mothers who agree to this say they are acting not only to lessen financial hardship but also to save the girls from the pain of growing up female.


The Garage Sale: Loud and Tacky, or Suburban Imperative?
For years, Montclair has prided itself as the unofficial garage-sale capital of northern New Jersey, a magnet for out-of-town bargain hunters, a mecca for stuff that passes not from generation to generation but from neighbor to neighbor.
But in recent years, some residents have complained that the line between event and commerce has blurred, that garage sale signs have been trying to outdo each other in loudness and tackiness.
So last month a new township ordinance went into effect, regulating garage sales and reinforcing an 1897 law prohibiting handbills or advertisements on trees or utility poles.


Selig's Job Title Could Change Because of Brewers' Problems
Cal Ripken won't be the only baseball figure to surpass a milestone this week.
On Tuesday, the day Ripken ties Lou Gehrig's consecutive-game record, Bud Selig will surpass the tenure his predecessor, Fay Vincent, held as commissioner.
Selig is technically acting commissioner, but there's nothing make-believe about his $1.25 million salary, the highest ever paid a commissioner.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
French Fast Food Comes to Forest Hills  In the 33 years that Peter Colthup owned Cafe Europa on 54th Street, between First and Second Avenues, one of the most popular items on the menu was brioche, a staple of French breakfasts, which he described as "a yeast dough with butter and eggs, a lot like a croissant or challah bread."


'Cement Block' Is an Oxymoron
To the Editor:
The questioner who referred to the "cement block" sign at Billy's Topless Dance Bar on the Avenue of the Americas at 24th Street ("F.Y.I.," Aug. 27) is guilty of adjective error.
What the questioner meant to say was concrete block, for concrete is what is formed when cement is combined with something else.
That something can be just cool air, in the case of asphalt cement; water, in the case of portland cement, or a more complex chemical compound, in the case of epoxy cement.
The semantic muddle was finally settled by the Pennsylvania Supreme Court a dozen years ago when it coined a lilting alliterative analogy: "Cement is to concrete what flour is to fruitcake. ORRIN RILEY  Manhattan The writer is the editorial director of the Concrete Industry Board.


Joe Montana, Just the Tip of Studio Icebergs
The biggest new TV star in the land of National Football League TV is Joe Montana.
Not the busiest.
Just the biggest.
The cool former quarterback, who would be played by Kevin Costner, will cruise into NBC's "N.F.L. Live" studio show six times during the regular season to take temporary possession of "The Joe Seat," when his colleague Joe Gibbs is busy on the Nascar circuit.
As a studio analyst, Montana says he will not serve up bland responses to avoid being burned by the ravenous media.
"Now I'll feel more freedom, where I won't have to defend my performance or my teammates," he said.
Sounds as if he forgot the media wrapped him in glory; this is Montana, not Testaverde!


They Must Have Tickets
FOR nearly 12 months a year, Philip J. Molite is just your average Queens guy.
He plays pickup basketball in the St.
Francis Prep schoolyard in Fresh Meadows, takes his family to the beach and gets his hair cut not far from his house in Flushing. (The barber, Karol Fisher, doesn't even know for sure what Mr. Molite does for a living.)
But two weeks on either side of Labor Day, Mr.
Molite is transformed into a most important person, an archetypal New York figure: gatekeeper to the hottest ticket in town.


Aug.27-Sept.2; Self-Help You Didn't Know You Needed
BORED?
Restless?
A little resentful your parents didn't force you to take those piano lessons when you were five?
Well, don't despair, help has arrived.
The video age has found a fast and easy way for you to learn skills that will amaze your friends and family.
For example, there's a video titled "How to Carve a Wooden Indian With a Chainsaw." No?
How about "Tomahawk Throwing for Backyard Recreation," or "Self Massage"?
If you're more the outdoor type, there are videos on "How to Clean and Filet a Salmon," "How to Butcher Wild Game" and the distressingly precise "Beef Cattle Castration."
Knit a Sweater
Those are only a few of the 70,000-odd titles that make up the eccentric and highly decentralized world of how-to videos.
From its sweaty birth in the Jane Fonda fitness craze of the 1980's, the field has erupted into a cornucopia of peculiarity as plummeting prices for equipment and tape have made the market accessible to thousands of would-be pedagogues.


POSTINGS: New York City Auction Is Set for Sept. 14; On the Block: Lots of Lots
The Brooklyn Bridge is not for sale, but how about a short-term monthly lease, one day less than a year, on a parking lot underneath it on the northeast corner of Pearl and Dover Streets?
A gavel-pounding auctioneer will be looking for a minimum opening bid of $15,900 a month for the lot at a city public-lease auction to be held in the second-floor auditorium at 125 Worth Street on Sept. 14 at 10 A.M.


The 'Baby Bust' Generation: We'll Just Go and Vanish
To the Editor:
I was stunned, stunned, by "Jim Hughes's Believe It or Not," the box that accompanied your article about the Rutgers demographer James W. Hughes (In Person, Aug. 27).
It's so rare that a high-ranking member of the cognitive elite makes a big slip.
Rarer still that such a slip makes it past the censors to the people.
You paraphrased Mr.
Hughes as follows: "One out of five young adults (25-34 years old) in New Jersey will disappear between 1990 and 2000, because of the maturing baby bust generation."


Italian Opera as Monte Python Might See It
Peter Holman, the harpsichordist who led the performances of Purcell's "King Arthur" at the Boston Early Music Festival last June, also directs Opera Restor'd, a British troupe that has been rummaging in obscure corners of the 17th- and 18th-century English repertory since 1986.
Their latest offering, John Frederick Lampe's "Pyramus and Thisbe" (Hyperion CDA 66759; CD), affords a glimpse of the English musical world's ambivalence toward Italian opera.
Lampe moved to England from Saxony in 1726 and was apparently well connected: Handel found him an orchestral post, and he briefly ran an opera company with the poet Henry Carey and the composer Thomas Arne (who was his brother-in-law).
Having achieved moderate success with a string of serious operas, he discovered a larger market for sendups of the Italian style, of which "Pyramus" (1745) was his last.


Historic Properties Open Their Doors
More than 1,000 properties throughout England, ranging from private homes to prisons, will be open free of charge during Heritage Open Days, Sept. 16 and 17.
Normally, the buildings either charge an admission fee or are closed to the public.
In London, where the program is called Open House '95, 300 properties will be open, including the studios of Sir Norman Foster, architect of the Royal Academy of Arts in London, and Sir Richard Rogers, who designed the Pompidou Center in Paris; the Royal Court and other theaters; and Spencer House, an 18th-century town house originally owned by the first Earl Spencer, an ancestor of Princess Diana's.
London Underground is also opening up several tube stations no longer in use.


U.S. Embargo on Cuba Slows Pace of Reform; Business Loses Big
To the Editor:
Richard Nuccio, the White House special adviser on Cuba, is dead wrong in stating (front page, Aug. 27) that American businesses are not losing out with respect to investment opportunities in Cuba, as the rest of the world opens its doors to trade and investment with the island nation.


Correction
An article in the Neighborhood Report last Sunday about financial problems at the Big Six Towers, a cooperative housing complex in Woodside, Queens, omitted the name of a group of resident shareholders who are challenging the co-op board's request for a 25 percent increase in maintenance fees.
It is the Cooperative Council of Big Six Towers.
The article also omitted the first name of a leader of the group.
She is Maxine Jacobowitz.


How Did Ludwig Die?
To the Editor:
Re "Bavaria's Royal Enigma Still Fascinates" (news article, Aug. 28): To say that "most historians agree" that King Ludwig II committed suicide implies that he drowned by himself.


The Next Wave In Mega-Retail: The Global Deli
Sooner or later, it was bound to happen.
First came the invasion by the big suburban-style retailers like Home Depot, Toys 'R' Us, Pathmark, Bradlees, Staples, Herman's, Crate and Barrel, Tops, Sports Authority and Bed, Bath and Beyond.


Dashing Imports That Saved a Bad Summer
THIS weekend is traditionally the last hurrah for summer, a time to get in the final full measure of activity before school and other new schedules ensue.
So rather than running on about things that should be done for the future, this may be a good time for reflection, a look back at how great some things were.
Some rather outstanding plants excelled during the rather blah summer of 1995, which the record books are now beginning to show had more than its normal share of a combination of heat, humidity and drought.
Through all these climatic adversities, several plants proved to be stalwarts.
Most of them are rather new to this part of the world although they have been around their native lands for quite some time.


Are Fares and Tolls Fair?
New York officials want to raise the tolls at Hudson River crossings and the fare on PATH trains, saying New Jerseyans aren't paying their fair share.
Do you agree?
What About the Taxes We Pay to New York?


Richard Sax, 46, Chef and Prolific Cooking Writer
Richard Sax, a chef and prolific cooking writer who taught millions of readers that elegant food could be prepared in ordinary kitchens using everyday ingredients, died on Friday at New York Hospital.
He was 46 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was lung cancer, said his editor at Chapters Publishing, Rux Martin.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
'This Is a Football'
AT their Football 101 clinic for the women of Long Island, the New York Jets handed out T-shirts.
Jeanette Teitelbaum of Central Islip quickly grabbed an extra-extra-large.
For herself.
Mrs.
Teitelbaum was eight months pregnant.
"I'm having a planned 'section,' " she said of the upcoming delivery.
"It's planned around the Jets schedule."
It's hard to find the words, she said, to describe how devoted a fan her husband, Ken, is.
"He wears New Yorks Jets underwear," she said.


MARKET TIMING
Monday Banks, financial markets and government offices closed in the United States and Canada for the Labor Day holiday.
Tuesday Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown is scheduled to release a report on intellectual property and the information highway.
House Speaker Newt Gingrich is scheduled to address the Economic Club of New York at the Hilton Hotel.
Wednesday The Ford Motor Company will release its car and light truck sales for August.
Also, Alex Trotman, Ford's chairman, speaks at the National Press Club on changes in the world auto industry.
The Commerce Department reports wholesale trade for July.
Forecast: up 0.4 percent, after a 0.5 percent increase in June and a 0.3 percent rise in May.
The Mortgage Bankers Association of America releases its weekly report on mortgage applications.
Thursday The Commerce Department releases housing completions for July.
They dropped 5.9 percent in June.
The Labor Department reports second-quarter productivity and costs.
The Federal Reserve reports weekly money supply numbers.
The Energy Department issues its weekly report on petroleum stocks, production, imports and refinery utilization.
The International Monetary Fund holds a briefing in Washington on its 1995 annual report, which will be released Sept. 13.
Friday The Federal Reserve reports on consumer credit for July.
Forecast: $9.8 billion, a slight increase from the $9.6 billion reported for June.
The Federal Reserve releases its weekly report of commercial and industrial loans at commercial banks.


Editorial Notebook; A Genius of Bad P.R.
A slick Southern magazine, The Oxford American, has a striking photograph in its current issue of one of those new Alabama chain gangs that have produced a fresh gusher of bad press for my home state.
The photograph reminded me of some phrases from "Stars Fell on Alabama" by Carl Carmer.
Sixty-one years after it was published, Carmer's book remains as essential to understanding the Alabama mind set as "Absalom, Absalom" is to an understanding of Mississippi.
Carmer, a New Yorker who taught at the university in Tuscaloosa, wrote of Alabama's "fatal compulsion" toward racial violence.
The state broke the spell of that compulsion in the 60's, but these days it appears to be in the thrall of a less gory, but nonetheless perverse obsession.
After complaining for years that the nation's journalists were too slow to forget about fire hoses and schoolhouse doors, Alabama's leaders, if not its citizens, have developed a renewed lust for damaging publicity.


To Manage the Great Swamp, 10 Towns Pitch In and Block State Oversight
Sometimes big government doesn't even have to pass a law to do its job.
In the Great Swamp, the mere threat of a new state commission that would have made its own master plan for the 55-square-mile swamp watershed has inspired the towns that ring the swamp to do what they haven't done in more than 30 years: get together to figure out how to protect one of the state's most fragile and beloved ecological treasures without completely trampling the rights of developers.


Make the P.S.C. An Elected Body
The letter from Dr.
Bronheim: "A Plan to Buy Cheaper Electricity"  [ Aug. 13 ]  is certainly right about current plans to buy all of Lilco as being a huge mistake for Long Island.It would put the burden for paying for Shoreham on the innocent public, who were right all along in their opposition to this unneeded plant.
The experts and officials of the Public Service Commission can surely see that Shoreham is not necessary, but instead of stopping it and saving us billions, they allowed the cost to climb 21 times over the original price.
The only possible reason can be that the members of the P.S.C. are appointed and not responsible to the public.
If commissioners of the P.S.C. had to stand for election, they would be voted out, and we would have saved a fortune.


There's a Large Hotel
It's an electric moment in "THE SHINING" (1980).
A child (Danny Lloyd) briskly pedals his tricycle through a remote, hotel off-season.
The camera rides with him, scanning the empty corridors like a bird of prey.
His caretaker father (Jack Nicholson) writes a novel.
His uneasy mother (Shelley Duvall) hovers.
Stanley Kubrick's thickly atmospheric version of Stephen King's eerie tale is overlong and predictable but it has coils.
Watch out.
It's on THURSDAY at 8 P.M. on Channel 11.
Howard Thompson


Agassi Rolls Over Edberg In the Open
The defending champion of the United States Open hiked up his baggy shirt, hitched up his baggy black shorts and prepared to face the worst from the former champion in politically correct, classic tennis whites who stared down at him from across the net.
But even if Andre Agassi looked ready for a playground rumble, and even though Stefan Edberg looked the part of the rightful Grand Slam champion, their third-round encounter yesterday did not pan out as a close encounter.
In truth, the first Grand Slam meeting between Agassi, who won this event last year, and Edberg, who owned it from 1991-92, was a dud.


Top-Notch Returns, With Nary a Tech Stock
MOST of the year's best fund performers have ridden the spectacular technology stock wave, but the Clipper fund produced top-notch returns with no technology at all, Ed Randall, an analyst for the Value Line Mutual Fund Survey, wrote in the most recent Fund Highlight, which showcases funds with above-average performance when adjusted for risk.
Clipper gained 26.3 percent in the first half of the year, beating its peers and the S.&amp; P. 500 because of hefty holdings in large-capitalization financial and consumer stocks.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
CELEBRATING LEBANON
Three hundred years ago a land grant was given to 51 people who developed what is now the town of Lebanon.
To mark that event, recently purchased land overlooking the town's mile-long green will one day be the site of a museum dedicated to Lebanon's history and such noteworthy residents as Gov.
Jonathan Trumbull, the painter John Trumbull and Dr.
William Beaumont, the father of gastroenterology.
To propel the venture into being, a fund-raising event will be held on the green on Saturday from 10 A.M. through early evening.
This first Historic Lebanon Day will focus on three forces in the town's evolution: the early Mohegan Nation, the Revolutionary War and the Civil War.
Approximately 150 men, women and children will don costumes and participate in battle re-enactments and encampments, abetted by several units of the original military companies including Shirley's 5th of the Quoketaug Rangers, French Malis, 5th Connecticut Regiment of the Continental Line, Liberty Hill Muzzle Loaders, 2d Connecticut Regiment of the Continental Line and 2d Regiment of the Light Dragoons, also known as Talmadge's Troops.


Frances Bivens, Kenneth Karas
Frances Elizabeth Bivens and Kenneth Michael Karas, both lawyers, are to be married today in Wilmington, Vt.
Judge James L. Oakes, senior judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Brattleboro, Vt., is to officiate at the Hermitage Inn.
The couple received their law degrees from Columbia University, where they were Harlan Fisk Stone Scholars.
Ms.
Bivens, who will keep her name, is to become an associate next month at the New York law firm of Davis, Polk &amp; Wardwell.
Mr.
Karas is an assistant United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, in Manhattan.


Philippoussis Follows Sampras's Footsteps
"Huge game, huge serve," Pete Sampras said.
Sampras could have been speaking about himself.
Instead, he was speaking about another player with power and talent to burn: Mark Philippoussis.


Suzanne Goldlust, Thomas E. Stluka
Suzanne Melissa Goldlust, a daughter of Barbara and Syd Goldlust of Reston, Va., is to be married today to Thomas Emil Stluka, a son of Carol and Gene Stluka of Chester Springs, Pa.
Rabbi Steven Glazer is to officiate at the Hilton in McLean, Va.


Lisa Fenkel and David Langer
Lisa Martha Fenkel, the daughter of Salli Mickelberg of Bala-Cynwyd, Pa., and Joseph Fenkel of Gladwyne, Pa., is to be married today to Dr.
David Jonathan Langer, a son of Joan Langer of Cherry Hill, N.J., and the late Dr.
Terry Langer.
Rabbi Aaron Landes is to perform the ceremony at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel in Philadelphia.
The bride, 25, is a candidate for a law degree at Temple University.
She graduated from the University of Vermont.
Her father is the president of the McLean Packaging Company in Philadelphia.
Her mother is a photographer in Bala-Cynwyd.
The bride is the stepdaughter of Stephen Mickelberg and Mary Fenkel.


Take This Park and Love It
IT IS MARCH -- EARLY AUTUMN IN CHILE -- THE day after Douglas Tompkins's 52d birthday, which he spent quietly at his 25,000-acre ranch with friends and employees.
He has returned to his "town" home in the southern city of Puerto Montt to the disheartening news that conservative politicians in Valparaiso have denounced him on the floor of the Legislature.
As a result, he is spending his morning planning a week of meetings with ministers and politicians and an end-of-the-week news conference.
Between phone calls he pads around the house on Buin Street in a buttoned Scandinavian sweater, khakis and lamb's-wool slippers.
Dark eyes sunk in his graying head, he moves his small, athletic body in a hurried shuffle.
The house is light and airy, well crafted of blond woods and white paints. (A furniture maker is among his full-time employees.) A 12-foot-tall, Giacometti-like wood sculpture rises in the atrium.
The walls are hanged with black-and-white photographs by Irving Penn and elegant color photos of big trees.
Out back are a Japanese garden and a greenhouse.
Every detail of the renovation of the 100-year-old house was carefully designed by Tompkins.
At Esprit de Corp, the international fashion company he started with his then-wife, Susie, he was officially "President and C.E.O." but preferred the title "Image Director."


IN SHORT: FICTION
THE BURNING  By Frank Norwood. Dial, $21.95.
Frank Norwood's novel "The Burning" is a highly charged investigation of racism that circles around Larry, a white rookie police officer who is forced after an outbreak of violence to seek shelter with Arletha Mae, a 15-year-old black mother who has devoted herself to "good Christian thinking." Mr.
Norwood subtly renders the anger and prejudices of these and other characters, including a tormented Vietnam veteran and an unemployed engineer.
Although the novel is somewhat compromised by contrivance, Mr.
Norwood successfully creates a bleak and hostile urban landscape, with only Arletha, its moral center, as a frail hope for redemption.
KEITH DIXON


Corrections
A caption in the Evening Hours column of Styles on Aug. 13 misidentified two guests pictured with Christina Smith at a Southampton Hospital dinner-dance.
The man at the center was Gary Sanders 2d, and the man at the right was Joseph Raia.


Miami's New Era Starts With A Whimper
The University of Miami, college football's controversial fallen dynasty, is officially starting over.
The Hurricanes were overwhelmed by the U.C.L.A.
Bruins tonight, 31-8, in their first game under their new coach, Butch Davis, a jarring demonstration of how far they have fallen from their championship days.
Karim Abdul-Jabbar, the senior Bruin tailback who adopted his new Muslim name this summer, ran for 180 yards and 2 touchdowns to lead U.C.L.A.


Sacred to Russians, Not to U.S. Budget Cutters
Arching out of the vivid, azure blue of Lake Baikal, where it laps up against Olkhon Island, is one of Buddhism's holiest sites, the Shaman Rock.
It is revered by the native Buryat people, and the Dalai Lama has also prayed here.
In the Soviet period, when most native traditions and religion itself were considered anti-state activities, the authorities built a dock directly under the Shaman Rock, where ships unloaded supplies and diesel oil for this small town of 1,500 and picked up the garbage.


Alexandra Lewis, John DeMarino Jr.
Alexandra Putnam Lewis, the daughter of Sara Allen Lewis of New Canaan, Conn., and the late Robert C. Lewis, is to be married today to Dr.
John W. DeMarino Jr., the son of Elaine Goldthwaite of Strongs Neck, L.I., and Mr.
DeMarino Sr. of Glen Cove, L.I.
The Rev.
Robert E. Taylor is to perform the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Riverside, Conn.
The bride, 29, is a compensation analyst at J. P. Morgan &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Marymount Manhattan College.


Look Who's Talking Health Care Reform Now
THIS FALL THE COUNTRY WILL BE Talking health care again -- or at least should be talking about it -- as Congress moves to change the principles on which Medicare and Medicaid were established 30 years ago.
A writer with a taste for irony could scarcely conceive a better plot, and as one of those who wrote the Clinton plan, I confess it strikes me as more than ironic.
Two years ago, Republicans were denouncing the secrecy surrounding the President's health care task force.
This summer, Republicans have been meeting "behind closed doors" on a Medicare proposal scheduled to be released later this month, only a few weeks before Congress votes on it, thereby avoiding independent analysis of the costs, mobilization by opponents and other inconvenient aspects of a long national debate.
Two years ago, the Republicans rang alarms about the Clinton plan's emphasis on managed care.
Now the Republicans' own plans for Medicare and Medicaid emphasize managed care.


L.I. VINES
Rose of Cabernet Sauvignon Gristina Vineyards, Cutchogue, 1994. About $9.
A holiday table, especially on the grass or on the porch, needs festive decorative color.
As a visually delightful centerpiece, this refreshing salmon-pink rose fills the bill, especially when the full bottle refracts bright sunlight.


Their Eyes on Labor's Shrinking Prize
LABOR is back in Labor Day.
Two Irish-Americans, both balding and born in the Bronx, both veteran colleagues of New York's labor wars, are out on the hustings, leafletting and glad-handing, and this weekend, they're all over the airwaves.
John J. Sweeney, 61, and Thomas R. Donahue, 67, are dueling for the presidency of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., and they are making quite a spectacle for an institution that normally abhors disclosure of internal dissent.
Since its formation 40 years ago, its presidents always ran unopposed and were elected by acclamation.


FINAL TRAINING CAMP REPORT
Tampa Bay Buccaneers
Tampa Bay receiver Alvin Harper is beginning to feel jinxed.


N.F.L. '95
The National Football League season starts today with 30 teams and a migrating West Coast offense.
A preview, SportSunday, section 8.


PHYSICISTS IN LOVE
Physics as television drama is an intriguing idea (Sunday: "The Romance of Science," Aug. 13).
But with all due respect to the physicist Leon Lederman, Americans are probably not going to sit on the edge of their seats watching the frantic search for cold fusion.
Based on my 10-year association with physicists and astronomers, I would recommend a sitcom -- called "Quarks." MARY PELIS Hadley, Mass.


U.S. Envoy Warns Allies Of Obstacles In Balkans
Assistant Secretary of State Richard C. Holbrooke arrived here today and briefed European allies and Russia on the latest diplomatic moves in the former Yugoslavia, cautioning against hopes of a breakthrough and saying the issue of territory remained the most divisive.
Mr.
Holbrooke came to Bonn after three days of negotiations in Belgrade with the Serbian President, Slobodan Milosevic.
Those talks led to agreements that Serbia would represent Bosnia's Serbs in future negotiations and that the Foreign Ministers of Bosnia, Serbia and Croatia would meet in Geneva on Friday to discuss a peace settlement.


Aug.27-Sept.2; Voltaire Would Understand
Eduard A. Shevardnadze has a gloomy face, but he may be the closest thing to Candide in the former Soviet Union.
As a tough Communist Party boss in Soviet Georgia, through his period in the cabaret of world diplomacy as Mikhail S. Gorbachev's reforming Foreign Minister, and now as the leader of a chaotic independent Georgia, Mr.
Shevardnadze has had more picaresque adventures than Voltaire's hapless optimist, while keeping most of his faith in the future.


Correction
An article in the Neighborhood Report last Sunday about financial problems at the Big Six Towers, a cooperative housing complex in Woodside, Queens, omitted the name of a group of resident shareholders who are challenging the co-op board's request for a 25 percent increase in maintenance fees.
It is the Cooperative Council of Big Six Towers.
The article also omitted the first name of a leader of the group.
She is Maxine Jacobowitz.


In the Region/Westchester; Brew Pubs Brewing in White Plains and Peekskill
FAST on the heels of the appearance of coffee bars on the streets of Westchester's downtowns, the next trend could be brew pubs, which brew specialty beers and also serve food.
Westchester's first brew pub is scheduled to open before the end of the year at 179 Mamaroneck Avenue in White Plains.
To be called the Westchester Brewing Company, the restaurant/brewery will occupy 9,000 square feet of storefront property in an area that has been struggling in recent years with retail vacancies and diminished foot traffic.


Memories of My Queens
LOOKING back at a lifetime in which Queens has been a recurrent theme -- sometimes dominant, often subtle -- I realize that I by no means have the definitive handle on the place.
The map of memory is often enhanced, as were the charts of ancient cartographers, with fanciful creatures and events rooted perhaps in reality, but embroidered by the passage of years.
My Queens is not as Irish as the Queens that Jimmy Breslin unerringly describes in his novels.
It is not the Italian Queens of Astoria, nor the Colombian Queens of Roosevelt Avenue.
The Chinese and Koreans of Flushing, the subcontinentals from India and Pakistan will remember a Queens much unlike mine, and so will the African-Americans in St.
Albans.


Deborah Korry and Dixon Simcox
Deborah Franklin Korry, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward M. Korry of Charlotte, N.C., was married on Friday to Dixon Harp Simcox, a son of Sara Harp Simcox of Cresskill, N.J., and the late Thomas F. Simcox.
The Rev.
Julian Whatley performed the ceremony at the Pleasant Grove Baptist Church in Garden Valley, Ga.
Mrs.
Simcox, 39, is a coordinator at Kwasha Lipton, an employee benefits consulting company in Fort Lee, N.J.
She graduated from Santiago College in Santiago, Chile.
Her father, who is retired, is a former United States Ambassador to Ethiopia and to Chile.
The bride is a descendant of Benjamin Franklin and of Nathan Miller, a former Governor of New York.


Cal and Lou in Tie
To the Sports Editor:
I hope Cal Ripken will tie Lou Gehrig's record, and then deliberately take a day off because, fortunately for baseball, Cal has the stature and respect to make such a gesture everlasting.
Since he began his career, Ripken has stood for everything we hoped our sports heroes would be.
He's brilliant at his trade, a team player, admired by all players, acclaimed by fans and press, sincerely modest, pure of spirit and habits.


One for the Road
Journeying anywhere alone can be more expensive and sometimes less safe.
On Oct. 21, the New York University School of Continuing Education will present a workshop called Traveling Single, taught by Judy Salwen, who runs a retirement planning service and lectures and broadcasts on the subject.
The six-hour course, which costs $105, will offer advice for travelers who want to plan their own itineraries as well as those who'd like to go with a group.
You might even meet a travel companion.
Information: (212) 998-7171.
JOSEPH SIANO


Parallel Sensibilities
"There is something ridiculous and miserly in the myth we inherit from abstract art," the painter Philip Guston once said.
"We are image makers and image-ridden." A latecomer to the circle of Abstract Expressionists that included Jackson Pollock and Mark Rothko, Guston (1913-80) was never completely at ease with the modernists' rejection of what he called "the known image." By the late 1960's, when abstraction was still enjoying its heyday, Guston was filling his canvases with everyday objects -- books, light bulbs, shoes, bottles, clocks.
It was a heresy for which the artist paid dearly.
Unnerved by the New York art critics who derided the new works as crude and cartoonlike, Guston retreated to upstate Woodstock, where he turned to a group of poets and writers for artistic solace.
These alliances led to a series of collaborations in the 70's with the poets Bill Berkson, Clark Coolidge, William Corbett and Stanley Kunitz.
PHILIP GUSTON'S POEM-PICTURES (University of Washington, paper, $19.95), with text by Debra Bricker Balken, the curator of an exhibition of these works, illustrates this critical turning point in Guston's career.
The works Guston created with his poet colleagues were not traditional collaborations; rather they were conflations of parallel, independent sensibilities in which he tested the relationship between pictures as images and words as images.
As William Corbett writes, these works were not illustrations; they show Guston "expressing his reader's imagination." ANDREA BARNET


Correction
Because of an editing error, a review on Aug. 6, about "Ancestral Passions: The Leakey Family and the Quest for Humankind's Beginnings," misstated current scientific estimates for the beginning of the Early Stone Age.
It is now  placed at about 2.5 million years ago.


Aug.27-Sept.2: Needles for Sale; One State Finds a Way To Cut Addicts' AIDS Risk
In the late 1960's and early 70's, heroin was plentiful, thousands of Vietnam veterans were returning hooked, and inexpensive disposable syringes had just come on the market.
So industrial states with large numbers of urban heroin users squeezed the source of needles by barring sales without a prescription.
Decades later, states like New York, Pennsylvania and Illinois still have heroin users, but now they also have the nation's highest rates of AIDS infection.
A shortage of syringes, public health officials say, led addicts to share needles.


A New Algonquin Suite
On Thursday, the Algonquin Hotel adds another place at its table of honor when it dedicates a new "signature suite." Atmospheric touches in the James Thurber Suite will include his second-grade report card, photos of the humorist and artist from age 3 and original Thurber New Yorker covers.


Wait, Let Me Show You How It's Done


Retailers Say the Special Olympics Was a Bust
For weeks, Chris Papanikolau prepared his Athenian Diner for the Special Olympics, one of the biggest events ever to take place in this city.
Organizers predicted that the games would bring Connecticut hundreds of thousands of visitors and millions of dollars in spending, and Mr.
Papanikolau expected business to boom.
He increased staff and bought a month's worth of food.
But as the swarms of athletes, coaches, volunteers and spectators descended on the city for nine days in July, Mr.
Papanikolau watched busloads of people speed by his restaurant without stopping.
Business plummeted by one third.


On the Road to Disney
There should be an "Are we there yet?" or two fewer on the way to Walt Disney World, thanks to a new toll system on Florida's Turnpike in the Orlando area.
Last month the highway switched from a toll-ticket system, like the one used on the New Jersey Turnpike, to a coin-only system along a 73-mile stretch centered roughly on the Orlando-Interstate 4 interchange.
So now motorists should spend less time in toll-collection lines -- leaving more time to stand in lines at Disney World.


Alpine Style Plus Gargantuan Servings
GLOCKENSPIEL in Higganum evokes the style of a Swiss Alpine lodge, with ceramic mugs and steins hung from high rafters plus a profusion of cuckoo clocks, red and white ceramic mushrooms and gnomes.
And indeed, for this small restaurant features the cuisine of three mountain places: Bavaria and Austria as well as Switzerland.
There are also a few French and Italian specialties on the large menu, but we fared best when we stuck to the Alpine heights.
Our old Swiss favorite, rosti, was excellent: a beautifully browned potato cake shredded and fried with bits of bacon on top, though it was too filling a dish for an appetizer.


Holiday Tomorrow
The Labor Day holiday is tomorrow. NEW YORK


With Eye On Polls, Seminoles Bury Duke
The poll game may be starting early for the Florida State Seminoles, who took particular note of Nebraska's 64-21 butchering of Oklahoma State Thursday night.
"We kind of knew we had to win big since Nebraska won big," Florida State running back Rock Preston said today, after his team's season-opening 70-26 victory over Duke before 51,200 people in sauna-like conditions in the Florida Citrus Bowl.
"We wanted to show the nation we can score like Nebraska."


Autumn Agonies: Hello September
Will fall bring the fall?
The stock market's meteoric rise has slowed, with August becoming the first month of 1995 to show a drop in the Dow Jones industrial average.
But indexes of smaller stocks were up nicely and have now risen for nine months.


Crying Neglect, Tenants Unite To Fight Owner
Celsa Magris was giving a visitor a tour of her Sunset Park apartment.
There is no front door knob, just a hole.
A candle illuminates the bathroom, since the ceiling collapsed and was replaced without a light fixture.
Murky water stands in the bathtub, which does not drain.
The toilet in Margarita Gonzalez's apartment next door does not flush.
On the floor below, a large hole gapes in the bathroom ceiling of Juana Figueroa's railroad flat.
Windows in several apartments and the common hallways are shattered.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: September 3, 1995
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
INSOMNIA, by Stephen King. (Signet, $7.50.) A widower and a widow, victims of sleeplessness, behold a sinister force at work in a Maine town.
2
5
THE BODY FARM, by Patricia Cornwell. (Berkley, $6.99.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta investigates the murder of a small North Carolina girl.
3
1
NOTHING LASTS FOREVER, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $6.99.) Three women doctors contend with lovers, betrayers and killers.
4
11
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Bantam, $6.99.) Murder in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
5
17
THE STONE DIARIES, by Carol Shields. (Penguin, $10.95.) The journey of a woman from childhood to motherhood through old age.
6
10
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $7.50.) Jack Ryan vs. a Japanese plot.
7
6
EVERYTHING TO GAIN, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) An act of violence destroys a woman's family life.
8
2
THE LAST INNOCENT MAN, by Phillip Margolin. (Bantam, $6.50.) A lawyer defends an attorney who may have killed a vice cop.
9
23
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $7.50.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing.
10
5
THE 13TH JUROR, by John T. Lescroart. (Island/Dell, $6.50.) A lawyer defends a woman accused of murdering two husbands and a son.
11
2
TRUST ME, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $6.50.) A canceled wedding leads to a curious romance between the groom and the caterer.
12
2
PLAYING FOR THE ASHES, by Elizabeth George. (Bantam, $6.50.) Arson, infidelity, cricket and murder in the English countryside.
13
1
PRIME TIME, by Sandra Brown. (Warner Vision, $6.50.) A television reporter's attempts to interview a reclusive general unexpectedly bring her love.
14
1
THREE WEDDINGS AND A KISS, by Kathleen E. Woodiwiss, Catherine Anderson, Loretta Chase and Lisa Kleypas. (Avon, $5.99.) Four short historical romances.
15
6
BORN IN ICE, by Nora Roberts. (Jove, $5.99.) An Irishwoman who owns a bed-and-breakfast plays host to a mystery writer from America.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
7
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Anchor/Doubleday, $6.99.) The discovery of the deadly Ebola virus in Virginia and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
2
2
DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion, $5.99.) Anecdotes and meditations on life by the star of "Home Improvement."
3
10
APOLLO 13, by Jim Lovell and Jeffrey Kluger. (Pocket, $6.50.) The 1970 moon mission during which an oxygen tank exploded.
4
23
REVIVING OPHELIA, by Mary Pipher. (Ballantine, $12.50.) The dangers that beset teen-age girls.
5
50
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
6
86
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
7
49
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
8*
617
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (+)
9
129
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence. (+)
10
17
MOTHERLESS DAUGHTERS, by Hope Edelman. (Delta, $12.95.) The experiences of women after the deaths of their mothers.
11
2
DANGEROUS MINDS, by LouAnne Johnson. (St. Martin's, $4.99.) A woman's experiences teaching English in an inner-city high school.
12*
51
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
13*
38
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Love and relationships.
14
48
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.
15*
8
THE CATCHER WAS A SPY, by Nicholas Dawidoff. (Vintage, $13.) The life of Moe Berg, big-league catcher, O.S.S. agent and lady's man.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
49
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) Uplifting stories. (+)
2
18
A 2ND HELPING OF CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) One hundred more stories. (+)
3
226
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success. (+)
4
10
TEN STUPID THINGS WOMEN DO TO MESS UP THEIR LIVES, by Laura C. Schlessinger. (Harper Perennial, $10.) Counsel by a therapist. (+)
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Aug. 19, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk (*) indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
A dagger (+) indicates that some bookstores report receiving bulk orders for a book.


Club Pushes Dancing, Not Drinking, Owner Says
To the Editor:
While I don't want to be unappreciative of basically positive press coverage in "The Comfort Zones of the Young Black Professionals," as the owner of Cafe Wha?
I take extreme offense at the implication that we encourage dancing in order to get our patrons to drink more.
Our philosophy is exactly the opposite.
We never try to encourage our patrons to buy drinks.
In fact we go to great lengths to prevent our customers from drinking too much -- it can only lead to trouble.
We never think in terms of maximizing drink sales, we think only in terms of maximizing the good time of our customers.


U.S. Embargo on Cuba Slows Pace of Reform
To the Editor:
In your Aug. 27 front-page article on United States companies pressing President Clinton to lift the Cuba embargo, Richard Nuccio, the White House special adviser on Cuba, says the embargo is the only pressure that drives Cuba toward economic or political reform.
Nothing could be further from the truth: the embargo inhibits economic and political reform.


Investigation Into PGA Ends
After more than five years of inquiry, the Federal Trade Commission has ended its investigation of the Professional Golfers Association Tour without taking any action.


Strange Vibrations


Boycotting Charm Inc.
THE village of Coupvray, the only time I saw it, was an unassuming place with vine-covered houses looking out on farmers' fields.
It was just 20 miles outside Paris, but had an unsuburban innocence that made me feel it was my kind of place.
I had stopped by Coupvray on the way to do a radio report on the opening of Euro Disneyland, then about two miles from Coupvray and expanding fast.
At the top of a field bordered by flowering wild cherry trees, Disney bulldozers were grinding away, getting menacingly close to a crumbly little cottage where Louis Braille, inventor of the system of writing for the blind, was born.
A Disney train track or golf course or something was replacing the field.
Just the situation to make my curmudgeonly blood boil.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: UPPER WEST SIDE


Dastardly Doings In Elysium, Lavishly Scored
IN THE WEIMAR REPUBLIC, Franz Schreker's operas were second in popularity only to those of Richard Strauss, receiving hundreds of productions and thousands of performances.
But when the Nazis took power, Schreker was among the principal targets of their censors.
A poster headed "Two Jewish Scribblers," a denunciation of Schreker and Ernst Toch, called Schreker "the Magnus Hirschfeld of opera composers," referring to a famous psychiatrist of the day, and declared contemptuously that "there was no sexual-pathological aberration he would not have set to music."
As odious as it is to agree with Nazi censors, in this case they were right, though the assertion might be viewed as a tribute to Schreker's imagination rather than a ground for condemning him.
And what an imagination it was: a new recording of Schreker's opera "Die Gezeichneten" ("The Branded"), by Lothar Zagrosek and the Deutsches Symphonie-Orchester, Berlin (London 444 442-2; three CD's), reveals a musical and dramatic gift that rivals the combined genius of Strauss and Hugo von Hofmannsthal in their great collaborations.


Serbs Balk But NATO Delays Raids
NATO held off further air strikes against the Bosnian Serbs today despite their failure to agree to terms for an end to the alliance's onslaught.
In a meeting on Friday with Gen.
Ratko Mladic, the commander of the Bosnian Serbs, the United Nations demanded that all Serbian artillery be removed at least 12.5 miles away from Sarajevo, that the airport -- closed since April -- be allowed to operate, and that roads into the besieged city be opened.
But General Mladic balked.


Streetscapes: Readers' Questions; Picturesque Neo-Medievals and Graybar Murals
This is another in a series of columns answering questions from readers about New York's changing streetscapes.
Neo-Medievals by the Blums
Q.
The neo-Medieval style building we live in, at the southwest corner of 55th and First Avenue, resembles several others across the street, and one on First Avenue at 48th Street.
Did the same architect design all of them? . . .
Kent K. B. Hanson, Manhattan.


For the Love of the People
IT'S 8 A.M. on a sunny Monday at the entrance to the Christopher Street subway station.
The only people who don't seem cranky are Aubrey Lees and Arthur Schwartz, the candidates.
Their wide-awake good humor seems vulgar.
They jab pictures of themselves captioned "new energetic voices" at the poor souls rushing to work with water bottles, leather backpacks, cell phones, briefcases, newspapers, coffee containers, muffins, the weekend mail and faxes.
It's a wonder how many people smile and take the campaign fliers, promise to vote, even wish them well, how few dismiss them with a drop-dead look and a contemptuous wave-away.


The Pull of Home (Plate)
The old buddies from Ravenswood had been playing pinochle every Friday night for years when Al Rapone decided the game didn't quite capture the essence of their youth.
"Wouldn't it be nice," Mr. Rapone wondered aloud, "if we could have a stickball game?"


Out of Place, Out of Time
SCHOOM  By Jonathan Wilson. 217 pp.
New York: Penguin Books.
Paper, $10.95.
THE HIDING ROOM  By Jonathan Wilson. 262 pp.
New York: Viking. $23.95.


POSTINGS: Landmarks Group Has $1.5 Million for Facade Work; Conservancy Seeks To Lend in Queens
People in Queens don't apply for the New York Landmarks Conservancy's preservation loans -- and nobody knows why.
Out of 63 low-interest loans granted by the Conservancy since the late 1980's, 23 have gone to residents of Manhattan, 35 to homeowners in Brooklyn, 2 to applicants in Staten Island and 3 to people in the Bronx.
None have gone to residents of Queens.


The Whole Earth Is at Stake, but It's Just a Game
Dr.
Jekyll and Ms.
Hyde  Tim Daly, Sean Young, Harvey Fierstein Directed by David F. Price PG-13 92 minutes
A fragrance-industry scientist (Mr. Daly) inherits some notebooks and learns he's a descendant of Dr.
Jekyll.
He drinks a potion and turns into a woman (Ms. Young) who promptly goes clothes shopping with his credit cards and then tries to steal his job, no matter whom she has to sleep with.
She keeps changing back into him, and he into her, at the most inopportune times.


The Neighborhood Bar As Elegant Drawing Room
AS neat as a very dry martini, Hudson Bar and Books, one of the mainstays of Manhattan's theme bars, is one part jazz club and two parts old rich guy's study.
Sort of.
The operative motif of this Greenwich Village watering hole -- as well as its sister establishments on the East Side, Lexington Bar and Books, and the more elaborately named Beekman Bar and Books Featuring the Cigar Bar -- is literary with a dash, perhaps unintentional, of nouveau-riche refinement.
They are to private libraries what authentic preppies say Ralph Lauren is to genuine old-school blazers.


Burmese Blues
To the Editor:
In respect to the Burmese Blues experienced by N. R. Becker, ("Letters on Travel," June 18) my wife and I had an entirely different experience in Myanmar, or Burma, last January.


Correction
A picture caption in some copies last Sunday about office-building renovation on Long Island misidentified a company that is about to renovate a building in Melville for its new corporate headquarters.
It is Sbarro, the restaurant chain, not the North Fork Bank.


Since 1965, a Park; Soon, a Private Yard?
Edward P. Bowman, a lifelong resident of 128th Street, remembers vividly the day in 1965 when the city's first vest-pocket park was dedicated on his street, and the headlines and hoopla afterward, including a visit from Sen.
Robert F. Kennedy.
He remembers how the Rev.
Linnette C. Williamson, pastor of Christ Community Church of Harlem, showed off the new basketball hoops, the trees and flowers potted in red barrels, and the blue-and-white canopy covering a sitting area.
"She said, 'This is for us -- this is where we should be," said Mr.
Bowman, 70.
"Before that, kids were playing football in the street and getting hit by cars."


Why No Moans For the Demise of Sloan's?
To the Editor:
We've seen the survival of local small businesses, whose owners and employees we've come to know and care about, threatened by the influx of retail giants ("More Bookstore Casualties," July 16).
What hasn't received any attention is the virtual demise of Sloan's, a fine neighborhood supermarket that was bought several years ago by John A. Catsimatidis, who also owns the Gristede's and Red Apple supermarkets.


Satchmo's on a Stamp, So the Music's Starting
THE small, unassuming red brick house at 34-56 107th Street in Corona was the home of Louis Armstrong from 1943 to his death in 1971.
Those were crucial years, during which Armstrong formed his seminal jazz group, the All-Stars, and recorded "Hello, Dolly!" and "Mack the Knife."
On Thursday, the house will be host to another landmark event: the New York debut of the Louis Armstrong commemorative stamp.
"The Stamp Dedication at Satchmo's Home" starts at 11 A.M. and features a block party with music by Arvell Shaw and the Louis Armstrong Legacy Band, composed of musicians who played with Armstrong.
There will be free pizza and soda, and speeches from the likes of the Flushing postmaster.
And a special cancellation mark designed by a local fifth grader will be unveiled.
The event is sponsored by the Louis Armstrong Archives at Queens College, which plans to turn the house into a museum by 1998, and the United States Postal Service.


ON THE MAP


Tracy Tolles, Donald Rueckert Jr.
Tracy Ann Tolles, a program director at the Coalition for the Homeless, and Donald John Rueckert Jr., an actuary, were married yesterday in Clinton, N.Y.
The Rev.
Paul J. Drobin performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Hamilton College Chapel.
The couple both work in New York, where she directs First Step, a job training program for homeless women, and he is a principal in Godwins Booke &amp; Dickenson, employee benefits consultants.
Mrs.
Rueckert, 28, graduated from Syracuse University.
Mr.
Rueckert, 37, graduated from the State University at Stony Brook, L.I.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: MANHATTAN UP ClOSE; For a New Crime, New Crime-Fighters
Inspector Donald Liebegott was on a stakeout.
He had received an anonymous tip that two men in a white van were hitting an apartment building on East 27th Street like clockwork every Wednesday.
So, last week, he put on his bulletproof vest, drove to the site at 4 P.M., parked his unmarked Ford Bronco and waited.
Finally, at 6:30, a battered rental van drove up and two men got out.
Inspector Liebegott, of the Sanitation Department's police force, perked up.
The men glanced around, and then, the action: they began stealing the newspapers stacked on the curb for recycling.
In short order, the inspector was reading them their rights.


If the System's Broke, The Jury Can't Fix It
To the Editor:
Like Robert Lipsyte ("Jury Duty, Part Two: The Fight on Lenox," Aug. 13), I, too, was a juror on a case over which Judge Leslie Crocker Snyder presided.
My jury was far more mixed racially than the one Mr.
Lipsyte served on, but its members were well educated and our case, too, involved a crack addict.
As in Mr.
Lipsyte's case, the jurors were favorably impressed by Justice Snyder.
However, I left the case feeling I could not sit on a criminal case again because I had unwillingly been made a participant in a system that was not conducive to truly doing justice.
All the jurors took their responsibilities seriously.
We were told to be the ones to determine the facts but we were then exposed to a system whose purpose seemed to be to cover up the facts.
Over the centuries the jury system has evolved from one in which jurors were required to know the participants to one in which any knowledge of any participants at the trial is forbidden.
It is time for further evolution.
PATRICIA J. F. ROSOF  Manhattan


Some Bears Short Funds, Yes, Funds
IF you are convinced that biotech stocks are absurdly high or that the outlook for car makers gets grimmer by the week, you might decide to short those stocks, or bet that they will decline in price.
Bearish investors usually bet against individual stocks, by borrowing shares, or against a broad index, by using futures contracts.
Few, even in fund circles, know about a third alternative -- shorting a mutual fund.
Yes, that's right, a mutual fund.


Which Funds Get Top Marks for Consistency
Analysts at Morningstar spend all day working with mutual funds -- collecting data, updating, analyzing.
After all that, surely they would wind up with some favorites.
They have.
Morningstar Investor, a newsletter, recently ran a Top 10 list, with a number of caveats.
Although the list includes fund favorites in several categories, Morningstar warns that it should not be viewed as a model portfolio.
The funds may not provide enough balance, for example, or they may have overlapping holdings or inappropriate risk levels.
But investors looking to plug a hole in a portfolio may get some ideas.


F.Y.I.
Changed Exchanges Q. Does the phone company still use or issue exchange letters (like BUtterfield 8) to identify telephone number prefixes?
And if so, is there any way to get a list of all the telephone exchange letters and their corresponding areas in New York City?
A.
The answer to your first question is: 66. (That's NO.)
Telephone exchange letters, once a source of pride (and sometimes snobbery) among the city's callers, finally went the way of the dodo in the middle to late 1970's, said Dave Frail, spokesman for Nynex.
But it wasn't without some squawking.
The demise of the letters, which paid tribute to streets and neighborhoods as well as prominent families and historic figures, began in 1960.
In 1960, Fredrick R. Kappel took over as the C.E.O. of AT&amp;T (the 236 of 288) and decided to switch to an all-number system to ease direct dialing and directory information, according to "Telephone," a history of the phone, by John Brooks (Harper and Row, 1975).
Early experiments with all-numbered prefixes in Council Bluffs, Iowa, went just fine.
The trouble began when AT&amp;T started to try to take away the letters in bigger cities.
In San Francisco, phone users were so outraged they formed the Anti-Digit Dialing League and filed lawsuits to prevent the change (people really liked their letters).
An October 1962 editorial in The New York Times in support of the league noted disdainfully that AT&amp;T "wants nothing but numbers, just numbers -- digits, just digits."
By the end of 1962, AT&amp;T had a public relations fiasco on its hands and slowed down the plan to change the system, issuing all-number numbers to new customers only.
Thus, letter exchanges were still being listed in city phone books as late as the late 1970's. (BUtterfield 8, made famous by the 1935 John O'Hara novel and the 1960 Elizabeth Taylor film, referred to numbers in a stylish area on the Upper East Side.)
Though less present in the lexicon now, the exchanges are still used by some New Yorkers.
No current maps or listings exist, Mr.
Frail said, but if you check the front of any phone book before the change (available on microfiche at the New York Public Library) , you can find a list of the lost letters.
When Meters Click Off Q.  How do taxi drivers get paid?
I understand they rent their own cabs, but do rates vary?
Do they pay in everything and then get check at the end of the week or do they take the cash?
A.
Drivers rent their cabs for 12-hour shifts, usually 5 A.M. to 5 P.M. or vice versa, said Christopher Lynn, chairman of the Taxi and Limousine Commission.
Rates vary from garage to garage and also depend on day and time.
Friday nights are the most expensive, with rentals being jacked up to about $110; Sunday nights the price drops to $70.
Drivers pay the rental fee up front, and then also have to invest in gas, which runs about $18 to $20 a tank.
Thus, cabbies usually start the day (or night) at least $100 in the hole.
At the end of the shift, cabbies return the cab, pay any late fees (cabbies can be charged $5 to $10 for bringing a car back 10 minutes late) and walk off with the remaining cash.
Which had better be more than $100, or they haven't even broken even.
It's Later, Alligator Q.  I loved the alligators that lined the wall of the walkway between the L trains (at Avenue of the Americas) and the 1/9 line (at Seventh Avenue) at the 14th Street stop.
What happened to them?
A.
The terra-cotta gators have been "deinstalled," said Mona Chen, manager of the Transit Authority's Creative Stations program.
Under the guidelines of the Creative Stations program, artists are responsible for the care of their work.
The gators, the work of the artist Anne Veraldi, were taken down this spring after the burden of repairing and tending for the delicate, chippable beasts became too much.
Their popularity may have been their downfall.
"I think kids may have been running along their backs," Ms.
Veraldi said.
"They got a lot of damage." JESSE McKINLEY Questions (and answers) may be sent to F.Y.I., The City, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Italy Offers Plan to Expand the U.N. Security Council by 8 Seats
Two years ago, the United Nations General Assembly created a committee to recommend ways to reform the Security Council so that it could better reflect and serve the world today.
The committee was given no deadline, and when it reconvenes in the coming week it will be no closer to its goal than it was in 1993.
While there is broad agreement that the Council needs fixing, finding a formula that appeals to a majority of nations appears to be an impossible task.


Kevin C. Goddess, Carol E. Buckman,
Carol Erica Buckman, a daughter of Thomas R. Buckman of New York and the late Gunhild M. Buckman, was married yesterday to Kevin Charles Goddess, a son of Marilyn Moffitt of Allentown, Pa., and John Goddess of West Palm Beach, Fla.
Mayor Ronald J. De Iaco of Alburtis, Pa., officiated at the Lock Ridge Furnace Museum there.
The bride is a graphics designer in New York.
She graduated from the California College of Arts and Crafts in Oakland.


Cruises in Turkey
To the Editor:
As a specialist in cruises and tours of Turkey, I read "Port-Hopping on the Coast of Turkey" (July 23) with interest.
I have arranged many charters of gulet vessels and personally led group trips.
I can say that the gulet is an excellent choice for certain parties.


A Three-Way Tie for the Wild-Card Spot
Rangers 4, Royals 1
Roger Pavlik broke his three-game losing streak and Candy Maldonado homered in his second at-bat for Texas as the Rangers beat the visiting Kansas City Royals, 4-1, last night to stop a five-game losing streak.


Backpack, Pencil Case, Modem
LIKE generations before them, freshmen at Hunterdon Central Regional High School will delve into Homer's "Odyssey" this fall.
But in addition to reading dog-eared texts, they will watch the story unfold on computer screens, complete with costumed characters and sound effects.
In biology class, the squeamish can dissect a computer-simulated frog instead of the real thing.
And in history, traditional term papers will be replaced by multimedia presentations -- collections of words, pictures, graphics and music that students create on computers.


Computers Are Great, But What About Books?
Educators no longer doubt that technology can serve as an extraordinary teaching tool, and few would pass up an opportunity to use it.
But as computers start to replace chalkboards and textbooks, it is natural for teachers to wonder where they should draw the line.
Lynn Maher, a spokeswoman for the New Jersey Education Association, the state's largest teachers' union, says most teachers no longer worry that computers will eventually replace them.
But she adds that most think technology can only supplement traditional teaching methods, and only to a certain extent.


Neighbors Protest the Swell of St. Mary's
Sitting at a small plastic table in the recreation room at St.
Mary's Hospital for Children, Mattis Ayala and her brother, Raleigh, two of a 15-month-old set of triplets, giggled and squealed in delight as two therapists enticed them to stack plastic rings and to stuff colorful blocks into a shape sorter.
Since their release from the intensive care unit last fall, Mattis and Raleigh, who were born 14 weeks premature, have been in St.
Mary's inpatient post-acute treatment program, learning coordination and motor skills. (The third triplet is at home.) Their stay costs $400 a day per child, compared with more than $1,000 a day in intensive care.


A Nod to Experience
In choosing Dr.
Luis Rojas Marcos to run the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani tapped a respected psychiatrist and researcher with previous experience at the agency.
As mental health commissioner, Dr.
Marcos has already presided over one city department at a time of drastic cuts, and he is a political survivor who knows how to say the right thing.
Article, page 31.


Smiles Of a Summer Night
A Friday in the city, after offices have closed and the partying has begun south of 14th Street, Aug. 25.


A Southern Escape
SAO PAULO, the largest city in the Southern Hemisphere, has become a powerful magnet for Americans, drawing business visitors to Brazil's economic center and tourists to Brazil's air hub.
But after more than a week in this dreary, industrial metropolis, visitors traditionally have escaped to Rio de Janeiro, one hour north by air.
Now increasing numbers of Paulistas and foreigners are flying one hour south instead -- for a quiet stay in Florianopolis, the island capital of Santa Catarina State.


DIARY
ADVERTISING Calvin Klein Zips Up Calvin Klein admit that he's gone too far?
Don't be silly.
That's the very definition of a Calvin Klein ad -- going too far.
Yet sure enough, last week his company said it would scrap, as soon as possible, some jeans ads that had raised cries that they skirted dangerously close to child pornography.
Not that it admitted any excess -- no, the ads had been "misunderstood." Calvin Klein ads aren't "that much more erotic than Marky Mark" with his pants down, one consultant said, suggesting that the latest ones were pulled because "these are more conservative times." But a critic for Advertising Age said this retreat might put a damper on ads aimed at "shocking a million people to impress nine."
As an alternative, there's Prison Blues Clothing, made by inmates in Oregon.
"Buy some," the catalog urges, "so if the fashion police knock on your door, you won't have to flush your old clothes down the toilet." Your old clothes, presumably, being your Calvins.
MERGERS One Nation, One Bank?
It's coming.
You can feel it.
One nation, one humongous bank.
Its name?
How about Citi-Chem-Union-BofA-BNY-NBD-PNC-ATM-PDQ?
Like snapping Pac-Banks addled by this drought, bankers have been madly buying one another all summer.
First Fidelity and First Union, Midlantic and PNC, First Chicago and NBD -- oh, why go on.
And for the grand, pre-Labor Day finale, Chase and Chemical linked up, sidling past Citibank to create the nation's biggest bank.
Rah-rah, Wall Street said, as investors salivated over all the juicy cost cuts on the way.
But those cuts will have a human face: of the banks' 75,000 jobs, 12,000 will vanish, and a third of those will be in the New York area, already bleeding from past losses of bank jobs.
And in poor neighborhoods, "cost cuts" often mean just one thing: no more local bank -- though the banks did vow that no branch would close if there's no other nearby.
MORE MERGERS High-Impact Media Aerobics And don't think for a second that media companies will be left behind in this huge-is-best stampede.
Disney and ABC team up to create a giant?
Well, Time Warner can top that -- no problem.
Last week it said it would buy Turner Broadcasting -- if, that is, the mighty Ted Turner agrees to bend his knee to another master, as vice chairman of the new powerhouse.
Money might ease the pain: he's worth, on paper, some $600 million more than he was a week ago.
There are other hurdles, though.
For one thing, John Malone has to be made happy, because his company, Tele-Communications, owns 21 percent of Turner.
And the head of HBO, Michael Fuchs, is apparently concerned about Mr.
Turner's ascendance.
So many egos, so few media giants.
THE DONALD Tees of Gold, Naturally Coming: Trump, the golf course.
No, no, make that: Trump, the Golf Course.
That's right, Donald Trump, who never tires of buying and selling choice pieces of this unworthy planet, is buying a 14-bedroom Mount Kisco chateau and plans to turn it into a playground for golfers -- those who can afford it, anyway.
Can you afford it?
Since you asked, forget it.
For your first swing, this one will reportedly charge you -- brace yourself -- more than $250,000.
That's clearly a bargain, though, when you consider that a typical golf club -- one with an entrance fee that's merely astronomical -- has 400 to 500 members.
No such un-Rolexed masses here -- Mr.
Trump is said to plan a limit of about 75.
COMMUNICATIONS The Day the Numbers Died So, you thought you could have all those modems and pagers and faxes and pocket phones and toys yet undreamed of -- and not, sooner or later, pay the price?
Face it: even Bill Gates can't add to life's 10 digits. (If we'd only had, say, 14 fingers, we'd surely have a 14-digit number system -- and just imagine how many possible phone numbers.) But it's a decimal world, alas, and it's running out of those phone numbers.
Just last week, Connecticut -- for so long a rustic, one-area-code island in the clanging stream -- suffered the indignity of having an 860 added to its 203.
No, there's no "0" or "1" in the middle of 860 -- we're out of those.
And by 2025, experts say, we'll need four-digit area codes.
But given the pace at which we're inventing gadgets, it'll probably be a lot sooner.
WORK Incredible Shrinking Fridays It's over, folks.
No more four-day workweeks.
Labor Day means what it says.
Don't deny it, now.
All summer a lot of people have been sneaking off earlier and earlier on Fridays -- you know, beating the traffic, then beating the people beating the traffic, and on and on in a cascading waterfall that, in some circles, pretty much wiped out Fridays.
Can capitalism survive this insidious assault?
Oh, yes, the would-be overachievers always insist that even on the beach or in the wild, they've got cellular phones blazing in both hands, like some bizarre latter-day cowboys.
And, alas, some of them do.
PHYSICS What Goes Up Goes Up If stock prices rise long enough, that proves they'll never fall.
Don't believe that bit of revisionist physics?
Well, a lot of people clearly do, because in July investors poured more money than ever before into mutual funds that invest in American stocks -- $12.4 billion more than they took out.
And that, remember, comes with the stock market somehow hanging on at its lofty levels.
But a word of caution, from a fund executive: "The excitement is always highest just before the roller coaster goes over the top." He added, in a plea to investors dreaming of untold riches, that he hoped they "realize that stocks do go down as well as up." What an odd notion.


'War and Peace' in 20 Minutes? If You Care What It Says, Read
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 30 obituary of Evelyn Wood neglects to mention that her approach to reading has long since been discredited by serious investigators.
Study after study demonstrates that although people can skim at extremely high rates (as much as 100,000 words a minute), they gain substantially no comprehension in the process.


The Grand Canyon Is Running Out of Room
THE enormous vacancy that is the Grand Canyon might seem to be the last place on earth where a traveler would need a reservation.
But the national park, like many others, is overcrowded, and eventually there might be routine restrictions on how many people can visit parts of the park at one time.
About five million people a year visit the canyon, most of them driving to the South Rim visitor center.
The number could swell to seven million in 15 years, the National Park Service estimates; at the very least, the parking spaces will be exhausted.


Clinton Sees Lessons in the Postwar Era
Fifty years after Japan formally surrendered to Gen.
Douglas MacArthur on the deck of the battleship Missouri, President Clinton today urged Americans to regain the sense of national purpose that propelled the United States into its postwar period of economic expansion and world leadership.
On the second day of ceremonies marking the end of World War II, Mr.
Clinton heralded the valor of the Americans who fought in what he called the "most destructive conflict in all human history." But he also touched on the ways that the war and the helping hand the nation extended to returning veterans changed the social and economic fabric of the country.


J.E. Jonsson, 93, Industrialist And Ex-Dallas Mayor, Dies
John Erik Jonsson, a Swedish immigrant's son who helped found Texas Instruments and as Mayor of Dallas helped heal that city in the wake of President John F. Kennedy's assassination, died on Thursday night at his home in Dallas.
He was 93.
Mr.
Jonsson helped build Texas Instruments from a tiny local company that built devices to aid in oil and gas exploration into an electronics giant, the inventor of the integrated circuit.
But it was his role in helping a stricken city regain its self-confidence in the wake of President Kennedy's assassination that was perhaps his greatest contribution.


Collectors Take Time Out
Things should run right on schedule at the annual seminar by the National Association of Watch and Clock Collectors at the Harrisburg Hilton in Harrisburg, Pa., Oct. 26 to 28.
Lectures will focus on design and construction of American clocks before the age of mass production.
On Oct. 27 there will be a bus trip to an exhibit of 18th-century American tall-case clocks at the association's headquarters on Route 30 in Columbia, Pa. (open to the public Oct. 28 to March 31).
The seminar costs $135, including food and the exhibit.
Information: (717) 684-8261.


The World; Finally Torn Apart, The Balkans Can Hope
COULD the Balkan national question cause of the wars of 1912 and 1913 that ended Ottoman rule in Europe, spark to World War I, catalyst to unspeakable butchery during World War II and now the kernel of the unfinished wars of Yugoslavia's destruction -- be moving close to resolution?
Such a notion, unthinkable even a week ago, did not seem completely implausible after a whirlwind of American-led diplomacy and NATO bombing of the Bosnian Serbs that led to an agreement among the warring parties to hold peace talks in Geneva next week, the first such meeting in two years.


Cruises in Turkey
To the Editor:
I was very happy to read "Port-Hopping on the Coast of Turkey." When I first started selling the Marmaris-to-Marmaris cruise, clients kept asking me how many black-tie evenings there would be and how many long dresses they should take.
Once I had explained the type of cruise it really was, some declined, others signed up immediately.
Nevertheless I was very surprised that my company, Cultural Tours, was not mentioned as a provider of both gulet charters and packaged Turkish cruises.


LOVE SONG '95
I enjoyed Stephan Talty's "The No. 1 Summer Song of Love," about Method Man's successful single "I'll Be There for You/You're All I Need to Get By" (Aug. 13).


Party Pooped
I am a recovering hostess with the mostest.
No, I am not recuperating from the exertions of a dinner party, as I have a million times before.
My days of confronting stacks of dirty dishes and wine-stained linen, of self-recrimination and painful remorse for not being God's gift to party giving are over.
My need to be the brunet Martha Stewart has lifted.
This is not to say that I no longer entertain.
On average, 700 people a year eat dinner, lunch, and potato latkes in my home.
That number has not substantially dropped since I came to grips with my hostessing disorder.
But after peeling away layers of denial, my manner of entertaining guests has changed.


Michael Nathanson, Tracy Teicher
Tracy Ann Teicher, an associate producer at Worldwide Television News in New York, was married last evening to Michael Brian Nathanson, the business manager of Time Inc.
Ventures Television in New York.
Rabbi David Posner officiated at the Water's Edge, a restaurant in Long Island City, Queens.
The bride, 32, graduated from Barnard College and received a master's degree in journalism from New York University.
She is a daughter of Suellen J. Globus of New York and Laurence M. Teicher of London and a stepdaughter of Dr.
David L. Globus.
The bride's father is the president of Brit-Am Foods in London.
Her stepfather is an internist in New York.
Her mother is a real estate broker based in New York.


Cho-Liang Lin and Deborah Ho
Dr.
Deborah Jui-Yuan Ho, a pediatric resident at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in New York, was married yesterday to Cho-Liang Lin, the concert violinist.
The Rev.
Linda L. Moeller, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at the Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York.
Dr.
Lin, 30, graduated from the Georgia Institute of Technology and received her medical degree from Emory University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Y.
Ho of Taipei, Taiwan.
Her father is a lawyer there for the National Taiwan University Hospital, where her mother, Chen L. Ho, is a social worker.


Word for Word / Military School; Going Back to College To Study War Some More
AS thousands of students across the country get ready to return to school this week, thousands of the military's best and brightest are setting aside their fighter jets and battle tanks and hitting the books too.
They're going to war college.
The services run well-known undergraduate schools, like West Point, which provide about 15 percent of their newly minted officers.
But the Pentagon also operates postgraduate schools for officers from eager young captains to battle-hardened colonels.


The End of a Perilous Season in the Surf
COME the cold winds of winter, the lifeguards will still be talking about the summer of 1995.
None of them can remember ever pulling so many people in from the sea.
On the busiest day of all, Aug. 13, a hot Sunday, the 24-member beach patrol in Seaside Heights alone hauled 150 swimmers out of churning riptides before late afternoon, and then they stopped counting.


ANOTHER CASE CLOSED
I'm glad that Gerald Posner can repeatedly get space in The New York Times to air his views ("Garrison Guilty. Another Case Closed." Aug. 6).
Unfortunately, I cannot.
Nor can the overwhelming majority of Americans who disagree with the "magic bullet-lone nut" theory of the Kennedy assassination.
But if you have the courage to print a dissenting view, I would like to offer one.
Posner's book "Case Closed: Lee Harvey Oswald and the Assassination of J. F. K." was written and published before any of the new Government documents on the assassination had been released.
Several hundred thousand pages of previously classified documents have now been made public, none of which were reviewed by Posner before pronouncing the case closed.
In fact, the newly released documents strengthen the case for conspiracy, not weaken it.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: MANHATTAN UP ClOSE; For a New Crime, New Crime-Fighters
Inspector Donald Liebegott was on a stakeout.
He had received an anonymous tip that two men in a white van were hitting an apartment building on East 27th Street like clockwork every Wednesday.
So, last week, he put on his bulletproof vest, drove to the site at 4 P.M., parked his unmarked Ford Bronco and waited.
Finally, at 6:30, a battered rental van drove up and two men got out.
Inspector Liebegott, of the Sanitation Department's police force, perked up.
The men glanced around, and then, the action: they began stealing the newspapers stacked on the curb for recycling.
In short order, the inspector was reading them their rights.


OLD SMOOTHIES
There is something disturbing and derisive about Veronica Chambers's Style column "Old Smoothies" (Aug. 13), celebrating the superiority of the skin quality of black women and the fact that they don't need cosmetic surgery.


Baseball in Yonkers, Over and Out
THE crowds were small.
The victories were few.
The operating costs were high.
The injuries were many.
Four strikes are definitely out for the Yonkers Hoot Owls, whose first season in the independent Northeast Professional Baseball League ended Thursday.
Out, as in out of Yonkers.
The return of professional baseball to Westchester County for the first time since 1949 has turned out to be a one-season stand.


Campaign '96
It's labor day weekend, when people tradition-ally just begin to grasp that a Presidential campaign is in the offing.
But like it or not, the 1996 contest has been in full motion for months, and is about to burst into public consciousness.
It may well be the longest, if not the most interminable, campaign anyone can remember, studded with pivotal events months before the customary snowy start in Iowa and New Hampshire.
While the road to the White House always has dramatic twists, there will be even more this time around, thanks to tremendous changes in the primary schedule, a fitful electorate, a roster of sharp-tongued (if uninspiring) Republicans and the shadowboxing among independents.
And don't forget the biggest question of all: Can the self-proclaimed Comeback Kid do it again?


The Nation; You're Fired! (But Your Stock Is Way Up)
NOTHING succeeds like unemployment, at least when it comes to stock prices.
Chemical Bank and Chase Manhattan Bank got together last week and decided that they would slash employment by 12,000 people, leaving them with 63,000 employees.


Andrea L. Kaplan, Michael J. Yanoff
Andrea Lynn Kaplan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gary Y. Kaplan of Fair Haven, N.J., is to be married today to Michael Jay Yanoff, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour L. Yanoff of Mashpee, Mass.
Rabbi Jack Rosoff is to officiate at Congregation B'nai Israel in Rumson, N.J.
The bride, 31, is a senior designer at the Corporate Asset Management Company, interior architectural designers in Boston.
She graduated from Ohio University.
Her father is a senior partner in Kaplan, Gaunt &amp; DeSantis Architects in Red Bank, N.J.
Her mother, Gloria A. Kaplan, is an agent at Rumson Realty.


Closing Arguments Start Tuesday in Terror-Bomb Trial
Two portraits of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman have emerged over the last seven months in a heavily guarded courtroom in Manhattan.
One, the sheik described by prosecutors, used his sanctuary in America as a base for plotting terrorism.
This Mr.
Abdel Rahman is a fundamentalist Muslim fanatic who led a conspiracy that included the bombing of the World Trade Center in February 1993 and plots to bomb other major New York buildings, all in an attempt to coerce the United States into changing its Middle East policy of supporting Israel and the Government he detests in his native Egypt.


Judith Blatman, Philip Stephenson
Judith Hillary Blatman and Philip Anthony Stephenson, travel executives based in New York, were married on Tuesday at the Inn at Sawmill Farm in West Dover, Vt.
Phyllis C. Shippee, a justice of the peace, performed the ceremony.
Ms.
Blatman, 38, is keeping her name.
She is the director of public relations for Princess Hotels International.
She graduated from the State University at Albany.
She is the daughter of Sena and Seymour Blatman of North Bellmore, L.I.


Not at All Unstrung, and Calling the Shots
THE HEAT IS STIFLING.
IT'S over 90 degrees in Pasadena, Calif., and people on the set of "Unstrung Heroes" are wearing T-shirts and shorts.
Smoke is being pumped into the auditorium of the Henry Wadsworth Longfellow Middle School, raising the temperature another few degrees.
Everyone is dripping with sweat except the director, Diane Keaton, who stands at attention, waiting for rows of children in starched white shirts and pomaded hair to fill the seats.
On the stage, 11-year-old Nathan Watt is at the podium.
Ms.
Keaton calls out instructions to the young actor: "There are 100,000 people out there, and they all think you're a geek. They don't like you one bit, not one iota." Then, screaming "action!" at the top of her lungs, she marches down the aisle in a long, charcoal gray coat with a handkerchief tucked neatly into a pocket.


IN SHORT: FICTION
SAYING GRACE  By Beth Gutcheon. HarperCollins, $23.
In her lively and engaging fourth novel, "Saying Grace," Beth Gutcheon takes a look at the day-to-day workings of a small private day school in California.
Under the direction of Rue Shaw, the school has thrived, but a disruptive new board president lessens Rue's delight in her job, as well as her support from the faculty.
Both at home and at school, she experiences a series of disturbing events that test her character and resilience.
As it follows Rue's trials, "Saying Grace" provides a realistic portrait of both a good school and its gifted leader.
Ms.
Gutcheon knows private schools, and she knows her craft -- and that's a winning combination.
CONSTANCE DECKER THOMPSON


Assassination Reminds India That Sikh Revolt Is Still a Threat
As a state funeral was held today in the Punjab for the victim of India's latest political assassination, the country's top security officials were conducting an urgent review of arrangements for protecting the country's most endangered leaders.
The powerful bomb blast on Thursday that killed Beant Singh, the Chief Minister of the Punjab, as well as 15 other people, has shaken the Indian Government's confidence that it had ended an insurgency by Sikh separatists that had long paralyzed life in the state.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
SOUTH NYACK TOURS
Friends of the Nyacks, a nonprofit civic organization that promulgates the historic and cultural aspects of the community every way it can, has scheduled an architectural-historical walking tour of South Nyack today at 2 P.M.
No reservations are necessary, just show up at the corner of Cedar Hill and South Broadway for the one-hour guided stroll past 18th-century workmen's cottages, capacious Victorian homes in the Queen Anne style, old shipbuilding sites along the Hudson River, and buildings constructed of Haverstraw brick and red sandstone quarried from South Nyack and distinctive for its rosy brown hue.
It was shipped to New York City in enormous quantities at the turn of the century to build many of the elegant brownstone houses.


A Word of Praise
To the Editor:
We recently went from Vienna to Prague by train.
Our travel agent had arranged to have us picked up at the railroad station.
Alas, nobody came.
After waiting for an hour I heard a gentleman giving instructions in English.
When I asked him where and how to get a taxi, he told us that many of them overcharge and volunteered to take us to our hotel by Metro.


A Total of 1,705 Candid Cameras
WHAT: A '72 Dodge van with 1,705 cameras glued, screwed or riveted to it.
Among them: a Mouseketeer camera from the days of Annette Funicello and one that doubles as a squirt gun.
And yes, some of them are loaded with film.


If the System's Broke, The Jury Can't Fix It
To the Editor:
Like Robert Lipsyte ("Jury Duty, Part Two: The Fight on Lenox," Aug. 13), I, too, was a juror on a case over which Judge Leslie Crocker Snyder presided.
My jury was far more mixed racially than the one Mr.
Lipsyte served on, but its members were well educated and our case, too, involved a crack addict.
As in Mr.
Lipsyte's case, the jurors were favorably impressed by Justice Snyder.
However, I left the case feeling I could not sit on a criminal case again because I had unwillingly been made a participant in a system that was not conducive to truly doing justice.
All the jurors took their responsibilities seriously.
We were told to be the ones to determine the facts but we were then exposed to a system whose purpose seemed to be to cover up the facts.
Over the centuries the jury system has evolved from one in which jurors were required to know the participants to one in which any knowledge of any participants at the trial is forbidden.
It is time for further evolution.
PATRICIA J. F. ROSOF  Manhattan


A Landlubber's 60-Year-Old Dream
The main question asked of Peter Reed these days as he sorts through the food, sails and survival gear on his boat is, "Why?" And Mr.
Reed, a 68-year-old retired mining analyst, can't muster much more than a simple, "Because."
Blame it on a late midlife crisis or a childhood dream, but one way or the other Mr.
Reed, a longtime resident of Katonah, N.Y., who has to haul a polio-weakened leg around like excess baggage, is planning sometime before Oct. 1 to set off alone from Falmouth to Falmouth, via the rest of the world.


Queens Youth Fatally Struck In Hit-and-Run
A livery van driver left a Queens intersection after fatally striking a teen-ager yesterday morning as the youth and a friend stood in the street, the police said.
The boy, who was believed to be about 14 and had not been identified, died at 8:50 A.M. at Mary Immaculate Hospital, said Officer Kathleen Kelly, a police spokeswoman.


Violators Will Be Towed. Maybe.
Painted in yellow stripes on the ground along the perimeter of stores in the Whitestone Shopping Center is a "no standing" fire zone.
The logic is simple: in an emergency, fire trucks and other rescue vehicles need access to the buildings.
But when it comes to keeping cars out of those zones, things are not so simple: city agencies are powerless to stop them.
The lack of enforcement is obvious at the shopping center, between the Cross Island Parkway and 14th Avenue, where cars are invariably parked in the fire zone as customers run in and out of the supermarket or drug store, make a quick bank transaction or grab a slice of pizza.


A Lion At 70
WHEN other people reach three score and ten, they say they are turning 70.
William F. Buckley Jr. becomes a septuagenarian.


Recital: Beethoven Sonatas
IT is usually well into September before the new season emerges from summer's torpor, but Litchfield Performing Arts, eager to begin its 15th anniversary celebrations, will begin its season on Friday evening at 8, when the pianist Richard Goode returns to give an all-Beethoven recital at First Congregational Church on the green in Litchfield.
Four sonatas, among them the "Hammerklavier," will be on the program.
Later events include a Momix dance company performance in Torrington on Oct. 6, Claire Bloom reading from "Anna Karenina" on Oct. 28 in Litchfield and recitals by the Kandinsky Trio and former New York Philharmonic principal violist Paul Neubauer.


Q. &amp; A.
Installment Sales Contracts  Q What are the benefits and risks of using an "installment sales contract" as a mortgage substitute?
I hear that such an arrangement is especially helpful to young couples who would have difficulty qualifying for a bank loan. . . .
Erhard Westphal, Bronx.
A "The apparent benefits of an installment sales contract are illusory," said Bruce J. Bergman, an East Meadow, L.I., lawyer who specializes in mortgage law.


Why No Moans For the Demise of Sloan's?
To the Editor:
We've seen the survival of local small businesses, whose owners and employees we've come to know and care about, threatened by the influx of retail giants ("More Bookstore Casualties," July 16).
What hasn't received any attention is the virtual demise of Sloan's, a fine neighborhood supermarket that was bought several years ago by John A. Catsimatidis, who also owns the Gristede's and Red Apple supermarkets.


Eduard Shevardnadze's Passion
Eduard Shevardnadze could have retired from public life in 1991 as a revered statesman, savoring the appreciation of a world he helped remake as the last Soviet Foreign Minister.
In partnership with Mikhail Gorbachev, Mr.
Shevardnadze eased decades of tension with the United States and opened the way for Eastern Europe to be free.
But early retirement was not Mr.
Shevardnadze's style.
The world was reminded of that last week by news photographs of Mr.
Shevardnadze's bloodied face after he dodged an assassination attempt in Tbilisi, where he is Parliament chairman and the political leader of Georgia.
The bombing of Mr.
Shevardnadze's motorcade was not the first effort to kill him since he returned to Georgia in 1992 in a stubborn effort to keep his homeland from disintegration and anarchy.


The 49ers' Formula for Success: Foresight Plus Hard Work
Thirty-nine days.
Beat Dallas or die.
William Floyd, otherwise known as Bar None.
Six new defensive starters means championship D. Compete within on offense.
Let Deion dance.


Be It Vision or Folly, There Is One Man Behind the Trolley
The plan for a 42d Street trolley has been called visionary and lunatic, hailed as futuristic and damned as folly.
It has chugged through layers and years of bureaucratic approvals, passing land-use reviews, the Planning Commission and the City Council, only to stall now over questions of cost.
No one can say whether it will ever become a reality.
Still, one thing is clear.
Frederic S. Papert is a determined man.


A La Carte; Aficionados to Taste World's Greatest Wines
THIS November, 30 fortunate wine lovers will pay $400 to $500 each for the privilege of tasting one of the world's greatest wines.
The wine, a shiraz, formerly called Grange Hermitage and now simply Grange, comes from Penfold's Vineyards in South Australia.
Every recognized wine writer, from Robert Parker to Hugh Johnson, has given Grange his top rating.
The aficionados will start with the 1963 vintage, which costs between $2,000 and $3,000 a bottle, and work their way up to the present and bottles in the $50 to $60 range.


Hi, Fellas


The Judge Also Needs Some English Lessons
To the Editor:
Re "Mother Scolded by Judge for Speaking in Spanish" (news article, Aug. 30):


Memories of My Queens
LOOKING back at a lifetime in which Queens has been a recurrent theme -- sometimes dominant, often subtle -- I realize that I by no means have the definitive handle on the place.
The map of memory is often enhanced, as were the charts of ancient cartographers, with fanciful creatures and events rooted perhaps in reality, but embroidered by the passage of years.
My Queens is not as Irish as the Queens that Jimmy Breslin unerringly describes in his novels.
It is not the Italian Queens of Astoria, nor the Colombian Queens of Roosevelt Avenue.
The Chinese and Koreans of Flushing, the subcontinentals from India and Pakistan will remember a Queens much unlike mine, and so will the African-Americans in St.
Albans.


Julie B. Gold, Andrew Kramer
Julie Beth Gold, a daughter of Isabel and Burton Gold of Plainview, L.I., was married last evening to Andrew Bennett Kramer, the son of Alice and Arthur Kramer of Stamford, Conn.
Rabbi Andrea Weiss performed the ceremony at Swept Away, a resort in Negril, Jamaica.
Mrs.
Kramer, 26, graduated from Syracuse University and is a candidate for a master's degree in nutrition at New York University.
She is also a practicing dietitian in New York.
Her father is the president of Karp Associates, a manufacturer of sheet-metal products in Masbeth, Queens.
Her mother is the program coordinator at the Center for Family Resources in Mineola, L.I.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
IN SEARCH OF CHURCHILL  A Historian's Journey. By Martin Gilbert. Wiley, $30.
Martin Gilbert has devoted more than 25 years of his life to Winston Churchill.
"In Search of Churchill" details just how that time was spent.
In 1962 the author became a research assistant to Randolph Churchill, who was working on his father's official biography; after Randolph's premature death in 1968, Mr.
Gilbert took over the job, completing the eighth, and final, volume in 1988.
Here, he describes rummaging through countless documents, conducting interviews, touring historical sites and generally following in his subject's footsteps.
One chapter begins: "There were few efforts more rewarding in my researches than my search for Churchill's Private Secretaries." This is a story that will probably appeal most to Churchill enthusiasts and those with an interest in the biographical enterprise as such.
BARRY GEWEN


A van Gogh for the Quirky 90's Defies All the Norms He Can Find
Theo Van Gogh was, Perhaps, protesting too much about his latest movie.
"It's a very prudish film," he said of "1-900," a Dutch story about phone sex.
"You don't see the breasts or anything like that. It's a very lonely film. It's about lonely people who don't touch each other. They just talk."
Well, not quite.
"1-900," which opens on Friday at the Quad Cinema in Manhattan, traces the relationship between a man and a woman who know each other only through a phone-sex line in Amsterdam, Mr. van Gogh's hometown. (The Dutch title was "06," the sex-line exchange in the Netherlands.) The couple, agreeing never to meet or reveal their names, proceed to fantasize, masturbate, argue, deceive and struggle for power in a series of conversations.


Parties With a Purpose
Diffa's series of benefits at Fire Island Pines, L.I., Aug. 26-27.


Mooney's the One
To the Editor:
John Updike, Philip Roth, Gore Vidal -- sure ("The Other Nixon Library: Portraits of the Ex-President as Literary Object," by Daniel Aaron, Aug. 6).
But for sheer uncompromising roman a clef Nixoniana, let us not neglect Dr.
Seuss' "Marvin K. Mooney, Will You Please Go Now!" (1972).
I believe Theodor Geisel admitted that the objectionable shifty-eyed little protagonist was a stand-in for the President, whose name was a rhythmic match.
Even if he didn't, everybody knew.
Many a pajamaed tot looked on quizzically as Mom and Dad chortled their way through story time.


Cutting Remark
To the Editor:
Many years ago, the opera conductor, producer and author Boris Goldovsky related this story: As a conducting student of Fritz Reiner, he was taught to use a long baton.
Years later, he became associated in Tanglewood with the conductor Serge Koussevitsky, who used a very short baton.
An early production there was Mozart's "Cosi fan Tutte."


Black Professionals Like Me: A Note of Thanks
To the Editor:
"The Comfort Zones of the Young Black Professional" (Aug. 20) is bold, daring, innovative and even revolutionary considering it appeared in a newspaper that is largely conservative, and not doing enough to report the changes taking place in the city.


Be It Vision or Folly, There Is One Man Behind the Trolley
The plan for a 42d Street trolley has been called visionary and lunatic, hailed as futuristic and damned as folly.
It has chugged through layers and years of bureaucratic approvals, passing land-use reviews, the Planning Commission and the City Council, only to stall now over questions of cost.
No one can say whether it will ever become a reality.
Still, one thing is clear.
Frederic S. Papert is a determined man.


A Shrine to Rock Music With a Roll All Its Own
ELVIS SIGHTINGS SHOULD BE even more common now that the glittering new Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame in Cleveland has opened.
Not only do we get to see Michael Jackson's deceased father-in-law (or at least an anatomically correct mannequin of him) dressed in full leather regalia.
The building itself, designed by I. M. Pei, has an Elvis-like swagger of its own.
Featuring saucy geometric forms cantilevered out from the middle of a six-story tower, the Hall of Fame is a swivel-hipped apparition in metal and glass.
From certain angles, the building even seems to be trailing a cape.
Initiated by a group of music industry executives in 1983, the Hall of Fame, which officially opened yesterday, celebrates the heritage of this distinctive American art form.
In addition to honoring legendary performers, the Hall of Fame will maintain and display a collection of rock artifacts that already includes Wilson Pickett's jumpsuit and the acoustic guitar on which Pete Townshend composed tunes for "Tommy." (Cleveland was chosen as the site for the Hall of Fame because the city offered to pay nearly half the $92 million cost of building it. The city was also home to Alan Freed, the disk jockey who gave the music its name.)


For Business, the Stakes Are High
WHILE the individual income tax is the target of the reformers, business taxes are sure to be included in any radical make-over.
In fact, the three most prominent plans all try to overcome one of the principal objections to the income tax: that it imposes a punishing double tax on investment by taxing profits and dividends once through the corporate profits tax and again through the personal income tax.


Lisa's Story: A Marine Pygmalion Loses His Galatea at Sea
On Saturday, Aug. 19 -- a sunny day with a stiff breeze from the northeast -- a 72-foot, twin-masted sailboat named Lisa passed City Island about 1:30 P.M., all lean lines and muscle skimming the water.
She had only been out a handful of times with a full complement of sails, so this voyage was a test.


Mumia Abu-Jamal and American Justice
To the Editor:
I had just finished reading Mumia Abu-Jamal's "Live From Death Row" when I came upon Michael Anderson's comments.
I did not recognize the book from his review.


Cachet and Dividends Aren't Everything
NOBODY buys a car just for its gas mileage.
After all, if it conks out after a few miles, it's not a very good deal.
So car buyers kick the tires, check the engine, and take a test drive, all in hopes of avoiding a lemon.
Investors are rarely so careful.
And investors in the Unimar Company, which collects money from the sale of Indonesian natural gas and oil, obviously failed to look under the hood.


These Playboys Know What Sells
IT'S A SWEATY FRIDAY Afternoon in Los Angeles.
DeVante, the lead producer of the singing group Jodeci and to many its main heartthrob, is leaning against a wall in the hallway of a local radio station.
A strawberry blonde turns the corner and finds herself just feet away from the 25-year-old tall, brown and handsome star.
She playfully gasps like an awestruck fan.
He answers with a cool, deep laugh.
She walks up to him, says, "Hi, silly rabbit," gathers herself up on her toes and kisses him noisily on the lips.
Later, DeVante describes the woman as "one of the most beautiful people I know." Her name, by the way, is Madonna.
Membership in Jodeci has its privileges.
The group has not only reshaped rhythm-and-blues by fusing soulful singing with hip-hop beats; it has shaped a distinct image, as a foursome of ladies' men.


Miriam Dellheim, Andrew S. Baumel
Miriam R. Dellheim, the daughter of Lorrane Dellheim and John L. Dellheim, both of Poughkeepsie, N.Y., is to be married today to Dr.
Andrew S. Baumel, a son of Nancy and Ira Baumel of Rockville Centre, L.I.
Rabbi Michael Siegel is to officiate at the West Park Wine Cellars in West Park, N.Y.
The bride, 27, was until recently a nurse practitioner at the Erie Family Health Center in Chicago.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, from which she also received a master's degree in nursing.


Limited Engagement
To the Editor:
Steve Pond's article on the injustices endured by contemporary soundtrack composers  [ "The Soundtrack Boom Leaves Composers at a Loss," Aug. 20 ]  mentions the short shrift given to Elliot Goldenthal over his "Batman Forever" score as opposed to the lavish attention paid to the rock songs in the film.
Yet the real irony is that the two heavily promoted songs by U2 and Seal are used only during the final credits and nowhere else.
DAN RECCHIA  Mamaroneck, N.Y.


A Tough Guy Takes Over A Marshmallow Team
"Do I know Rich Kotite? Size 15 shoes," said Mike Cosby of Gerry Cosby, the landmark sports-equipment store abutting Madison Square Garden.
"He used to come to us all the time at the old Garden when he went to Poly Prep. He had big feet and couldn't find shoes that fit."
"Rich Kotite?" said Don Turner, trainer of the former heavyweight champion Evander Holyfield.
"Are you kidding? I used to spar with him at Gleason's Gym in the Bronx."


Mastery, and Mystery, in Old Folk Art
COLONIAL WILLIAMSBURG IN Virginia was definitely on to something in 1973, when it presented the first museum exhibition of the state's folk art.
The best of the 20 pieces of furniture shown were three painted chests for blankets and a clock, each profusely decorated with birds, flowers, hearts, scrolls, stars, pinwheels or diamonds.
At the time, no one knew the name of the artist who had painted the images on the chests and clocks, but there were clues: several bore the letters "JSP," and every piece was embellished with boldly graphic motifs that look like exploded versions of the watercolor images on frakturs, the birth and baptismal certificates of the Pennsylvania Germans and their relatives in Virginia.


Ileana C. Herman, David I. Kutler Ileana Carol Herman, the daughter of Louise and William H. Herman of Harrison, N.Y., is to be married there today to David Ivan Kutler, the son of Elaine and Jay S. Kutler of Williamsville, N.Y. Rabbi Norton D. Shargel is to perform the ceremony at the Jewish Community Center of Harrison.   The couple graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, she summa cum laude and he cum laude.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbakcs
WHO WILL RUN THE FROG HOSPITAL? By Lorrie Moore. Warner, $11.99.
A woman coming to the end of her 30's and possibly the end of her marriage looks back on the bond she and her best friend shared when they were both 15.
Her story is "a sad, witty, disillusioned fairy tale," Caryn James said here last year, and Ms.
Moore's "richest work yet."


Ideas &amp; Trends; Riding Out Summer's Last Wave


Irish Peace Talks Are Waiting for Britain
To the Editor:
This is the first anniversary of the cease-fire in Northern Ireland, but the peace is tenuous.
The British Government is now calling for decommissioning arms as a condition of Irish Republican Army participation in peace talks.
This new condition is both unrealistic and unnecessary in light of the critical need to bring all parties to the table.


Antiques, or Old Heaps?


F.Y.I.
Changed Exchanges Q. Does the phone company still use or issue exchange letters (like BUtterfield 8) to identify telephone number prefixes?
And if so, is there any way to get a list of all the telephone exchange letters and their corresponding areas in New York City?
A.
The answer to your first question is: 66. (That's NO.)
Telephone exchange letters, once a source of pride (and sometimes snobbery) among the city's callers, finally went the way of the dodo in the middle to late 1970's, said Dave Frail, spokesman for Nynex.
But it wasn't without some squawking.
The demise of the letters, which paid tribute to streets and neighborhoods as well as prominent families and historic figures, began in 1960.
In 1960, Fredrick R. Kappel took over as the C.E.O. of AT&amp;T (the 236 of 288) and decided to switch to an all-number system to ease direct dialing and directory information, according to "Telephone," a history of the phone, by John Brooks (Harper and Row, 1975).
Early experiments with all-numbered prefixes in Council Bluffs, Iowa, went just fine.
The trouble began when AT&amp;T started to try to take away the letters in bigger cities.
In San Francisco, phone users were so outraged they formed the Anti-Digit Dialing League and filed lawsuits to prevent the change (people really liked their letters).
An October 1962 editorial in The New York Times in support of the league noted disdainfully that AT&amp;T "wants nothing but numbers, just numbers -- digits, just digits."
By the end of 1962, AT&amp;T had a public relations fiasco on its hands and slowed down the plan to change the system, issuing all-number numbers to new customers only.
Thus, letter exchanges were still being listed in city phone books as late as the late 1970's. (BUtterfield 8, made famous by the 1935 John O'Hara novel and the 1960 Elizabeth Taylor film, referred to numbers in a stylish area on the Upper East Side.)
Though less present in the lexicon now, the exchanges are still used by some New Yorkers.
No current maps or listings exist, Mr.
Frail said, but if you check the front of any phone book before the change (available on microfiche at the New York Public Library) , you can find a list of the lost letters.
When Meters Click Off Q.  How do taxi drivers get paid?
I understand they rent their own cabs, but do rates vary?
Do they pay in everything and then get check at the end of the week or do they take the cash?
A.
Drivers rent their cabs for 12-hour shifts, usually 5 A.M. to 5 P.M. or vice versa, said Christopher Lynn, chairman of the Taxi and Limousine Commission.
Rates vary from garage to garage and also depend on day and time.
Friday nights are the most expensive, with rentals being jacked up to about $110; Sunday nights the price drops to $70.
Drivers pay the rental fee up front, and then also have to invest in gas, which runs about $18 to $20 a tank.
Thus, cabbies usually start the day (or night) at least $100 in the hole.
At the end of the shift, cabbies return the cab, pay any late fees (cabbies can be charged $5 to $10 for bringing a car back 10 minutes late) and walk off with the remaining cash.
Which had better be more than $100, or they haven't even broken even.
It's Later, Alligator Q.  I loved the alligators that lined the wall of the walkway between the L trains (at Avenue of the Americas) and the 1/9 line (at Seventh Avenue) at the 14th Street stop.
What happened to them?
A.
The terra-cotta gators have been "deinstalled," said Mona Chen, manager of the Transit Authority's Creative Stations program.
Under the guidelines of the Creative Stations program, artists are responsible for the care of their work.
The gators, the work of the artist Anne Veraldi, were taken down this spring after the burden of repairing and tending for the delicate, chippable beasts became too much.
Their popularity may have been their downfall.
"I think kids may have been running along their backs," Ms.
Veraldi said.
"They got a lot of damage." JESSE McKINLEY Questions (and answers) may be sent to F.Y.I., The City, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Rona G. Shapiro, David M. Franklin
Rabbi Rona Gail Shapiro, a daughter of Dr.
Ann Shapiro and Donald Shapiro of New York, is to be married today in Berkeley, Calif., to David Michael Franklin, a son of Rosalie and Sidney Franklin of St.
Louis.
Rabbi Susan Talve is to officiate at the home of Lois and Gary Marcus, friends of the couple.
The bride, 34, is the executive director of Berkeley Hillel, the Jewish student center at the University of California at Berkeley.
She graduated from Harvard University and received a master's degree in Hebrew arts and letters from the Jewish Theological Seminary, from which she also received her rabbinical ordination.
Her father is the president of the New York Federal Savings Bank and of the New York Harvard Club.
Her mother is a professor of English at the State University at Farmingdale, L.I.


Q and A
Hotels in Yalta
Q.
My son is a Peace Corps volunteer in the Ukraine, stationed in Yalta.
I would like to visit him, and want to know about accommodations. -- Jerilynn B. Hoy, Reston, Va.


Kristin Scholl, Michael Perry
Kristin Scholl, the daughter of Patricia and Anthony Scholl of Wilton, Conn., is to be married today to Michael Perry, a son of Carol and Herbert Perry of Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y.
Mary Lee Brown, a notary public, is to perform the ceremony at the Chapel on Squirrel Island, in Boothbay Harbor, Me.
The bride, 29, graduated from Colby College and is a candidate for a doctorate in psychology at Pace University.
She is also an intern in child psychology at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in New York.
Her father owns Hudson River Communications, technical writing consultants in Wilton.
Her mother is a social worker in the Adler Geriatric Assessment Center at the Yale-New Haven Hospital.


'Road to Nowhere': Still No Return
A proposal for an extensive rail system linking the two Queens airports with Manhattan wasn't the only airport access plan scrapped because of budget cuts.
Plans to build a westbound side of the Nassau Expressway leading into Queens from Kennedy International Airport have also been put off.
Since 1981, two versions of a plan have been proposed to include westbound lanes on the expressway, a one-way highway running east from Cross Bay Boulevard through Kennedy Airport and into Rockaway Boulevard.
But because of budget considerations and changing priorities, neither version of the highway is going to be built anytime soon, said Michael Fleischer, a spokesman for the State Department of Transportation.


If Crime Doesn't Pay, at Least Some of the Criminals Will
Crime is not supposed to pay; it's the criminal who is supposed to pay, in time or money, after sentencing.
At least that's the theory.
The reality is that a criminal often just forgets about the financial part of punishment and the courts do little about it.
But in 1990 Daniel R. Coburn, then a Superior Court judge in Morris County, undertook a one-man crusade to try to change that.


Cuts Imperil Teachers' Education
LIKE many teachers, Mitchell Combs went to school this summer to hone his skills and nudge his salary up a notch.
Mr.
Combs, a social studies teacher at Dobbs Ferry High School, took a course in administration at the Westchester Teachers Center in Hartsdale to help prepare for a team-teaching program he will lead in school this year.
Mr.
Combs praised the high level of instruction at the center, saying that a comparable college course would have cost three to four times the $75 fee he paid.


OLD SMOOTHIES
We always knew "black is beautiful"; that's why we spend so much money at tanning salons and on self-tanners.


Dashing Imports That Saved a Bad Summer
THIS weekend is traditionally the last hurrah for summer, a time to get in the final full measure of activity before school and other new schedules ensue.
So rather than running on about things that should be done for the future, this may be a good time for reflection, a look back at how great some things were.
Some rather outstanding plants excelled during the rather blah summer of 1995, which the record books are now beginning to show had more than its normal share of a combination of heat, humidity and drought.
Through all these climatic adversities, several plants proved to be stalwarts.
Most of them are rather new to this part of the world although they have been around their native lands for quite some time.


ANOTHER CASE CLOSED
As a friend and former physician of Clay Shaw, when I lived in New Orleans at the time of his ordeal, I am gratified to see him finally vindicated and Jim Garrison exposed for the opportunist he was.
Of Shaw's many friends, those of us who are left have waited almost 30 years for Posner's honest voice.
MARTIN PALMER, M.D.


Long Road to Handicap Permit Is Paved With Tickets
Here's one for the annals of parking nightmares:
Kenneth Rosenblat, a paraplegic, has amassed 15 tickets, totaling $775, for parking his van, a white 1992 Ford Econoline with New Jersey handicap plates, in a loading zone on 45th Street between Fifth and Madison Avenues.


Susan Guthrie and Stuart Jamieson
IN Westport, Conn., Stuart Jamieson is hard to miss.
He drives a white Porsche Carrera that is always filled with friends, golf clubs and beach chairs.
He is out almost every night.
A financial consultant at O'Brien-Kreitzberg Inc., a construction management and engineering consulting company in Manhattan, he is meticulous about what he wears, from his eyeglasses, which must be Armani, and his ties, which must be Ferragamo, to his button-down oxford shirts, which must hang on polished wooden hangers in his closet.


Kathleen Condon, Richard Luftglass
Kathleen Mary Condon, a project coordinator at the Brooklyn Children's Museum, is to be married today to Richard Eric Luftglass, the manager of corporate philanthropy programs at Pfizer Inc., the pharmaceutical company in Manhattan.
The Rev.
Ralph Colby, a Congregational minister, is to officiate, and Cantor Daniel Rous is to take part in the ceremony at the Plymouth Church of the Pilgrims in Brooklyn.
Ms.
Condon, 37, will keep her name.
She graduated from George Washington University and is a candidate for a master's degree in folklore at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
She is a daughter of G. Christopher Condon of Folly Beach, S.C., a former news anchor at KSD-TV in St.
Louis, and Clare Condon of Ste.
Genevieve, Mo., who is a folk singer.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
HARLEM  Now Open for Viewing: Status of Women Curators
Though women have held long held jobs as museum curators, few have landed top jobs in the field.
This is the subject of a slide lecture, "Surviving or Thriving? The Status of Woman Curators Today," on Saturday at the Museum of the City of New York, delivered by Dr.
Kendall Taylor (left), director of Art Management Associates in Washington.
"It is one of the few professions that woman went into early on but have not reached the top of the field," said Jane McNamara, a program specialist at the museum.


At the Casinos
What's happening on stage at all the Atlantic City casinos this week.
Tickets are available through Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Bally's Park Place  Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 225-5977.
PARK CABARET "Legends in Concert," impersonations of Neil Diamond, Judy Garland, Whitney Houston, Roy Orbison, Tom Jones, Elvis Presley, Tina Turner, Madonna, Elton John and the Blues Brothers.
Sunday through Thursday at 7:30 and 10 P.M.; Saturday at 8 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $20; $25 on Saturday.
Caesars Atlantic City  2100 Pacific Avenue. (800) 677-7469.
CIRCUS MAXIMUS THEATER Ray Charles.
Tonight at 8.
Tickets: $40.
COMING UP Don Rickles, Sept. 14-17.
Richard Jeni, Sept. 29-Oct. 1.
Claridge Hotel  Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 257-8585.
PALACE THEATER Nancy Wilson.
Tonight at 7.
Tickets: $25.
COMING UP Al Martino, Oct. 6-8.
The Grand  Boston at Pacific Avenue. (609) 340-7200.
COMING UP Liza Minnelli, Sept. 15-17.
Harrah's Hotel Casino  Harrah's Boulevard and Huron Avenue. (800) 242-7724.
BROADWAY-BY-THE-BAY "Guys and Dolls." Tonight at 7 and 10:30.
Tickets: $20.
The Oak Ridge Boys.
Friday at 8 P.M., Saturday at 8 and 11:30 P.M. and next Sunday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Merv Griffin's Resorts Casino Hotel  1133 Boardwalk. (609) 340-6830.
COCONUT BALLROOM Bob Newhart and Julius LaRosa.
Tonight at 8.
Tickets: $30-$35.
Ron O'Brien's "Four of a Kind," with the Four Aces, the Four Lads, the New Chordettes and the Platters.
Monday and Tuesday at 7:30 P.M., Wednesday and Thursday at 3 and 7:30 P.M., Friday at 8 P.M. and Sept. 13-17.
Tickets: $20-$25.
COMING UP Wayne Newton, Sept. 28-30.
Sands Hotel and Casino  Indiana Avenue and Brighton Park. (800) 257-8580.
COPA ROOM Joe Piscopo, Louie DuArt and Frankie Pace.
Tonight at 7:30.
Tickets: $35-$40.
"Sophisticated Rhythms." A five-piece live band accompanies Clint Holmes as he covers hits by the Mills Brothers, Smokey Robinson, Louis Armstrong, Nat King Cole, the Supremes and the Pointer Sisters.
Monday through Wednesday at 3:30 and 8 P.M.; Saturday at 8 and 11 P.M. and next Sunday at 3:30 and 8 P.M.
Through Nov. 26.
Tickets: $20.
Showboat Hotel Casino  Delaware and Pacific. (609) 343-4000.
MARDI GRAS SHOWROOM "The Basin Street Follies," a revue with birds, song and comedy, with new acts every month, featuring Corey Schmidt, animal trainer, and his four birds; Alto and Mantai, sketch comedians, and Duke Daniels, singer.
Monday through Saturday at 8 and 10:30 P.M.
Through Sept. 30.
Tickets: $10.
Tropworld Boardwalk and Brighton Avenue. (800) 257-6227.
SHOWROOM The Four Tops and George Wallace.
Wednesday and Thursday at 8 P.M., Friday and Saturday at 9 P.M., next Sunday at 7 P.M. and next Monday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $30-$35.
COMING UP Ben Vereen, Sept. 20-25.
Trump's Castle Casino Resort Huron Avenue and Brigantine Boulevard. (800) 777-8477.
CRYSTAL BALLROOM Al Martino.
Tonight at 9.
Tickets: $30, plus a one-drink minimum.
KING'S COURT SHOWROOM Dick Clark's "American Bandstand Live: The Beat Goes On." Four decades of rock-and-roll, presented through song, dance, magic, comedy and novelty acts.
Through Sept. 21.
Monday and Saturday at 7:30 and 10:30 P.M.;, Tuesday through Thursday, 3:30 and 7:30 P.M., and next Sunday at 6 and 9 P.M.
Tickets: $12.50 on weekdays and $15 on Saturdays.
One-drink minimum.
COMING UP Steve Lawrence and Eydie Gorme, Sept. 22-23.
Trump Plaza  Boardwalk at Mississippi Avenue. (800) 759-8786.
PLAZA SHOWROOM Barry White.
Tonight at 8.
Tickets: $50-$75.
COMING UP Frank Sinatra Jr., Sept. 28-Oct. 1.
Pat Cooper, Oct. 6-8.
Trump Taj Mahal  1000 Boardwalk, at Virginia Avenue. (609) 449-1000.
CASBAH The Fifth Dimension.
Sunday through Thursday at 7:30 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $12.50.
COMING UP Buddy Hackett, Sept. 22-24.


Offbeat and Arty in the Land of the Multiplex
FOR state-of-the-art brutality, follow the crowd to "Mortal Kombat." All the shootouts you can stand?
Try queuing up for "Desperado." Look at other films high on the current box-office charts ("Dangerous Minds," "Waterworld," "Lord of Illusions"), and there's not an art-house title on the list.
To the moviegoing masses, the term "art-house fare" may sound like trade talk or conjure visions of the snob who goes to the cinema, not the movies.
In New York City, showplaces for these offbeat films flourish, unintimidated by the multiplex (and some in multiplexity themselves).
And if Albert Gabriel Nigrin, the director and curator of the New Jersey Film Festival, has his way, the state won't remain far behind as a serious center for non-mainstream films.


Stacy J. Bernard, Richard A. Davis
Stacy J. Bernard and Richard Arthur Davis, officials with the State Department in Washington, are to be married today in Chevy Chase, Md.
Cantor David Shneyer is to perform the ceremony at Woodend, the headquarters of the Audubon Naturalist Society.
The bride and the bridegroom work in the Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs, where she is a foreign affairs officer in the Office of Strategic Policy and Negotiations and he is the bureau's senior adviser for arms control.
The bride graduated from Cornell University and received a master's degree in international relations from Tufts University.
The bridegroom graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, from which he also received a master's degree in political science.


Toby Lazarus, Allan Lichtenberg
Toby Ellen Lazarus, the daughter of Naomi E. Lazarus of New York and the late Melvin Lazarus, is to be married today to Allan Charles Lichtenberg, the son of Dr.
Eva F. Lichtenberg of Chicago and the late Leo Lichtenberg.
Rabbi Haskel Lookstein is to perform the ceremony at the Plaza in New York.
Ms.
Lazarus, 28, will keep her name.
She is a clinical intern in psychology at Long Island Jewish Medical Center in New Hyde Park, L.I.
She graduated from Johns Hopkins University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a master's degree in psychology from the University of Chicago and is a candidate there for a Ph.D. in developmental psychology and mental health research.
Her father was a commodities trader and was a member of the board of Comex, the Commodity Exchange, in New York.
Her mother is a director of admissions at Yeshiva University in New York.


Old-Style Drudgery Bests a Modern Foe; Workers Use Scoops and Scrapers To Get the Lead Out of Oyster Bay
At the bottom of Jakobson Shipyard lay a half-century of industrial flotsam: rusting iron and oily workmen's rags, glittering lead paint chips and dark sandblasting grit called Black Beauty.
The dirty pink sand needed scrubbing, but no one had ever laundered a shipyard in the state of New York or knew how to wash away the stains of generations.
For cleaning hints, the shipyard's high-tech cleanup crew turned in desperation to a venerable source -- a grainy 1902 edition of the Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company catalogue.


The Perpetual Man of the Hour
THE TRANSFORMATION OF Harry Truman from the hapless, unpopular leader he seemed during much of his Presidency to one of America's most beloved folk heroes began with the publication of one book and reached its apogee with the publication of another.
In 1974, little more than a year after Truman's death, Merle Miller published "Plain Speaking," an oral biography filled with spicy (and, many scholars now believe, largely apocryphal) stories of Truman's life and Presidency.
It became a major best seller, inspired a popular one-man show (starring James Whitmore) and launched Truman's improving image into orbit.
In 1991, David McCullough published his elegant, affectionate biography of Truman, which won a Pulitzer Prize and has now been adapted for an HBO movie.
Unlike Mr.
Miller's book, Mr.
McCullough's was grounded in extensive research.
But like Mr.
Miller's, it became outstandingly popular and cemented, at least for now, Truman's iconic status in the American political memory.


SUNDAY, September 3, 1995; GOOD BREEDING: Pecking Order
Commercial chickens are bred in spacious homes, selected for productivity and then crammed into tight quarters.
Not unlike people in a big city.
As a result, the chickens turn violent and cannibalistic.
To keep them in line, producers chop off their beaks.
But that may become a barbarism of the past, thanks to William Muir, a genetics professor at Purdue.
At the first North American Symposium on Poultry Well-Being, held last month in Edmonton, Canada, Muir revealed a kinder, gentler bird.
If chickens have to live wattle to wattle, Muir first reasoned 14 years ago, why not breed them to cooperate?
So he raised families of young chickens in commercial-size coops, noted which families produced the most eggs and then bred those families together.
Seven generations later, the results are truly rare birds.
"They quit pecking, trampling and fighting," says Muir, "stressing each other out."


At the Olcott, A Penthouse Of Cards
It is 1 P.M. on a Tuesday, and the largest room in the penthouse is packed with foursomes playing duplicate bridge.
Murray Seiler, a retired lawyer, made his four-heart contract and snapped a kernel of advice to an opponent: "You should have sloughed a spade." At 91, Mr.
Seiler is acknowledged as one of the strongest players in the Manhattan Bridge Club.
In a smaller room across the hall, three tables of women -- all of a certain age -- are taking a bridge lesson.
"I'm not going to let you make that bid," chides Jeff Bayone, their instructor, as Elaine Cohen puzzles over a complex hand.
Mrs.
Cohen, a retired movie production administrator who took up the game last year, changes her bid, and Mr.
Bayone nods his approval.


Drawings Teach Young Jews and Arabs
"If you want to teach peace here, you don't start pushing Jew and Arab in each other's face. You start with everyday things, you know what I mean?"
But before she can be asked what she does mean, Maureen Kushner is off to consult with a boy on what shade of blue to use for a picture of the world and to hug a girl who is coloring a pair of huge ladybugs.


Calvin Klein's Models
To the Editor:
As the mother of one of the models, Bijou Phillips, age 15, who was photographed most beautifully by Steven Meisel for the CK Calvin Klein Jeans campaign, I resent the aspersions that have been cast suggesting that I would allow my daughter to be used as an object of pedophilia.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Building a Home for Rockaway's Lost Soul
For 15 years, Leon Locke has collected pieces of Rockaway history.


Era of Privatized County Services Begins
IN it first privatization of a department, Westchester has hired a nonprofit business group to do the work once performed by its Office of Commerce and Economic Development.
The move is expected to save taxpayers $160,000 in the first 12 months and even more in succeeding years as the private group, the Westchester County Association, generates new sources of financing for economic development.
The county has decided to privatize some government services now in order to maintain its Aaa bond rating later on, said Neil J. De Luca, the deputy county executive.
Officials are worried that if they fail to reduce the size of government, they will soon face unwieldy budget deficits.


INSIDE
Balkan Bombing Held Off
NATO held off air strikes against the Bosnian Serbs even though no agreement was reached with them and though there was shelling attributed to the Serbs near Sarajevo.
Page 8.
A Call for National Renewal
Commemorating the Japanese surrender that ended World War II 50 years ago yesterday, President Clinton urged Americans to regain a sense of national purpose.
Page 16.
Riley a Heat Executive
A day after the Knicks settled tampering charges with his new bosses, Pat Riley was introduced as head coach and president of the Miami Heat.
SportsSunday, Section 8.


Deep Pockets, New Try: A Magazine Is Born
The first copies of Brooklyn Bridge, a glossy magazine about Brooklyn, had just arrived, and Melissa Ennen, the owner and editor in chief, was searching for an errant truck driver and fielding frenzied calls from distributors.
"At Time Warner or Conde Nast," she said, "I'm sure everything would be in place."
Hers is not a typical publishing house.
Until now, Ms.
Ennen, 42, had no experience in journalism.
She grew up in Asheville, N.C., worked at the Ministry of Foreign Trade in China and made a small fortune working at her father's ball-bearing business.
Then she settled down in Boerum Hill and was surprised to learn that Brooklyn, a borough of two and a half million people, had no magazine of its own.


Lisa's Story: A Marine Pygmalion Loses His Galatea at Sea
On Saturday, Aug. 19 -- a sunny day with a stiff breeze from the northeast -- a 72-foot, twin-masted sailboat named Lisa passed City Island about 1:30 P.M., all lean lines and muscle skimming the water.
She had only been out a handful of times with a full complement of sails, so this voyage was a test.


Carmel
Ever since 1602, when three Carmelite friars stood on a hill overlooking a pristine bay and named the area for their order, the town of Carmel-by-the-Sea has been inspiring visitors and residents with its natural beauty.
By the early part of the 20th century, writers such as Sinclair Lewis and Jack London had moved in (followed later by artists like Donald Teague and the photographer Ansel Adams), putting up cabins and tents in what would become modern-day Carmel.
Today, this hamlet on the Monterey Peninsula some 130 miles south of San Francisco still combines breathtaking natural scenery with a village as unassuming and low key as anything conceived of by its earliest settlers.


Italian Fare That's Filled With Sensations
IT was unanimous.
Every dining companion on two separate visits thought that Villa Doria in Bellmore was a special place, but each had his own reasons.
"It's the flowers," volunteered an avid gardener.
The opulent bouquet of white lilies and purple lupine on the bar was so perfect we touched it to be sure it was real.
Throughout the restaurant were other floral sensations: oversize vases of giant sunflowers and a sideboard holding a dozen or more bouquets from field daisies to exquisite roses.


Senator Pell to Announce Re-election Decision
Senator Claiborne Pell of Rhode Island has scheduled an announcement about his political future for Tuesday and is likely to become the seventh Democratic Senator to decline to seek re-election next year.
Bill Bryant, Senator Pell's press secretary, said today that the announcement would come at 10 A.M. on Tuesday, but he would not confirm a report by a Providence television station, WJAR, that the 76-year-old Senator had decided not to run for a seventh term.
"I'll let him speak for himself," Mr.
Bryant said.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: UPPER WEST SIDE


Mumia Abu-Jamal and American Justice
To the Editor:
Your reviewer, Michael Anderson, expresses his displeasure with Mumia Abu-Jamal's "Live From Death Row" (In Short, Aug. 13).
He finds the author's critique of the American justice system to be "strangely banal." Mr.
Anderson then chooses these words to summarize Mr.
Abu-Jamal's book: "the rant of a caged animal staring at extinction without any gain of comprehension."


Gold Coast Canape
The wry gleam of "THE PALM BEACH STORY" (1942) suggests fun was had by all: Claudette Colbert and Joel McCrea as a Manhattan couple who spat and light out for Florida; and Rudy Vallee and Mary Astor as rich, sun-kissed brother and sister romantic predators.
And three cheers for the Ale &amp; Quail Club, a hilarious gang of rowdy hunters aboard the Miami-bound train!
Only Preston Sturges could have concocted this lark.
Bless him.
MONDAY AT 6 P.M. and  11:30 P.M. on AMC. -Howard Thompson


'Cement Block' Is an Oxymoron
To the Editor:
The questioner who referred to the "cement block" sign at Billy's Topless Dance Bar on the Avenue of the Americas at 24th Street ("F.Y.I.," Aug. 27) is guilty of adjective error.
What the questioner meant to say was concrete block, for concrete is what is formed when cement is combined with something else.
That something can be just cool air, in the case of asphalt cement; water, in the case of portland cement, or a more complex chemical compound, in the case of epoxy cement.
The semantic muddle was finally settled by the Pennsylvania Supreme Court a dozen years ago when it coined a lilting alliterative analogy: "Cement is to concrete what flour is to fruitcake. ORRIN RILEY  Manhattan The writer is the editorial director of the Concrete Industry Board.


What Do Women Want?
MIRABELLA'S reappearance on newsstands last month, amid an advertising campaign that promised it would be "a sign of intelligent life," once again raised a question that has led to the ouster of more than one magazine editor: What do women want from a beauty magazine, anyway?
Are they looking for articles on Bosnia, or on how to unclump mascara?
Do they want an update on Norplant contraceptive devices, or details on what hairbrush is preferred by 9 out of 10 fashion models?


Michelle Michailoff, David D'Urso
Michelle Anne Michailoff, a daughter of Mary and Theodore A. Michailoff of Pelham Manor, N.Y., was married there yesterday to David Francis D'Urso, a son of Florence B. D'Urso, also of Pelham Manor, and the late Camillo J. D'Urso.
Bishop Patrick J. Sheridan, the vicar general of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Perpetual Help Church.
The bride, 26, is an associate in New York with the media and communications lending group of the Bank of Montreal.
She graduated from Fordham University.
Her father is a computer consultant at the Securities Industries Automation Corporation, a securities reporting service in New York.
Her mother is a staff developer at Public School 33 in the Bronx.


Of Industrial Things Past
BEFORE the coffee bars had spread to Bedford Avenue, before the artists had assembled their lofts and the musicians their recording studios, even before the Poles had founded their restaurants and the Italians their groceries -- before all that, there was industry in Williamsburg: metal spinners and bottling factories, food distributors and trucking companies.
Now, entire blocks of that industrial village stand barren and silent.
Time stands still as a stone.


Marketing Strategy That Focuses on God
WHEN Marc Bloom, the new rabbi of the Jewish Family Congregation in South Salem, graduated from Northwestern University, he joined the business world.
He worked for the Clorox Company, helping to market Tilex.
"It's not altogether different from what I'm doing now," he said recently.


In Memory of . . .
A dinner raises money for two projects dedicated to Vitas Gerulaitis, Aug. 27.


The Whole Earth Is at Stake, but It's Just a Game
Magic in the Water  Mark Harmon, Harley Jane Kozak Directed by Rick Stevenson PG 98 minutes
Jack Black, an inattentive workaholic father, is transformed into a goofy, fun-loving dad after an encounter with Orky, a creature that inhabits Lake Glenorky.
As Orky works his magic, Jack's behavior becomes increasingly strange, and he is committed to a mental institution.
Eventually, Jack's children, Ashley and Joshua, realize that Orky -- and Lake Glenorky -- are being polluted with toxic wastes, and they set out to save Orky, the lake and their father.


Elyse C. Hudacsko, Eric J. Sollod
Elyse Cselle Hudacsko and Eric Jonathan Sollod, information system consultants at Andersen Consulting in New York, are to be married this evening in Basking Ridge, N.J.
Rabbi Laurence Sebert is to perform the ceremony at the Olde Mill Inn.
The bride, 23, graduated from Cornell University.
She is the daughter of Mary T. Hudacsko of Elizabeth, N.J., and Dennis W. Hudacsko of Bedminster, N.J.
The bride's father is an urban planning and zoning consultant in Bedminster.
Her mother teaches the first grade at the Abraham Lincoln School in Elizabeth.


Complaints Lead to a Billboard's Demise
A Queens billboard mural co-sponsored by Arthur Ashe's Safe Passage Foundation about life in the inner city has drawn fire from some black employees of the New York City Transit Authority, who said they found the mural's message demeaning.
They complained and got their way -- most of the billboard was removed overnight on Friday.
The mural, mounted outside the Casey Stengel bus depot in Queens, near the United States Tennis Center in Flushing Meadows, showed a black youth standing on a rundown street holding a tennis racket, with a text about "rays of sunshine" on the "street of the hard life." The Ashe foundation was created to help inner-city children find ways out of poverty, but a Transit Authority spokeswoman, Melissa Farley, said that bus drivers passing the billboard thought it stereotyped blacks as living in ghettos.


Man From Missouri
President Harry S. Truman, who made the decision to drop the atomic bomb, who instituted the Marshall Plan to rebuild Europe after World War II and who left office in 1952 with an approval rating of less than 33 percent is getting the TV treatment.
"TRUMAN" is an adaptation of the Pulitzer Prize winning David McCullough biography.
The film -- on SATURDAY at 8 P.M. on HBO -- stars Gary Sinise and was directed by Frank Pierson.
The large cast includes Diana Scarwid as Bess Wallace Truman; Pat Hingle as Boss Pendergast, who put Truman on the political road, and Daniel von Bergen as General Douglas MacArthur, who tested the President and the Presidency; Colm Foere as Charlie Ross, and Harris Yulin as George Marshall.


Turning the Tables
To the Editor:
In his article "With Henri Cartier-Bresson, Surrounded by His Peers"  [ Aug. 20 ] , Michael Kimmelman writes that the famed photographer "says that he doesn't like interviews." This is an understatement, for Cartier-Bresson's abhorrence of being interviewed and photographed has long been part of photographic lore.


Brown Knows Fame Could Be Fleeting
Dave Brown used to be able to go anywhere he wanted and not be recognized.
He is tall and lanky and good-looking, so people would give him a curious stare, then move on.
Some would think he was a basketball player.
If he was at a restaurant with friends, others thought he was just some guy.
He could play golf and no one would recognize him, even if he birdied every hole.
He could shoot some hoops and no one would gawk.
That was the Dave Brown of old.
Then he became the starting quarterback for the Giants.
And as only politics, sports, or a hit situation comedy can do, Brown was pushed at warp speed into the spotlight.
His face has been on the cover of magazines and he has been analyzed on ESPN.
A walk into a restaurant now brings autograph seekers with their pens and pads.
He tries to be polite and amicable at all times, but sometimes a man would just like to have his pasta salad in peace.


Burmese Blues
To the Editor:
My visit to Myanmar in June 1994 left a different impression from the Beckers'.
My son and I booked our eight-day tour through Absolute Asia in New York.
They booked through Diethelm Travel, as the Beckers did.
When we arrived at Yangon airport, we were greeted by a representative of Sri Asia, the organization that was used on the Beckers' trip.
This was not a surprise because the Diethelm representative who met us in Bangkok had told us in advance.
We had different hotels than scheduled in Mandalay and in Yangon.
Each change was explained clearly and was plausible.
We were impressed with the Sri Asia staff and the efficiency of handing us off to different guides as we went from Yangon to Mandalay and from Pagan back to Yangon.
We were met at each city and transported directly to our hotel.
We were guided to all the points of interest listed in our itinerary.
We would not hesitate using Absolute Asia, Diethelm Travel or Sri Asia again.
WILLIAM RONAI  East Northport, L.I.


Aug.27-Sept.2: A Shock Too Far; The Envelope Shuts On Calvin Klein
For almost 15 years, the foremost purveyor of sensuality in American advertising has so relentlessly, and successfully, pushed the envelope of acceptability that critics could be excused for wondering whether a sampler over his desk reads: "It doesn't matter what you say about me as long as you spell my name C-a-l-v-i-n K-l-e-i-n."
But last week, there was Calvin-gate: a campaign for Mr.
Klein's designer jeans apparently backfired, forcing him for the first time to withdraw ads under pressure.
By likening the campaign to child pornography, an ad hoc coalition of complainants from child welfare officials to conservative politicians made use of recent attention that has focused on issues of adolescent sexuality, from the film "Kids" to the specter of obscenity in cyberspace.


Jacqueline Judson, Kevin Harmonay
Jacqueline D. Judson, a daughter of Colette and Franklin S. Judson of Greenwich, Conn., was married there on July 15 to Kevin Harmonay, a son of Marilyn and Richard Harmonay, also of Greenwich.
The Rev.
Mark Connolly officiated at St.
Michael's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Harmonay, 34, teaches the first grade at the Ox Ridge School in Darien, Conn.
She graduated from Virginia Commonwealth Universityand received a master's degree in education from the Sacred Heart University in Fairfield, Conn.
Her father retired as the president of Stroheim &amp; Romann, fabric distributors in New York.


On Sunday; After Science Of Budgeting, Art of Teaching
SUSIE Durant, daughter of farmers and fishermen from South Carolina, came north to New York in 1958.
She had a high school diploma and a way with kids.
She has taught at Public School 15 in Red Hook, Brooklyn, for 26 years.
Rosalyn Irving, daughter of a subway conductor and a Queens housewife, graduated from P.S. 140 and later from Queens College.
At 10, she realized her dream was to teach, and she has spent the last 32 years of her life doing just that in the city's public schools, the past 21 at P.S. 7 in the Bronx.
"I'm a child of the city," she said.


And Now, Presenting the . . . Mega-Deli


Appraising the Role of the Appraiser
APPRAISERS, whether independent or hired by a bank or other lender, are somewhat remote figures compared to the real estate agents, lenders and lawyers involved in home sales or home equity loans.
But virtually every loan applicant will have to rely on an appraisal to set a value on the property against which the loan is to be made.
Despite a fleeting one-time appearance, the appraiser's function is central to the lender's decision to grant the loan, deny it or reduce it.
Until recently the appraiser was unregulated and the borrower had little recourse from a lender's decision based on the appraisal.


The Next Wave In Mega-Retail: The Global Deli
Sooner or later, it was bound to happen.
First came the invasion by the big suburban-style retailers like Home Depot, Toys 'R' Us, Pathmark, Bradlees, Staples, Herman's, Crate and Barrel, Tops, Sports Authority and Bed, Bath and Beyond.


Words' Power, Not Special Effects
IT isn't every American summer stock production that luxuriates in rehearsing -- for three weeks, mind you -- on a London stage, the very same stage where the play at hand has been running for years.
But then nothing about "The Woman in Black," which opens a two-week run at the Westport Country Playhouse tomorrow, is going the stock way of summer theater.
A spooky English thriller, a genre that's all but vanished from the American theater experience, the adaptation by Stephen Malatratt of a novel by Susan Hill, began its seventh year in June at the Fortune Theater in the West End.
Before moving to the Fortune, the play ran more than six months in three other London playhouses.


Amy L. Brout, Robert McHugh
Amy Louise Brout, a daughter of Joan and Alan Brout of Larchmont, N.Y., was married yesterday to Robert Anthony McHugh, a son of Mary and Anthony McHugh of Seaford, L.I.
Rabbi Charles Familiant performed the ceremony at the Crocker Mansion in Hillsborough, Calif.
The Rev.
John Hester, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Brout, 31, is keeping her name.
She is the Western region sales manager in San Francisco for the Loan Pricing Corporation, a financial information company in New York.
She graduated from Dartmouth College and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father retired as a senior partner in BDO Seidman, an accounting firm in New York.


RESULTS PLUS
BOXING  Bruno Wins the Title
Frank Bruno won the heavyweight championship in his fourth attempt last night in London, registering a unanimous decision over Oliver McCall to take his World Boxing Council title.


The Tax Code Heads Into the Operating Room
FLAT tax, consumption tax, value-added tax, national sales tax, unlimited savings allowance tax: The jargon is largely new, but the underlying politics are familiar.
Many Americans loathe the personal income tax, and influential lawmakers are beating the bushes for a winning replacement.
While President Clinton has yet to offer his own ideas on what may well be a central issue in the 1996 campaign, just about every other important politician in Washington is backing one of the several tax overhaul plans floating around today.


Congressman Convicted in Sex Case to Resign
Representative Mel Reynolds, convicted last week of having sex with a 16-year-old girl three years ago, announced his resignation from Congress on Friday night during a television interview in which he continued to maintain his innocence and bitterly criticized some other House Democrats.
Mr.
Reynolds, who overcame poverty as a youth to become a Rhodes scholar and later a rising star in Democratic politics here, made the announcement in Los Angeles on the CNN television program "Larry King Live" with his wife, Marisol, at his side.


The Sad State of the Parties
Thomas Kean's decision not to run for the New Jersey Senate seat being vacated by Bill Bradley is at once sad and instructive.
It is sad because he was a useful Republican Governor and in all likelihood would have been a useful senator.
It is instructive for what it reveals about Washington, about the disheveled condition of our two major political parties and about the ferment affecting American politics in general.
Mr.
Kean's reasons for not seeking membership in the Senate broadly parallel Mr.
Bradley's reasons for leaving it.
Mr.
Bradley said he was "disgusted with the politics of both parties" and their inability to find common ground.
Mr.
Kean, rather more passionately, said that Washington in general and Congress in particular had become uncivil, "mean-spirited" and relentlessly inhospitable to moderate voices like his own.


The Forest Primeval


The Rising Cost Of Taking a Trip
PEOPLE taking their vacations now will probably find that things cost more than they planned when they drafted their budget last spring, although rising prices at the filling station have apparently peaked.
Gasoline and diesel-fuel prices in June were 8 percent above those in June 1994, according to the Federal Consumer Price Index; but by July, these prices were only 3.1 percent above the year before.
According to Patrick C. Jackman of the Bureau of Labor Statistics, which prepares the index, filling-station prices follow by a few months the movement of crude-oil prices, and these have been declining.


Foreign Affairs; The View From Taipei
The crisis simmering today between Taiwan and mainland China has replaced Korea as the powder keg voted most-likely-to-explode by Asian leaders.
The man holding the fuse is Lee Teng-hui, President of Taiwan, father of Taiwan's democratic reform movement and the only person in the world whose receipt of an alumni award plaque from Cornell University almost triggered a war across the Straits of Taiwan.
President Lee invited me over for an interview Friday in his office in downtown Taipei.
The conversation left me both reassured and disquieted.
It was reassuring because Mr.
Lee is an unlikely fuse.
A sober, owlish man, who weighed his words carefully, he evinced a strong grasp of the red lines that constrict Taiwan's behavior -- red lines he is certainly trying to push out but won't likely breach.
It was disquieting, though, because, as he made clear, this is a plastic moment in relations between China and Taiwan, a time when new pressures are bending old constraints to the breaking point.
The potential for miscalculation by Beijing or Taipei is enormous.


Despite Big Welcome, Jaguars Foiled in Debut
If you believe Michael Barrow, the Houston Oilers' linebacker, the National Football League did everything in its power today to assure the Jacksonville Jaguars would have a successful league debut.
"Believe me, this was a conspiracy," Barrow said after Houston's 10-3 victory at Jacksonville Municipal Stadium before 72,363, including N.F.L.
Commissioner Paul Tagliabue.


Gordon First On Late Sprint
Jeff Gordon, driving a Chevrolet Monte Carlo, took the lead with 35 laps to go today and won the Mountain Dew Southern 500 at Darlington Raceway.
Gordon held off Dale Earnhardt, who was second in a Chevy, and Rusty Wallace, whose Ford Thunderbird was third, over the last nine laps after a late yellow flag.
Gordon, who won $70,630, spun in Turn 1 early in the race but avoided a crash.
He passed John Andretti's Ford Thunderbird on the 333d lap and led by 0.66 seconds at the finish.


U.S. Leads Japanese Into Information Age
When the Compaq Computer Corporation and the Dell Computer Corporation invaded the Japanese market three years ago with personal computers selling for half the price of the local varieties, rival Japanese companies braced for trouble: declining market share, falling profits, or worse.
But instead of killing the Japanese personal computer industry, the American onslaught liberated it.
Prodded by what is known here as "Compaq shock," Japanese manufacturers have become fiercer competitors, cutting their prices drastically.
The result has been a boom in sales that is benefiting the Japanese manufacturers as much as, if not more than, the Americans.


After an Anarchist Melee, Neighbors Reclaim a Park
Peace came yesterday to a tattered East Village patch of weeping willows and prize tomato plants that has become an unlikely epicenter of youthful anarchy.
A day after a bottle-throwing melee led to the arrests of 25 people gathered for an impromptu beer party of punk rockers and self-professed anarchists, La Plaza Cultural was locked and almost silent.
And even some of the anarchists confessed dismay at the chaos that had beset the community park at Ninth Street and Avenue C.


METRO DIGEST
FACTORIES IN NEW YORK PROSPER IN NICHES
New Yorkers often look at neighborhoods like Long Island City, Queens, and see only vacant warehouses and factories, idle piers and other fading remnants of the city's industrial past.
Few realize that a new plant on 38th Avenue produces fresh pita each day for the city's Greek diners and restaurants.
Nor do they know that thousands of custom-made mannequins are churned out at a factory on 43d Avenue each year, just a few blocks from a company that assembles plastic teeth and jaws used to train dental students.  [ Page 1. ] NEW YORK CITY


Drivers Go Looking For Bumps in the Road
Find a smallish patch of loose sand.
Add a crop of boxy, four-wheel-drive vehicles that cost around $50,000 apiece, plus drivers whose previous experience leaving the pavement might consist of a wide turn on the country club lawn.
Then, voila!
You, too, can have an off-road driving clinic.
The four-wheel-drive vehicle has become the trademark of those striving for adult, baby-boomer toys that say "I am not my parent." But perhaps no one sweats more about avoiding the staid image of a (shudder) station wagon than those who drive a Range Rover or one of its two smaller relatives.


Another Bomb Wounds 4 in Paris


H.M.O.'s for Welfare Recipients
The State Human Services Department is gradually requiring people who receive Medicaid through the Aid to Families with Dependent Children program to enroll in health maintenance organizations.
The 128,000 affected recipients in Hudson, Camden and Gloucester Counties will have to choose an H.M.O. this month to retain Medicaid coverage.
Starting in six months, the 101,000 A.F.D.C. recipients in Essex County will have to follow suit.


Years of Pain Turning Happy For a Bluesman; With His 'Lady Luck' Guitar, A Return to Playing in Public
In the Bronx, there lives a man for whom the road to health is paved with the strings of a guitar.
Darnell Ellis strums hello to the sunrise.
And plays and plays until his pains are gone.
It was on an afternoon in June that a social worker named John Bruno went to Mr.
Ellis's apartment carrying an electric guitar bearing the name "Lady Luck." Mr.
Ellis, a recovering alcoholic who was once homeless, held it in his hands, and played the guitar for the first time in seven years.


Seoul Journal; Where a Culture Clash Lurks Even in the Noodles
If her parents sent Jennifer Kim to her ancestral homeland for the summer so she would meet a nice Korean man to marry, the plan backfired.
"When they go out with you, they treat you like a queen," Miss Kim, a 21-year-old Korean-American from Laguna Beach, Calif., said of Korean men.
"But I know that if you marry one, you're in the kitchen and treated like a dog."


When an Early Triumph Raises the Stakes Forever
Richard Wright's career can be seen as confirmation of F. Scott Fitzgerald's bleak observation that "there are no second acts in American life." As "Richard Wright: Black Boy" tells the story, Wright's first novel, the critically praised, best-selling "Native Son," brought him a success that he never again approached.
Tonight's 90-minute appreciation takes Wright from his childhood in Mississippi, where he was born into a sharecropper's family 87 years ago today, to Chicago, where he wrote for Communist Party publications; to New York, where "Native Son," published in 1940, made him an international literary figure; to exile in France, where he died in 1966 at the age of 58.


In America; Problems Of Parenting
Hugh Price always speaks softly and respectfully, which means he always runs the risk of not being heard.
Mr.
Price is the president of the National Urban League and in speeches and interviews recently he has spoken candidly about the problem of parenting.
Mr.
Price's focus has been on the African-American community but his comments for the most part apply to everyone.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:  TUESDAY  Witco Corp WEDNESDAY  Browning-Ferris Inds Central Newspapers Inc Handleman Co Hayes Wheels Intl Helmerich &amp; Payne Inc LG &amp; E Energy Corp Pioneer Int Shs Inc Premier Indl Corp Stanhome Inc Trinet Corp Rlty THURSDAY  Allegheny Pwr Sys Inc Bradley Real Estate Capstead Mtg Corp Engelhard Corp MBIA Inc Pep Boys  Pratt &amp; Lambert Utd Rowe Furniture Corp York Intl Corp FRIDAY  BMC Inds Inc Crimi Mae Inc Gencorp Inc


Freshman Service Requirement
Trenton State College's 1,080 freshmen will be required for the first time to complete 10 hours of community service, by working for either a charitable organization or an inner-city agency.


Mariners Cheer Ripken and Go On to Win
Mariners 9, Orioles 6
The Seattle Mariners applauded Cal Ripken for playing in his 2,128th consecutive game yesterday, then went out and put the finishing touches on a 9-6 victory over the Baltimore Orioles at Camden Yards.


Why Should We Adjust to Job Market Reality?; Redirect Peace Dividend
To the Editor:
Re "Skilled Workers Watch Their Jobs Migrate Overseas" (front page, Aug. 28): America's skilled and professional workers are paying an enormous tax burden to defend multinational corporate interests abroad and to protect sea lanes and markets in Asia, freeing Asian countries to invest in education and infrastructure.


A Domestic-Violence Shift
Under a new state law, judges dealing with domestic-violence cases will be able to issue restraining orders only when the abuser and the victim are no longer living under the same roof.


Bullpen Proves That 9 Runs Aren't Enough
If the Yankees fail to qualify for the post-season, they have only to look at games like yesterday's 10-9 loss to the Oakland Athletics for the reason why.
The Yankees tied their season-high with 18 hits.
They scored eight runs in the first five innings.
They led by three runs after five and were still up by two going into the eighth.


Bush's Sponsor in Japan Is Linked to Rev. Moon
Former President George Bush is planning to spend nearly a week in Japan this month speaking at meetings sponsored by an organization connected with the Unification Church of the Rev.
Sun Myung Moon.
The organization, the Women's Federation for World Peace, was founded and is headed by Hak Ja Han Moon, the wife of the church leader.
At the "Global Family Festival" on Sept. 14 in the Tokyo Dome baseball stadium, Mr.
Bush and his wife, Barbara, are to share the speaker's podium with Mrs.
Moon.


Sidney Freidberg, Lawyer, Dies at 81
Sidney Freidberg, a retired lawyer who had practiced in New York and Washington and was a member of the Foreign Claims Settlement Commission, died on Thursday in a nursing home in Briarciff Manor, N.Y.
He was 81 and lived in Pelham, N.Y.
He had Parkinson's disease, said his daughter, Emily Merrick.


Malfunctioning Bomb Wounds Four in Paris
A bomb exploded at a crowded street market in Paris near the Place de la Bastille this morning, leaving four people slightly hurt.
The police said that the bomb, packed into a pressure cooker and hidden in a bag under a vegetable stand, did not cause greater damage because of a malfunction.
But the incident clearly left a deep impact on Government officials who are facing what they believe to be a campaign of terrorism directed by Islamic militants from Algeria.


Bridge
Place two thumbs on the East-West hands, and plan your play in six clubs after the heart king is led.
West has contributed a Michaels cue-bid, showing length in the major suits.
This is one of 111 single-dummy problems for intermediate players titled "One Trick Short," by P. S. N. Sarma, an Indian bridge columnist.
It is available from Bridge World, 39 West 94th Street, New York, N.Y. 10025 for $15.95 including mailing.


Don't Ponder New Westways When Subways Are Crumbling; Bring On the Green
To the Editor:
Re "The Road Not Taken" (Op-Ed, Aug. 26): No one could more urgently wish for a park on the West Side waterfront than the people who fought Westway and those who were confident that the will of the majority would prevent its being built.


INSIDE
Ultimatum to Bosnian Serbs
The Bosnian Serbs were told they must remove their heavy weapons from around Sarajevo by a deadline or face renewed bombing.
Page 3.
The Price of Consent
John C. Malone, the chief of Tele-Communications Inc., has been holding up Time Warner's takeover of Turner Broadcasting.
Page 35.
A Day for Former Champions
Three former Open champions, Pete Sampras, Steffi Graf and Gabriela Sabatini, defeated opponents considered to be future stars.
Page 27.
Kicking Off the Season
On the opening day of the National Football League season, the two newest teams didn't embarrass themselves while the defending champion didn't impress many.
The Carolina Panthers lost in overtime to the Falcons, 23-20, in Atlanta, and the Jacksonville Jaguars lost by 10-3 at home to the Houston Oilers.  *
The San Francisco 49ers, the defending Super Bowl champions, struggled during a 24-22 victory over the Saints in New Orleans. *
Despite having a new head coach, the Jets could not keep up with the Dolphins in Miami and lost, 52-14. *The Raiders made a triumphant return to Oakland, Calif., defeating the San Diego Chargers, the defending A.F.C. champion, by 17-7.
Because of holiday production requirements, The Times is printed today in two sections.
SportsMonday begins on page 27, Business Day on page 35.


Racism of a Rogue Officer Casts Suspicion on Police Nationwide
Ever since white police officers battled black rioters and demonstrators in the streets of America's cities in the 1960's, police departments around the country have struggled to shed their reputations as enforcers of the prevailing white culture.
Nearly 30 years later, the audiotaped bigotry of a former Los Angeles police detective, Mark Fuhrman, reverberated last week not only through the Los Angeles courtroom where O. J. Simpson is on trial on murder charges but also through the nation, convincing many Americans that the police still have a long way to go.


'Stopping Emmitt' Is Giants' Concern
To the Giants, the word Emmitt is a dirty one.
And around here he is not known as Emmitt Smith.
It is just Emmitt.
The Giants and Emmitt are on a first-name basis.
When defensive linemen are asked about Emmitt, their faces tighten as if they have just been punched in the stomach.
One player said he has watched so much film on Emmitt that he knows what kind of cologne he wears -- Calvin Klein, he speculated.
The defensive coordinator, Mike Nolan, chuckled for about 30 seconds and almost choked on an apple when asked how he plans to stop Emmitt on Monday night.
"First I'm going to try 11 guys with an 'S' on their chest," Nolan said.


Holiday Today
Today is Labor Day. NEW YORK


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  None  Wednesday  None  Thursday  Productivity 2d Qtr.. . .
Revised  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Consumer Borrowing . . .
July


Plane Crash Kills Pilot
A single-engine plane towing an advertising banner along the coast crashed several miles from Atlantic City International Airport yesterday, killing the pilot.
The plane, a Piper PA-18, went down in a wooded area in Egg Harbor Township about 12:03 P.M., said Arlene Salac, a Federal Aviation Administration spokeswoman.


Finally Reckoning With Rock History
Chuck Berry had the first word and the last at the Concert for the Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame and Museum on Saturday night, nearly seven hours of rock oldies and tributes performed for the 60,000 people at Cleveland Stadium and those watching the live HBO telecast.
At 2:15 A.M.
Sunday, with Bruce Springsteen at his side, he sang, "It's got a backbeat, you can't lose it/Any old way you choose it." He was a living symbol of rock's heritage being honored and preserved; so is the Hall of Fame.
The concert, of songs by Hall of Fame members, was a show of rock unity.
Pioneers from the 1950's (Little Richard, Johnny Cash, Jerry Lee Lewis) and figures from the 1960's and 70's (James Brown, Robbie Robertson of the Band, the Kinks, Booker T and the MG's, Martha and the Vandellas, the Allman Brothers Band, George Clinton, Sam Moore of Sam and Dave, Jackson Browne) shared the bill, and sometimes the stage, with current hit makers (Melissa Etheridge, John Mellencamp, Jon Bon Jovi, Natalie Merchant, Slash) who played old songs.


Soul-Searching on Labor Day
For at least two decades, it has been a ritual of Labor Day in America to point out the decline and fall of organized labor.
The political downward spiral of unions is underscored this year by a Republican Congress vowing to undo job safety regulations and other hard-won achievements of workers.
But Labor Day of 1995 also arrives with a rare opportunity for labor's renewal.
The beginning in earnest of the 1996 Presidential election campaign comes just as labor's own leadership is engaging in an unusual bout of soul-searching.
Criticism of organized labor's past lethargy and parochialism is echoing through the fierce battle for the presidency of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., which got under way after the retirement last month of the venerable but stolid Lane Kirkland.
Reflecting the times of his long tenure, Mr.
Kirkland often seemed more interested in cold war politics abroad than the erosion of union strength at home.
Now his handpicked successor, Thomas Donahue, may well be swept from office by a vigorous challenge from an insurgent, John Sweeney.


Netscape Run: $12 to $28 To $74 to $48
Netscape, the hottest initial public offering of 1995, is proving to have been a good deal only for those who got in at the offering and got out fast.
The company, which dominates the small market of providing software for browsing the Internet, faces competition: the Microsoft Network, which is included with Microsoft's new Windows 95 operating system, uses different software.
But Netscape has rushed out a product to be used with Windows 95.


G.O.P. EFFORTS PUT TEACHERS' UNIONS ON THE DEFENSIVE
As schools reopen around the country, teachers' unions -- for decades the most conspicuous voice in American education and a bright spot for American labor -- find themselves under assault as never before, victims of Republican electoral successes, disenchantment with the nation's schools and the weakened clout of labor in general.
In Michigan, California, Illinois, Indiana, Pennsylvania, Wisconsin and other states, unions are fighting measures designed to curtail teachers' ability to strike and raise money for unions, to limit tenure, bargaining power and job security, or to promote school choice, which threatens unions' power and jobs.


Taking In the Sites; Sacking Simms Was Easy, But Defining 'Chucking' Isn't
The National Football League, not usually known for restraint and refinement, started a Web site on Friday that has the appealing look of a group of sleek running backs in motion, rather than the imposing appearance of a headlong rush of 300-pound linemen.
Unfortunately, not everyone can enjoy the view.


In Political Looking Glass, A Centrist Image of Powell
For months, Gen.
Colin L. Powell has fended off reporters' questions, not only about his political intentions, or lack thereof, but also about his views on the pressing political issues of the day.
But in fact, more is known about General Powell's views than is generally acknowledged.
He has said enough, in interpolations into his standard speech and in answers to questions posed by members of his audiences, to suggest that he holds centrist views on such questions as affirmative action, abortion and social welfare, in contrast to his better-known conservative views on fiscal and foreign policy issues.


Youth Honored for Good Deed
A 14-year-old martial arts expert from East Brunswick will be honored next week for an extraordinary deed: raising $30,000 to buy an artificial limb for a friend born without a left arm.
The teen-ager, Alex Kaplan, and four other youths who also performed altruistic acts will be inducted as the first members of the Kids' Hall of Fame on Thursday at the National Geographic Society.


Freeze-Dried Music: Just Add Artists
Call it a postmodern audio collage. Or pop music's Veg-o-matic. Or soundware.
Whatever it is called, sampling is hot.
It is cheap.
It is fast, and it is more and more an alternative to live studio musicians.
These days, noted Jim Aikin in a recent issue of Keyboard magazine, "just about all of the creative activity in electronic sound" is in samplers, which are snippets of music recorded on disks.
They are the core of a $20-million-a-year industry that is growing rapidly, with many companies saying that their business doubles each year.


Staff Is Cut at Berkshire Paper
The new owners of the venerable Berkshire Eagle in Pittsfield, Mass., have moved to cut salaries and staff, slashing the newsroom work force by more than 25 percent.
Saturday editions of the newspaper reported that 11 of the 40 editorial employees were either not offered jobs or decided to resign when an affiliate of the Media News Group of Denver took control last week of the Eagle Publishing Group, the newspaper's parent company.


Ripken Learned a Lot From Every Day People
Cal Ripken Jr. is said to have a lot in common with Lou Gehrig, the Iron Horse whose consecutive-game playing streak of 2,130 is an eyelash away from being broken by the Orioles' shortstop.
Ripken, scheduled to play No. 2,131 Wednesday at Camden Yards, says he also has something in common with Eddie Murray, who, like Ripken, likely will be enshrined in the Hall of Fame.
For Murray, Ripken says, taught him the importance of playing every day, something Ripken has taken to heart for 13 consecutive years.


J. E. Jonsson, 93, Industrialist And Ex-Dallas Mayor, Dies
John Erik Jonsson, a Swedish immigrant's son who helped found Texas Instruments and as Mayor of Dallas helped heal that city in the wake of President John F. Kennedy's assassination, died on Thursday night at his home in Dallas.
He was 93.
Mr.
Jonsson helped build Texas Instruments from a tiny local company that built devices to aid in oil and gas exploration into an electronics giant, the inventor of the integrated circuit.
But it was his role in helping a stricken city regain its self-confidence in the wake of President Kennedy's assassination that was perhaps his greatest contribution.


Niners Cough and Wheeze Past Saints
This wasn't suppose to be the way that San Francisco opened the defense of its Super Bowl championship.
No way this well-oiled machine was supposed to sputter against New Orleans, committing eight penalties for 55 yards and three turnovers -- one resulting in a score when Saints safety Sean Lumpkin returned Elvis Grbac's interception 47 yards for a touchdown in the second quarter.
No way was Steve Young supposed to get hammered like this -- sacked five times and knocked out of the game temporarily with a sprained neck.


U.S. Drug Agency Tracks Guatemalans
To the Editor:
In your Aug. 27 news article on the future of the Guatemalan armed forces, you state that senior members of the military high command, as well as local commanders, are reportedly involved in drug trafficking.


With a Rebel Yell
Darlington Raceway defiantly calls itself "Too Tough to Tame," an attempt to put a positive spin on the fact that in its 46 years, this speedway has gone from state-of-the-art to an ornery, crash-inducing anachronism.
But the title could just as easily be applied to the spectators who jam the infield of the 1.3-mile Darlington oval track each Labor Day weekend for one of stock car racing's most venerable events, the Southern 500.
They arrive in dilapidated vans and old school buses fitted with beds and kitchens and painted to look like their favorite drivers' cars.
Many fans sleep under plastic awnings on mattresses tossed into the back of pickup trucks or in tents; after walking past row after row of makeshift grills, rumpled bedding and homemade viewing platforms with old bar stools one might expect to stumble upon the Joad family.


Protesters Delay Delivery of Detroit Newspaper


Bringing Down Labor's Giant Leader
"Well," Lane Kirkland said as he opened a special meeting of the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s 35-member executive council in the cavernous meeting room of a Florida hotel last February.
"What's the beef?"
He already knew the answer.
By merely scheduling this meeting he had tacitly acknowledged that the "beef" was with him.


Hartford Mulls Slot Machines to Rescue Jai Alai
When jai alai was introduced here 19 years ago, this obscure sport, billed as the world's fastest ball game, was touted as a glamorous evening's entertainment that would draw thousands into the city to eat, drink and -- most important -- gamble.
"We think jai alai will be very well accepted," Paul Silvergleid, who was chairman of the state's gaming commission, said at a party before its debut on May 20, 1976.
"On a dull night when there's little else to do, it's a beautiful form of entertainment."


NATO Demands Serbs Withdraw Guns Near Sarajevo
NATO issued an ultimatum to the Bosnian Serbs today to remove their heavy artillery from the Sarajevo area, and United Nations forces adopted a new policy by opening a road out of the Bosnian capital without asking for the Serbs' consent.
The opening of the road was largely symbolic in that it consists of a track across the airport and Sarajevans must still use the treacherous Mount Igman road to go anywhere beyond the city area.
But the fact that the United Nations acted unilaterally was highly significant in that its policy has been to do nothing without the approval of the Serbs.


Physical Makeover Aside, Roosevelt Awaits Academic Upgrade in Schools
The instant makeover of this community's beleaguered public school system began with a new fall wardrobe.
Shiny glass replaced cloudy, scratched windows, and coats of beige paint freshened 72 classrooms.
The rear windows on the school buildings are still laced with white swirls of graffiti, but they do not matter so much as the 240 sparkling windows at the front.
The spruce new image of Roosevelt schools faces the street, and the doubting residents waiting for results in the first state takeover of a local district in New York history.


Most Wanted; A Nervous Strain In Technology Stocks
Technology stocks have been this year's big winners, largely on the belief that the industry will grow and grow.
But Wall Street still gets nervous.
Worries of a disappointing quarter at Adobe Systems Inc., the company that brought multiple tsypefaces to personal computers, sent its shares down more than 15 percent last week.


50 Years of Blockbuster Bank Mergers
What has become of the grand New York banking houses of yore?
As New York grew to be the financial capital of America in the 19th century and of the world early in this century, it proved to be fertile ground for the creation of famous and powerful banks, and once boasted dozens of major and hundreds of minor commercial banks and savings institutions.


Link of Interest Rates to Budget Cuts Opposed
Politicians in Washington may hope that the Federal Reserve will quickly reduce short-term interest rates to reward efforts to balance the Federal budget.
But the consensus among economists at the Fed's annual conference here this weekend was that such a move was neither likely nor wise.
While top economists from around the world agreed that economic output in many countries would be slightly larger if the countries reduced their budget deficits, they argued that central banks should be slow to react to political promises of multiyear deficit-reduction programs.
They said central banks should reduce interest rates only as budget deficits actually drop significantly.


Gunpowder Plant to Close
After manufacturing gunpowder for more than 80 years, the Alliant Techsystems plant will close at the end of 1996, leaving 259 employees looking for new jobs.
The factory, formerly owned by Hercules Inc., produces about five million pounds of gunpowder annually, said Rod Bitz, a company spokesman.
Hercules sold the business last spring to Alliant, which will move the gunpowder manufacturing operation to Virginia.


Mets Get Back on Track With a Victory on the Road
Enduring a West Coast trip with a young team like the Mets can be a harrowing experience.
Victories in their first two games in Los Angeles created premature expectations.
Three straight losses after that prompted some re-evaluation.
A worst-case scenario would be to end the trip in a tailspin that could sour the positive feelings that have been created since the All-Star Game break.
So it was important, if not imperative, for the Mets to make some sort of stand against the Giants this afternoon at Candlestick Park and avoid being swept in the three-game series.


Barbs Are Exchanged After Divorce Is Final
The biggest city in the country became too small for Dave Checketts and Pat Riley to work side by side.
If that wasn't obvious before, it is now, with each man trading barbs in the news media.


Why Should We Adjust to Job Market Reality?; Raise World Wages
To the Editor:
In "Leaky Boats on the Rising Tide" (Op-Ed, Aug. 29), Steven Rattner seems to be speaking to difficulties faced by a small percentage of young professionals, rather than average workers.


Why Should We Adjust to Job Market Reality?
To the Editor:
Re "Leaky Boats on the Rising Tide" (Op-Ed, Aug. 29): Steven Rattner's suggestion that retraining plans and relocation vouchers will ease growing income inequality in the United States is contradicted by his own acknowledgment that even jobs requiring high skills are "at risk, since corporations are increasingly hiring educated workers overseas who will work for less."


Don't Ponder New Westways When Subways Are Crumbling
To the Editor:
Randy M. Mastro, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani' chief of staff, laments the days when big-spending government could sock taxpayers for wasteful mega-roadway projects like Westway (Op-Ed, Aug. 26).
His views augur poorly for beleaguered straphangers, who are awaiting funding for long-overdue repairs to crumbling stations, unsafe track and signals, and aging subway cars and buses.


Dick Tracy, Eat Your Heart Out
Move over, Captain Midnight.
Heads up, Mata Hari.
Now anyone can have a real-life decoder ring.
The computer chip has enabled us to manufacture some of the fantasy tools once consigned to the realm of science fiction: hand-held computers, if not Spock's tricorder, and the cellular telephone, if not Dick Tracy's wristwatch -- yet.
Now, the tiny chip has given us an electronic-age decoder ring.


Brooklyn School Races To Clean Out Asbestos
Asbestos-removal workers moved from room to room last week inside Public School 181 in Flatbush.
Construction workers shouted orders.
Officials ranging from the school's principal to School Construction Authority executives to teachers' union representatives met behind closed doors to talk about air-quality measurements and contingency plans.
The race was on at the Brooklyn elementary school, a race against chaos school officials say was spawned by a rebuilding project.


World's No. 3 Player Isn't Happy on Court 16
The electronic scoreboard on the Grandstand Court was flashing as if it belonged across the railroad tracks in Shea Stadium: "JIM, JIM, JIM, JIM, JIM," it read.
Jim Courier tipped his ball cap to the crowd after his straight-set victory over Kenneth Carlsen and strolled off into the cool of the tunnel where the top players and television crews lurk.


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about the increasing use of grass for football playing surfaces misstated in some copies when the University of Oklahoma switched to a grass field from artificial turf.
It was last year, not this year.
In addition, the article misstated in some copies the type of surface used by Oregon State.
It still has artificial turf.


Threat of Privatization Is Robbing Public Employees of Clout
Months before their current contract troubles began, the fate of New Jersey Turnpike workers was apparently sealed when a committee convened by Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman issued a report recommending that the state's toll roads be turned over to private operators.
Since that proposal in January, the union representing 1,500 toll collectors and maintenance workers has been sliding down a slippery slope -- losing one collective bargaining initiative after another, gaining little with a lackluster strike on July 4, agreeing to wage and benefit concessions, and most recently, facing a plan to replace some of its members with electronic toll collectors.


A Lesson On Selling A Book By Its Cover
When the proposal for "Blue Dog," the story of George Rodrigue's preoccupation with painting a blue dog with yellow eyes, first arrived at Viking Studio Books, executives suggested that the book be given a large initial printing, modest packaging and a list price of $17.95 to $19.95.
But Peter Mayer, chief executive of Penguin USA, Viking Studio's parent within Pearson P.L.C., disagreed.
"Blue Dog," he insisted, would sell better as a high-end $45 gift book.


Black Businesses on the Internet: A Market That Was 'Invisible Until Now'
William Jordan Jr., an electrical engineer, and his brother, Rodney, a software designer, wanted to test their concept of "the uncut black experience" -- blacks marketing to blacks and controlling the experience.
And what better way to do that than to use the Internet's World Wide Web?
It offers small black businesses an inexpensive way to market goods and services to a vast audience of blacks and others.
An estimated 10 million to 30 million people worldwide use the Internet.


Steelers Lose Woodson in Victory
Steelers 23, Lions 20
The host Pittsburgh Steelers won but probably lost the All-Pro cornerback Rod Woodson for the season with a knee injury and quarterback Neil O'Donnell for at least two weeks with a broken finger as they beat the Detroit Lions, 23-20.


Suspect Is Arrested in Tollbooth Robberies
A man suspected of robbing tollbooth clerks on the George Washington Bridge of more than $5,500 in five incidents this summer was arrested last night after a chase in upper Manhattan, the authorities said.
Almost seconds after the suspect robbed a clerk of $980 around 5:45 P.M. on the bridge's upper level on the New Jersey side, Port Authority police officers blocked off the New York side from all traffic, said Peter Yerkes, an authority spokesman.


Media: TELEVISION; Should networks use their news magazines to promote their entertainment shows?
ELLEN DeGENERES is a personable comedian who has translated her talents to the prime-time sitcom world, starring in her own show, "Ellen," on ABC.
Is that newsworthy?


CHRONICLE
BILL GATES, the computer software mogul, took some time off from selling his Windows 95 operating system to get his first look at the Da Vinci manuscript he bought by telephone for nearly $31 million last fall.
Mr.
Gates, the founder of Microsoft, got a chance to see the 72-page compilation of ideas and inventions on Saturday in Venice, where he attended the annual film festival, The Associated Press reported.


Blast Causes Fires
Nearly 100 cylinders of hydrogen and other gases exploded in an industrial yard in East Rutherford, N.J., early yesterday in a chain reaction of fires and blasts that reverberated like sonic booms over the Meadowlands Sports Complex and surrounding communities.


The Raiders Hold a Homecoming, And the Chargers Bring the Gifts
Heidi, you can come home now.
It felt as if all your rowdy friends in silver and black were back where they belonged, in the once-lost furor of the Oakland-Alameda County Coliseum.
"Hurt Somebody," a banner in the upper deck implored.
For those whose commitment to excellence goes back as far as the day old man Willie Brown returned his Super Bowl interception into eternity, the sign's translation was simple: Welcome Home.
Home is where the Oakland Raiders -- now that everyone here can link the words again -- celebrated the end of Al Davis's 13-season self-imposed exile to the south with a 17-7 victory over the San Diego Chargers this afternoon.


Edinburgh's Creative Frenzy
The Edinburgh Festival, yes, but which?
Every August the city is host to festivals of cinema, books, television, jazz and, above all, two very different festivals of the performing arts.
It is said it would take two years without sleep to attend every performance or debate at this year's three-week festival.
So where to start?
The least daring path leads to the International Festival founded in 1946, which offers rich, tried-and-tested fare of music, theater and dance by internationally renowned orchestras and companies as varied this year as, say, the Kirov Opera, the Mark Morris Dance Group, Pina Bausch and the Berliner Ensemble.


Helpful Corporate Pressure on Cuba
Frustrated as they watch foreign companies making deals with Cuba, American business executives have increased pressure on the Clinton Administration to end the American economic embargo.
That is a healthy sign.
Corporate pressure was a key element in the recent change in policy toward Vietnam.
Cuba does not loom large as a market for the United States.
But for some businesses it could represent significant opportunities, and it is galling for these companies' executives to watch helplessly while corporations from Japan, Canada, Europe and other Latin American nations take advantage of Cuba's new openness.


Technology: DIGITAL COMMERCE; An author with global ambitions uses the Internet to break into print.
RANDY CASSINGHAM, otherwise known to thousands of loyal readers in dozens of countries as "arcie@netcom.com," is taking a rather contrarian view of commercial publishing on the global Internet.
Mr.
Cassingham is the author of a column called This is True, which now pops up weekly, by request, in almost 120,000 electronic mailboxes around the world.
Not only does he give away his weekly column, which he has been publishing via the Internet since July 1994, he encourages people to do what comes naturally in net culture -- that is, make copies and distribute them with impunity to friends and colleagues.


Many Black Officers Say Bias Is Rampant in Los Angeles Police Force
Officer Bob Grant's indoctrination into what he calls the racist culture of the Los Angeles Police Department began shortly after he graduated from the police academy seven years ago.
His training officer, he said, told him that "to be really effective, we have to keep the people down, we have to keep the soul brothers and sisters down."
"He believed deep down in his heart that he was on this great gorilla hunt, and he treated black people like animals," said Mr.
Grant, who is black.
But when he complained to his superiors about the white officer's racist attitudes, Mr.
Grant was taken off the streets and punished with a desk job, he said.


Markets Closed
All financial and commodity markets and banks in the United States will be closed today in observance of the Labor Day holiday.
Most markets overseas will be open.


Fernandez Ends Sanchez's Bid to Repeat
Mary Joe Fernandez attacked the net last night.
She hit forehand winners crosscourt on the full run and hit her first serve deep into the corners.
She did all of that and more, but the most important reason Fernandez was able to knock the defending champion Arantxa Sanchez Vicario out of the United States Open with a 1-6, 6-4, 6-4 victory in the fourth round was this: She was healthy.


Software Maker Works To Digest and Recover From Acquisition Spree
By any measure Sybase Inc.'s chairman, Mark B. Hoffman, has had a summer he would rather forget.
The once fast-growing software company suffered through its second consecutive money-losing quarter, relinquished its technological lead in an intensely technical arena and saw its share of a hotly contested $7 billion software market erode under pressure from its chief competitors, Oracle Systems and Informix.


WOMEN AT FORUM AGREE TO PRESS ON
Divided over whether to step up their confrontation with China over excessive security and poor facilities, the leaders of an international women's forum here said today that they would carry on despite concerns that, in some cases, freedom of expression was being severely stifled.
The leaders of about 2,000 private groups meeting here for the Non-Governmental Organizations Forum on Women threatened on Saturday to suspend or cancel their meeting unless China withdrew its oppressive security forces from the meeting site within 24 hours.


Time Warner Mulls Management Shifts
Time Warner's proposed buyout of the Turner Broadcasting System generated unexpected complications over the weekend as the Time Warner chairman, Gerald M. Levin, considered rearranging the portfolios of his top managers, including those of Michael J. Fuchs, a longstanding ally in the company's continuing internecine warfare.
A person close to the negotiations said Mr.
Levin had been considering revising the management structure of the merged companies if the deal went through, so that Mr.
Fuchs, chairman of Time Warner Music as well as of HBO, the cable-television movie channel, might give up both those positions.
Management of the music group might be given to Robert A. Daly, chairman of Warner Brothers, the film and television division.


Theorists Look at '94 Voting: Was It Major or Minor Trend?
The nation's leading political scientists spent the holiday weekend looking back 10 months, debating whether the 1994 elections were a modest temblor or the long-awaited big one.
Walter Dean Burnham of the University of Texas called the midterm elections -- which saw the balance of power shift from Democratic to Republican in both chambers of Congress -- no less than the transformation "from one American republic to the next." James Sundquist of the Brookings Institution said the elections were little more than the eighth big political victory since 1946, and "the electorate is up for grabs."


Esiason Ducks as His Receivers Are Covered
It wasn't the sort of throw anyone had come to expect from Boomer Esiason today.
It was thrown on a line, with great velocity and pinpoint accuracy.
It hit its intended target precisely where it was aimed.
"It kind of caught me by surprise," Dolphin linebacker Chris Singleton said.


Humans Against Automatons And Friends Against Friends
There were no long works in "On Fire," the program that Dance Aura presented on Friday evening at the Taipei Theater.
Nevertheless, almost everything seemed long-winded.
The company, a New York-based group founded in June, offered four pieces by its director, Wenndy Ching-Wen Yeh, who has studied dance in Taiwan and England and is now a doctoral candidate in dance at New York University.
She was at her most imaginative in "Personal Mission," in which she successfully conveyed a sense of struggle and aspiration by having dancers climb and dangle from an enormous stepladder.


F.B.I. Braces as Senate Takes Up Idaho Siege
Three years after a bloody standoff between an elite F.B.I. paramilitary unit and a white separatist on a remote Idaho mountainside called Ruby Ridge, the Government's conduct will be examined for the first time under the glare of Congressional hearings.
Starting on Wednesday, the Senate Judiciary Committee's Subcommittee on Terrorism, Technology and Government Information will explore an incident that to some Americans is a shameful symbol of how the Government turned its force against its own citizens.


Solemn Commemoration


Lukas's Serena's Song Romps in the Gazelle
The invasion of the Californians began in earnest at Belmont Park yesterday when D. Wayne Lukas unleashed his commanding filly Serena's Song, who glided to a seven-length victory in the Gazelle Handicap and hurried far down the road to the year's ultimate prize, the Breeders' Cup Distaff.
It will be run at Belmont Park on Oct. 28 on the same track where she also won the Mother Goose in June and at the same distance, a mile and an eighth.
You won't get rich running against Serena's Song at that distance because she is 5 for 5 at nine furlongs, with no sign of weakening.
If you asked her to run an eighth of a mile farther, she might not make it: She ran 16th in the Kentucky Derby after leading most of the way and she ran second in the Coaching Club American Oaks, also after leading most of the way.


Immigrant Threatens Mussels
New Jersey boasts 12 species of freshwater mussels, but they are threatened with extinction by another mussel that originally came from the Caspian and Black Seas.
The zebra mussel, named for its striped shell, has overwhelmed native populations wherever it has spread in Canada and the United States, and zoologists at the State Environmental Protection Department think it is on its way to New Jersey.


Sampras, Graf, Sabatini: Age Before Exuberance
Although the teen-agers turned out in full force yesterday on the Stadium Court at the United States Open, it was the old guard led by Pete Sampras, Steffi Graf and Gabriela Sabatini, those twentysomething former champions of this Grand Slam, who made the rites of experience count for more than raw exuberance.
No tennis lessons were proffered to the kids; instead, their elders took the heartless approach.
Better to turn the youngsters into losers than be losers yourselves, explained the second-seeded Sampras, who faced an opponent with the sobriquet of Scud and treated the young missile-launcher with the appropriate degree of wariness.


Quick, Get Rewrite: Kotite's New Script Has Holes
The Jets faced a dizzying, crushing barrage of six touchdowns just before and after halftime today -- on the ground, via interceptions and, of course, from the arm of Dan Marino -- and were left reeling from a season-opening 52-14 rout by the Dolphins.
But more important for the remaining 15 games was their reaction.
Would they collapse?
Point fingers?
Listen to love/hate radio on Monday morning?


Computers Beware! New Type of Virus Is Loose on the Net
A new and deceptively simple type of computer virus, one that can sneak past security devices by hitching rides on electronic mail and other common Internet files, is causing deep concern among computer security officials around the world.
Only one virus of the new type has been spotted, and so far there are no official reports of damage to corporate or private computer data.
But that virus is in widespread circulation and has used up countless hours of productivity as workers try to eliminate the virus and improve computer security.


Where Armchair Critics Can Run Madison Avenue
If word of mouth is supposed to be the best form of advertising, what happens when it goes digital?
Many of the millions of computer users trolling the Internet are finding out through a news group, or discussion forum, known as alt.tv.commercials, which is devoted to praising, damning and analyzing ads, as well as answering frequently asked questions about the history and production of commercials.


Why Should We Adjust to Job Market Reality?; Women's 76 Percent
To the Editor:
Danielle Crittenden in "Yes, Motherhood Lowers Pay" (Op-Ed, Aug. 22) misunderstands both economics and biology in her effort to defend the inequality of working women as a product of genetic wiring.


Team Stops Woman, 46, Set to Jump From Bridge
A woman jumping off the Brooklyn Bridge's girders was saved by two police officers who were held upside down by four Emergency Medical Service workers in a chilling rescue last night.
The woman, 46, who was not identified, climbed over the edge of the bridge's Manhattan-bound roadwayjust south of its Brooklyn-side stone tower.
Sometime before 6:55 P.M., a call to 911 brought the officers who made the rescue, Mark Brager and Richard Hare, to the scene.


Factories in New York City Prosper in Niches
New Yorkers often look at neighborhoods like Long Island City, Queens, and see only vacant warehouses and factories, idle piers and other fading remnants of the city's industrial past.
Few realize that a new plant on 38th Avenue produces fresh pita each day for the city's Greek diners and restaurants.
Nor do they know that thousands of custom-made mannequins are churned out at a factory on 43d Avenue each year, just a few blocks from a company that assembles plastic teeth and jaws used to train dental students across the city.


U.S. OPEN '95: Sports of The Times; Martina Is Her Name, Tennis Is Her Game
SHE is not the original Martina, nor, apparently, is she the maiden namesake.
Before Martina Hingis hit the women's tennis tour, Martina Navratilova knew there were others named for her.
"There was an African-American a few years ago who came up to me and said she'd named her daughter after me," Navratilova said yesterday, walking through the crowd at the National Tennis Center.
"Then there was the Romanian cabdriver, right here in New York who told me the same thing, and a few people who sent letters."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a front-page article yesterday about the international gathering of women's groups in China misstated in some copies where Calvin Mitchell, a spokesman for the National Security Council, commented on the gathering.
Mr.
Mitchell was in Hawaii, not Washington.


Patents; To get rid of smog, an engineer suggests shooting it up a tall tower and right into the stratosphere.
THE air pollution that plagues cities from Los Angeles to Santiago has generated proposals that are ingenious -- if not always practical -- for getting rid of smog.
One such solution involves a series of mammoth fans.
Another employs giant air purifiers.
Now E. Stephen Miliaras, an engineer trained at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, has patented his own idea for dispersing smog: a big tower that will shoot polluted air straight into the stratosphere.


Cybervirus Whodunit: Who Creates This Stuff?
When the first call came in to Command Software Systems Inc. from a client complaining of a possible computer virus, Sarah Gordon said, she and her associates "worked on it day and night." And within a few days, her team had cracked the virus and distributed antivirus software over the Internet and other networks.
The tougher problem, Ms.
Gordon said, was to figure out the psychology of virus writers.
She had studied them for years and found they were invariably male, they often created viruses for intellectual pleasure out of boredom, and many of them revile viruses that are destructive.


No Headline
"Traditionally, we reward police officers for the big arrest, for the shootout. We need to also reward them for being a part of the community." -- LEE P. BROWN, President Clinton's drug czar.  [ 6:3. ]


Zaire Refugee Camps Threaten Parklands
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 25 news article on the expulsion of Rwandan refugees by Zaire refers to environmental degradation caused by the massive, yearlong encampment.


Central Park Bike Racers Pose Serious Danger
To the Editor:
One recent Saturday I entered Central Park at West 85th Street on my bicycle at 8:15 A.M., on my way to the East Side to play roller hockey, as I do every Saturday morning.
I am 36 years old, fit and active, and an enthusiastic participant in sports.


Holtz Era Suffers Jolt With Loss In Opener
We had been led to believe that this was supposed to be a sleepy opening weekend, a chance to get back to campus, hear the fight song and begin to see how things were going to be when the really important games arrived.
Instead, there was a point on Saturday evening when the beginning of the new season presented the most unlikely of possibilities.


Fun in Foxboro as Patriots Pull One Out
For more than 55 of the game's 60 minutes, the Cleveland Browns and New England Patriots played the kind of touch-and-feel football that teams groping for an anchor on each other usually offer.
It was as if their game plans were similar, their attitudes, too, and one kept waiting for the other to provide that crucial turnover or make that big blunder.
With the clock running down in this cat-and-mouse game, one team had to step out and play to win.
There would be no more waiting for victory to be served.
There was no more time for that.


Sony Hires Own Special Effects Expert
With Hollywood suddenly gaga for technology, Sony Pictures reached for a star to try and capture a little digital magic and become a player in the industry's hottest realms: animation and special effects.
Most studios have been content to use outside companies for most of the computer-generated effects that have become a staple of film making.
But Sony Pictures Entertainment, a unit of the Sony Corporation, announced last week that it had hired Ken Ralston, a well-known visual effects expert from George Lucas's Industrial Light and Magic studio, as president of its in-house digital factory, Sony Pictures Imageworks.


A Book Contract, Riches, and Now, Uncertainty
Nicholas Evans knows that some people hope his multimillion-dollar novel, "The Horse Whisperer," will fail miserably.
He is prepared for complaints about the Hollywoodization of the book business, derisive comparisons to "The Bridges of Madison County" and potentially unflattering reviews.
But despite the poison-tipped knives being readied for the publication of "The Horse Whisperer" on Wednesday, Mr.
Evans has ample reason to feel exceedingly cheerful about his novel, the story of the romance between a British expatriate magazine editor and the man in Montana she enlists to help her daughter and her daughter's horse after a terrible accident.
And the $6.2 million that "The Horse Whisperer" earned from the sale of film and North American publication rights is only part of it.


Firefighters Find a Body And a Mystery
When firefighters entered the smoky basement apartment at 1616 East Second Street in Brooklyn late Saturday, they removed an overheated pan from a burner and switched off the kitchen stove.
Then they caught sight of a television set that had apparently toppled onto a blanket.
Then they spotted two feet sticking out from underneath.
When they lifted the blanket, the firefighters discovered an Asian woman in her 20's whose hands and feet had been bound with telephone wire, said Elbert Washington, a Fire Department spokesman.
A plastic bag had been tied over the lifeless woman's head, which had apparently been smashed in by the television set, Mr.
Washington said.
The woman was still unidentified last night.


The Dunes of Brooklyn
Back home in Crown Heights, the stars were only a few solitary dots, so lonesome they were almost swallowed up by the night sky.
But among the dunes and marshes of Jamaica Bay, the sky was suddenly alien and alive with light.
For 18 young campers, most of whom had never spent the night outdoors before, there were more wonders to be found in collecting pine boughs for a fire, learning ghost stories and camp songs, and toasting marshmallows.
The overnight campout last week at Ecology Village, in the Gateway National Recreation Area in Brooklyn, gave the youngsters a chance to examine marine creatures collected in nets along the shore of the bay and sail aboard a 72-foot schooner, the Mary E. After the rerurn to shore, cries of "Hamburgers!" went up as the children were sent out to gather dead limbs to fuel the grills set up near their tents in the pine groves.


The Remote Control Over a Media Merger; For Time Warner's Offer to Buy Turner To Succeed, Malone Must Be Satisfied
Nobody ever said dealing with John C. Malone was easy.
But until last week, few people outside the media industry knew just how tenacious a negotiator the cable television entrepreneur could be.
For almost a week, Mr.
Malone has been the sole roadblock to Time Warner's proposed merger with the Turner Broadcasting System.
Although Ted Turner, the chairman of Turner Broadcasting, supports the deal, it is Mr.
Malone who needs to be mollified.
As the chief executive of Tele-Communications, Mr.
Malone controls the company's 21 percent stake in Turner Broadcasting, worth about $2.34 billion.
While Mr.
Malone has no legal right to block a deal, neither Mr.
Turner nor Gerald M. Levin, the chairman of Time Warner, wants to do the merger without his imprimatur.
Not only have Mr.
Turner and Mr.
Malone worked together for years, but Tele-Communications is a major distributor of Turner's cable services as well as Time Warner's Home Box Office movie channel.


Virtual Baseball
With its smoldering labor troubles and fan discontent, Major League Baseball desperately needs some September pennant drama to give it a lift.
The prospects look slender, but fans should not despair.
The owners, with their customary deadening touch, have come up with some artificial excitement that is sure to diminish the game.
By traditional measurement, only one of the six divisions offers a close, multi-team race.
That is the Western Division of the National League, where the gap between the first-place Colorado Rockies and the fourth-place San Francisco Giants was five games before yesterday's action.
In the Western Division of the American League, the Seattle Mariners and the Texas Rangers still have a hope of catching the California Angels.
The rest of the divisions are blowouts, with teams like the Cincinnati Reds and Cleveland Indians riding 12-game, even 21-game leads yesterday.


CHRONICLE
The United States has had an actor (Ronald Reagan) for its President and a basketball player (Bill Bradley) for a Senator.
Will Russia have a chess player for a member of Parliament?
Possibly.
ANATOLY KARPOV, the world champion of the International Chess Federation, is running for Parliament, according to the Russian Embassy in Washington.
The election is scheduled for Dec. 21.
What district he will represent is unknown, said Peter Silantyev, a consular officer at the embassy and head of the information department.
When Mr.
Karpov, 44, dominated the world of chess, from the early 70's to the mid-80's, he played what chess experts called a minimalist game, using the fewest moves necessary to quietly encircle and defeat an opponent.


In Suriname's Rain Forests, A Fight Over Trees vs. Jobs
The women still wash in the chestnut-brown river and the men launch sleek canoes to fish and hunt in rituals as old as the rain forest itself.
Life here seems unchanged and unchanging, but when the Granman Matodja Gazon looks into the future what he sees is sorrow for the forest and for his people.
"When our ancestors fled the city they were not guided to liberty by anyone who knew the way -- it was the forest itself that saved us," said the 85-year-old chieftain of this village of around 500 Maroons, descendants of African slaves who ran away after they were brought to South America by Dutch sugar plantation owners in the 18th century.
"If something does good for you like that, you cannot just let it be cut down."


Chain of Fire And Blasts At Gas Plant
Nearly 100 cylinders containing hydrogen and other gases exploded in an industrial yard in East Rutherford, N.J., early yesterday in a chain reaction of fires and blasts that reverberated like sonic booms in the predawn darkness over the Meadowlands Sports Complex and surrounding communities.
No one was injured in the blasts and fires, and damage was limited to the exploded cylinders and wooden pallets on which they were being stored on the grounds of Matheson Gas Products, an eight-acre site on Paterson Plank Road, just off Route 17, a half-mile west of the sports complex, officials said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  STANDOFF AT CHINA MEETING
Groups meeting in advance of the world conference on women decided to keep meeting despite China's surveillance, increasing the likelihood that the problem will remain when Hillary Clinton arrives.  1  BATTLE OVER SURINAME'S FOREST
The country of Suriname, desperate for money, wants to grant logging rights to up to 40 percent of its Amazon forest.
But environmentalists there and elsewhere say the agreement would be a disaster.  1  NATO ULTIMATUM TO SERBS
NATO issued a new ultimatum to Serbs to remove their artillery from around Sarajevo, and a road was reopened without Serb approval to send a message that United Nations policy has changed.  3  REV.
MOON LINK TO BUSH VISIT
Former President George Bush will visit Japan to speak at meetings of a group linked to Rev.
Sun Myung Moon's Unification Church, and the appearance is seen by some as lending the group legitimacy.  2  FRENCH SEIZE THIRD PROTEST BOAT
The French Navy seized a third protest boat near its nuclear testing site in the South Pacific, and the environmental group Greenpeace contended that its protests were forcing the tests to be delayed.  2  A bomb exploded in a crowded open-air market in Paris.  3  THORNY PATH TO KOREAN ROOTS
Seoul Journal: Every summer, many Korean families overseas send their children home to learn about their roots and perhaps meet a special someone, but the result is often an identity crisis.  4  JAPAN'S COMPUTER RUSH
In the wake of American computer makers flooding Japan with PC's selling for half the price of local varieties, Japanese manufacturers have cut prices sharply, producing a sales boom that is bringing the nation into the information age.  35  National 6-8  TEACHER UNIONS UNDER FIRE
Teachers' unions, for decades the most conspicuous voice in American education, are under assault, victims of Republican electoral successes, disenchantment with the nation's schools and the weakened clout of labor in general.  1  LOOKING AT POWELL'S OPINIONS
Although Gen.
Colin Powell has fended off reporters' questions about his political views, more is known about those views than is generally acknowledged.  1  Powell says he was approached by two administrations.  8  TARNISHED VIEW OF POLICE
The taped bigotry of Mark Fuhrman at the O. J. Simpson trial convinced many Americans that the police still have a long way to go to shed their reputations as enforcers of the prevailing white culture.  1  TOUGH ROAD FOR BLACK OFFICERS
Interviews with more than a dozen black officers offer a portrait of broad and deep frustration for blacks who have tried to make a career within the Los Angeles Police Department.  6  WARNING: VIRUS ON LINE
An agile type of computer virus, one that can sneak past security devices by hitching rides on electronic mail and Internet files, is causing deep concern among computer security officials around the world.  1  BRINGING DOWN LABOR'S LEADER
Members of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. executive council recounted the behind-the-scenes maneuvering earlier this year that forced Lane Kirkland, the labor federation's longtime president, from office.  7  RE-EXAMINING '94
The nation's leading political scientists spent the holiday weekend in Chicago debating whether the 1994 elections were a modest temblor or the long-awaited big one.  8  CONGRESS TO EXAMINE IDAHO SIEGE
Three years after a fatal standoff between an F.B.I. paramilitary unit and a white separatist on a remote Idaho mountain, the Government's conduct will be examined for the first time under the glare of Congressional hearings.  8  Metro Digest 21  AN INDUSTRIAL REVIVAL?
Open.  27  Obituaries 20  John Erik Jonsson, former Mayor of Dallas.
Business Digest 35  Editorials/Op-Ed 18-19  Editorials Labor Day soul-searching.
Virtual baseball.
Helpful pressure on Cuba.
Letters  Bob Herbert: Problems of parenting.
Eleanor M. Fox: Don't let antitrust become obsolete.
Labors lost, and won.
Bridge 15  Chronicle 22  Crossword 14


Economics Sinks In At Gay Publications
Debuts, departures and diversification are transforming the segment of the publishing industry devoted to gay and lesbian concerns, as the companies search for new ways to survive economically.
Because magazines and books play a crucial role in linking otherwise disparate homosexual communities, publishers have often put political and editorial missions ahead of financial strategies.
As a result, many have gone under.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Found: A Computer Virus Transported by E-Mail  An agile type of computer virus, one that can sneak past security devices by hitching rides on electronic mail and Internet files, is causing deep concern among computer security officials around the world.


French Navy Seizes a Third Ship At Site of Planned Nuclear Tests
The French Navy captured a third protest ship today in the waters off the Polynesian atoll where French scientists are making final preparations for a series of nuclear tests that have drawn worldwide condemnation.
The seizure of the small, French-registered sailboat came two days after French Navy commandos stormed aboard a pair of larger ships owned by the environmental group Greenpeace, which is saying that its protests last week off the test site at Mururoa Atoll have forced the French to delay the tests.


Sports of The Times; Sorry, Leon, But It Won't Happen Now
LEON HESS might want to reword his ultimatum.
When the Jets' oil-baron owner hired Coach Rich Kotite last January after having fired Pete Carroll, he barked: "I'm 80 years old. I want results now."
But now that Hess is 81 and now that the Jets are 0-1 after yesterday's 52-14 disaster against the Dolphins, "now" seems premature.
Maybe he'll settle for better results by next season or the season after.
Or maybe by the turn of the century.


Ventura Becomes 8th to Hit Two Grand Slams in Game
White Sox 14, Rangers 3
Robin Ventura of the White Sox became the eighth player in major league history to hit two grand slams in a game, connecting in the fourth and fifth innings as Chicago defeated the host Texas Rangers, 14-3, last night.
Ventura also tied a club record with eight runs batted in, last accomplished by Jim Spencer in 1977.
Frank Robinson was the last major leaguer to hit two grand slams in a game on June 26, 1970, for the Baltimore Orioles.


Irate Cabby Dies in Attack On the Police
A taxicab driver, armed with a knife and angry over what acquaintances said was the suspension of his driver's license, slipped into an Upper West Side police station house at midday yesterday, lunged at a female officer and stabbed an officer who came to her aid, the police said.
Two officers opened fire, killing the man, officials said.


9 Arrested After Melee on Party Boat in Queens
The police broke up a wild melee on a party boat and pier in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park yesterday and arrested nine people, but not before several people were pushed into Flushing Bay and shots were fired into the air.
About 12 people, including several police officers attempting to break up the fight, suffered cuts, bruises and other minor injuries, the police said.
Four people were taken to Elmhurst Hospital Center for treatment and later released.


Greece and Macedonia Ready To Settle Dispute, U.S. Says
Greece and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia appeared ready today to end a four-year dispute that had threatened to erupt into war.
The two nations said they would conclude an agreement next week that is expected to lead to improved relations.
After more than a year of mediating the dispute, the Clinton Administration announced today that the two nations' Foreign Ministers would sign the accord next week in New York, a move Administration officials said signaled that Greece would end its trade embargo against Macedonia.


Markets Closed
All financial and commodity markets and banks in the United States were closed yesterday in observance of the Labor Day holiday.
Most markets overseas were open.


RESULTS PLUS
SOCCER  Long Island Wins
With only six seconds left and the United States International Soccer League championship game headed for overtime, Giovanni Savarese of the Long Island Rough Riders turned swiftly on a goal-mouth pass from Chris Armas and slammed the ball past the Minnesota Thunder's flattened goalkeeper to give Long Island a 2-1 victory and its first championship.
After a Rough Rider pass pulled goalie John Swallen out of position, the ball rolled toward the end line.
But Armas, who had scored the game's first goal just before halftime, chased it down and lashed it back across to Savarese.


For New Species, A Few Genes Are All That's Needed
IT has remained one of the central mysteries in evolutionary biology: how many steps does it take for a new species to evolve?
Biologists comparing the DNA differences between two closely related species of monkey flower have found that in these wildflowers, at least, a mere handful of genetic changes is sufficient to equip each species for its different colored flowers and method of pollination.
Longstanding theory, following Charles Darwin's lead from more than a century ago, suggests that new species arise only after the accumulation of many small genetic changes.


New Leader for Prosecutors
The County Prosecutors Association of New Jersey will have a new president on Friday, when Sharon B. Ransavage, the prosecutor for Hunterdon County, takes over from W. Michael Murphy Jr., the Morris County prosecutor.
Ms.
Ransavage, 49, is perhaps best known for her handling of the 1991 trial of Brenda Wiley, a teen-ager who was convicted of murdering her mother and brother in Delaware Township.
She said that as head of the prosecutors' association, she hopes to heighten community awareness of child abuse.


Chess
It is often better not to peak too soon in a tourney.
Aron Nimzovich noted over a half-century ago that the successful competitor paces himself to avoid early burnout.
He should not be upset or impatient over a few draws here and there and not waste energy on a game where the winning chances were very doubtful, especially if pursuing them would consume too much energy.
Perhaps he picked up a disciple in the Russian grandmaster Aleksei Dreyev, winner of the Schweizerische Kreditanstalt International Tournament in Biel, Switzerland, in late July.
Dreyev started this all-grandmaster event in third place after three rounds, but he smoothly stepped up the cadence to lead the field by a point after the 13-round competition was over.


Maradona Blasts Drug Test Procedure
The Argentine Football Association is unfairly targeting past offenders in a bid to crack down on drug abuse, DIEGO MARADONA contends.
Maradona, whose second 15-month playing ban for drug-related offenses expires Sept. 30, said three tests on the striker CLAUDIO CANIGGIA in the last four weeks made a mockery of what was supposed to be random selection.
"This is a country of squealers; it's ridiculous that Caniggia has been tested three times," Maradona said Sunday in a radio interview.
In Argentine league and cup games, two players from each team are picked randomly to undergo a doping test.


William Kunstler, 76, Dies; Lawyer for Social Outcasts
William M. Kunstler, the gravel-voiced radical lawyer whose wild hair seemed to symbolize his distrust of government and his kinship with unpopular people and causes, died yesterday.
He was 76 and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Kunstler died of heart failure at Columbia Presbyterian Hospital in Manhattan after a short illness, said his law partner, Ron Kuby.
Mr.
Kunstler had a pacemaker implanted on Aug. 7 and had been hospitalized since Aug. 28.


New Light Shed on How Enzyme May Play Crucial Role in Cancer
THE span of human life is determined by fate -- in Greek mythology by the three Fates, Clotho, Lachesis and Atropos.
Clotho spins the thread of each person's life, Lachesis marks off its length, and Atropos cuts it.
Molecular biologists have recently come up with a surprisingly similar explanation for the mechanism of mortality.
Their thread is a tassel of DNA tacked on to the ends of the chromosomes and known as a telomere, from the Greek words for "end section." And their counterpart to the three Fates is a strange enzyme known as telomerase.


Sports of The Times; Simms Set Standard For Brown
THE blue wall behind the Giants bench is usually just that, blue.
Banners are not permitted to be hung there by fans, presumably in order to avert bedsheet sentiments that a Giants coach or player or owner should be hung instead.
But with Phil Simms's jersey to be retired at halftime of the season opener against the Cowboys, appreciative banners were allowed last night to decorate that wall.


A NATO DEADLINE IN BOSNIA PASSES WITHOUT ATTACK
A NATO deadline for the easing of the Bosnian Serb siege of Sarajevo passed today with the artillery of the Bosnian Serbs still in place and without any immediate resumption of air strikes.
On Saturday, NATO gave the Bosnian Serbs until 11 P.M. local time today (5 P.M. Eastern time) to begin moving their artillery out of the Sarajevo area or face a renewal of the 50-hour bombardment that ended last Friday.


A Venetian Master Gets Room to Stretch


Don't Let New York's Maritime Business Die
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 30 news article on questions about the maritime industry's future in New York City raises an important issue for Brooklyn and for the city.
It is time for a reassessment of the mission of the Port Authority.
However, to suggest that the city would be "better off if it let some or all of its commercial shipping business just die" is misguided, shortsighted and unwise, particularly with regard to Brooklyn's waterfront.


Ad Institute Seeks a Director
The New York council of the American Association of Advertising Agencies is seeking a successor to Harold Levine, who has served for a decade as director of the Institute of Advanced Studies, which offers training for young employees of agencies.
"It's time for a new director to make his or her imprint on the institute," said Mr.
Levine, 74, a founder of Levine, Huntley, Schmidt &amp; Beaver in New York, who added that he would continue to serve as a consultant to agencies.
The council said it hoped to find a successor before the start of the next institute class in January.


Parading to Honor Some Proud Heritages


Promoting Classical Music As a Cool Summer Postlude
September is upon us, which means it's time for the marketing brains of the classical music business, and whatever politicians they can enlist in the cause, to proclaim Classical Music Month throughout the land.
Inspired by the country music equivalent, which marketing types say is partly responsible for the current boom market in drawling crooners and pedal steel-guitar players, Classical Music Month was first celebrated a year ago, with posters and hoopla and official recognition from President Clinton.
The most tangible achievement of that first year was a logo -- a tilted quarter note against what might be meant as a wavy musical staff except that it has only four of the required five lines -- and a slogan: "Classical Is Cool."
September may be the worst possible time to give a promotional shindig for the classics.
The summer festivals have ended, and the regular concert season does not begin in earnest until the final days of the month.
So even if the buttons and posters declaring that "Classical Is Cool" were to arouse a craving in a listener's heart for, say, an evening of Beethoven symphonies or Shostakovich quartets, the concert world is unprepared to satisfy that desire.


International Briefs; Currency Plan Dispute
The European Commission denounced one of its top economists yesterday for writing a book that takes issue with the European Union's plan for a single currency.
Excerpts from the book, "The Rotten Heart of Europe: The Dirty War for Europe's Money," began appearing yesterday in The Times of London.
Its author, Bernard Connolly, was quoted by The Times as saying that a monetary union was a "dangerous confidence trick" engineered by France and Germany at the expense of other European countries.
A spokesman for the commission said that Mr.
Connolly's book was "completely contrary" to the policies of the European Union, and that he could face sanctions. (Dow Jones)


No Headline
"The only thing less popular than a poor person these days is a poor person with a lawyer." JONATHAN D. ASHER, director of the Legal Aid Society of Metropolitan Denver.  [ A1:2. ]


An Archive in Which Pride Outstrips Pain
The Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture is one of the city's astonishing cultural treasures.
A research branch of the New York Public Library on Malcolm X Boulevard at 135th Street, it encompasses a lecture hall, a theater, two galleries, holdings of more than 125,000 books and a vast archive devoted to documenting black history from Africa to the Americas.
There are few institutions like it in the world, and this year it celebrates its 70th anniversary with two concurrent documentary exhibitions dedicated to the somewhat mysterious man for whom it was eventually named: Arthur A. Schomburg.
It is hardly a household word for most New Yorkers, who might guess that he was a wealthy American, probably of Central European background, who lent his name and fortune to public philanthropy.


International Briefs; Czechs Study Merger Of Two Breweries
The Czech Government is studying a plan to merge the state-run Budejovicky Budvar brewery, maker of Czech Budweiser beer, with Jihoceske Pivovary, which brews other brands in the same plant, officials said yesterday.
The merger would help to open the way for Budvar to resolve a trademark dispute with the Anheuser-Busch Companies, which has been prohibited from selling the American Budweiser in most of Europe.
Busch has been in talks with the Czech Government over the trademark dispute while seeking a minority stake in Budvar.


A $6 Million 'Horse' Finally Arrives for Inspection
THE HORSE WHISPERER By Nicholas Evans 404 pages. Delacorte Press. $23.95.
Nicholas Evans's first novel, "The Horse Whisperer," made headlines in the fall last year before it was finished when Robert Redford snapped up the movie rights for $3 million and Dell subsequently paid a startling $3.15 million to publish it in North America.
Now that "Whisperer" is finally out, it's clear that the novel's purchasers have paid for nothing more than a hodgepodge recycling of old movies and bad books.


Kotite's Jets Too Uptight to Get It Right the First Time
The Jets could have been accused of choking if it had been a game played with something at stake.
Instead, on the morning after, trying to make sense out of the worst opening-day defeat in their 35-year history, the Jets and even Coach Rich Kotite today described this young, amorphous mass of players as "tight" in the locker room before the game.
And then when the game started, they played worse.


Cowboys' Stampede Leaves the Giants Gasping for Air
The circus came to town.
It came on a beautiful night, on a night with a gracious ceremony retiring the jersey of former Giants quarterback Phil Simms.
And it came complete with three rings and sideshows.
The Giants were little more than props, suffering their worst loss ever at Giants Stadium, as well as the worst opening-day loss in team history.
The Dallas Cowboys were in the center ring, of course.
The Giants had talked about how they might have closed the gap between themselves and the Cowboys during the off season.
But before a record crowd of 77,454 stunned fans and a national television audience, Dallas slapped away the challenge the way a parent smacks a child's hand that is too close to the oven.
The final score was Dallas 35, Giants 0.
It really wasn't that close.


Yankees Clamoring Around Bat Rack
To Wade Boggs, the Yankees' resurgence at the plate is not so hard to explain.
"Hitting's contagious," the leadoff hitter said after the Yankees had pounded out a season-high 19 hits in a 13-3 thrashing of the Seattle Mariners yesterday afternoon at Yankee Stadium.


Imported Pasta's Rising U.S. Sales Draw Complaints
Italy's premier pasta makers have decided that America's growing appetite for Italian food is too good to pass up, so with promotional cries of "Eat!  Eat!" they are shipping as much pasta as they can spare to the United States.
With pasta consumption in Italy stagnant and discount stores here pushing prices lower, the American strategy has paid off.
By last year, shipments of Italian pasta to the United States had nearly doubled in four years, to $119 million, and Americans still aren't full.


After Thousands of Abortions, Some Questions; If Practice Makes Perfect, Is Imperfection Malpractice? Doctor in Line of Fire Says No
Accused of botching an abortion on a woman seven months pregnant, Dr.
Herbert Schwarz leaned forward, focused all the authority of 32 years in medicine into one intense blue glare and demanded: "Look at me. Do you really think that I did anything but what I was equipped by my experience to know was the very best for her? The best I knew how? Do you think I did anything but the best?"
That is the question.
Normally, at worst, it would probably be the crux of a typical malpractice case.
But because Dr.
Schwarz performs abortions -- has performed perhaps as many as 45,000 of them, or an average of almost 10 a day, by his own count -- his work carries an unusually powerful charge, emotional and political.
And since one of his patients ended up hemorrhaging and undergoing emergency surgery to deliver a stillborn, 7-month-old fetus, he has been plunged into a maelstrom of allegations and counter-allegations, nasty publicity and legal clashes.


Piniella Looks Around And Sees Good Clubs
Lou Piniella, always a welcome visitor at Yankee Stadium, was discussing the teams in the wild-card race yesterday and scoffing at the suggestion that the team he manages, the Seattle Mariners, would have the best chance of the ragtag collection of contenders to pull an upset in the playoffs.
"What's wrong with Kansas City?" he asked.
"They've got good pitching over there. What's wrong with the Texas club the way they played all year? What's wrong with the Yankees?"


Suit Says Prudential Broke A Settlement on Partnerships
Nearing a final settlement with the last of hundreds of thousands of investors who bought its limited partnerships during the 1980's, Prudential Securities is now being sued by investors who contend that it failed to meet the terms of an earlier settlement involving two of those partnerships.
The lawsuit also asserts that the company breached its fiduciary duty by not getting a fair price for properties sold by the partnerships in late 1993.


Baby's Condition Still Critical
A baby girl who was delivered by Caesarean section after her mother was raped and beaten to death on Saturday remained in critical condition yesterday at University Hospital.
The mother, Juanita Fudge, 28, was eight months pregnant when she was attacked on a Newark street, the police said.
No arrests have been made.


The Giants' Best Play Of the Dallas Game Was Simms to L. T.
The Giants' quarterback dropped back.
Plenty of time to survey.
He looped the pass toward the Giants receiver and the defense was nowhere to be found.
Just where was the Dallas Cowboys' defense?
Totally out of the play.
The receiver grabbed the ball and the crowd roared, a standing ovation.
This was hot stuff.
This was halftime.


The Seats Are Coming Back
Last month, when the Borough of Princeton decided it had had enough of rowdy youths in Palmer Square, officials reasoned that if there was no place to sit down, there would be a lot less loitering.
Despite some objections, all five benches were removed.
But with the end of summer, things have quieted down.
At last night's Borough Council meeting, the high school chess club was to propose that concrete chess tables be placed in the square.
And the seating is slowly being reinstalled.
"We'll do them one bench at a time and watch how they're used," Mayor Marvin Reed said.
TERRY PRISTIN


New York's Democratic Depression Worries the White House
Ten months after its 1994 electoral crash and burn, New York State's Democratic Party remains in a funk: debt-ridden, factionalized, uncertain of its message and deeply anxious about its ability to carry the state for President Clinton next year.
Though no one expected the party to revive quickly after losing the governor's office for the first time in 20 years, even Democratic stalwarts are dismayed and astonished at how the state organization has been struggling just to make a start on rebuilding.


Bilingual Americans Are Role Models
To the Editor:
Re "Mother Scolded by Judge for Speaking in Spanish" (news article, Aug. 30):


Crenshaw to Lead U.S. in Dunhill Cup
The Masters champion BEN CRENSHAW will head the United States team for the Oct. 19-22 Dunhill Cup, with GREG NORMAN and the PGA champion STEVE ELKINGTON leading the Australians.
The 16-nation field -- with 12 of the world's top 24 entered -- includes NICK PRICE of Zimbabwe, and COLIN MONTGOMERIE and SAM TORRANCE of Scotland.
LEE JANZEN and PETER JACOBSEN will join Crenshaw for the Americans, who were upset in the final last year by Canada.
The Canadian threesome of DAVE BARR, RICK GIBSON and RAY STEWART are back to defend the title. (AP)


Family Sells Last of Stake In Thyssen
For almost 105 years, the Thyssen family has been the largest shareholder in Thyssen A.G., the giant steel company which is one of the cornerstones of Germany's industrial might.
But in a deal that analysts valued at about $1 billion, Commerzbank A.G. of Germany announced today that it had purchased the remaining 15.4 percent stake held by the two great-grandsons of the company's founder, August Thyssen.


By Design; For Those Last Hot Days
What to wear when the calendar says September but the weather's still steamy?
A shift or sheath dress -- the kind Jacqueline Kennedy wore for appearances on the White House lawn -- is an excellent choice.
"You can dress it up or down, add jewelry or not," said Kalman Ruttenstein, the senior vice president for fashion direction at Bloomingdale's.
"It's replaced the slip dress."


The Transforming Leap, From 4 Legs to 2
THOSE were venturesome steps for some apelike creatures long ago in Africa.
Dropping out of trees, they essayed a novel means of locomotion, for reasons that elude paleoanthropologists.
These primates may have sought to reach higher in foraging, see farther over tall grasses, reduce the exposure of their bodies to the searing tropical sun or extend their range beyond the forest to the open savanna.
Perhaps they needed to free the hands for carrying food or infants over long distances.
In any case, driven by need or the lure of new opportunity, in their struggle for survival these creatures found some saving advantage in a new way of walking.
Instead of scampering about on all fours, as usual, they stood upright and, gradually and no doubt unsteadily at first, began to walk on their hind limbs.
Small bipedal steps for apes, and as it would turn out, a giant leap for mankind.


Sizing Up the Latest Powerbooks
APPLE has finally put some "power" in its Powerbook portable computers.
But somewhere along the way, they lost some of their pizzazz.
Several new models of the Powerbook family were introduced last week, all but one of them built around the Power PC microprocessor upon which Apple is basing (and betting) its future.
The new 5300-series and 2300-series Power PC-based Powerbooks appear to be solid upgrades of the Powerbook and Duo line, and bargain hunters will definitely want to look at the Powerbook 190.


Do You Want to Make a Deal, or Pay Full Price?
ON the left of the Egghead Software shelf sits a box of software priced at $209.93.
On the right is a virtually identical box at $439.83.
The $229.90 difference?
The left-hand box is prominently labeled "Upgrade." The other one might as well be labeled: "Ridiculously overpriced! For suckers only!"
The second box is the computer world's equivalent of the full-fare airplane seat or the rack-rate hotel room, with even less reason for existence.
After all, hotel rooms and airline seats are transitory.
With software, there is always time to crank out another copy.


Dole Aims a Barrage at 'Intellectual Elites'
Angling anew for the votes of the conservatives who dominate the Republican Presidential nominating process, Senator Bob Dole of Kansas contended today that elitist liberals were trying to undermine American values in the nation's schools and other cultural institutions.
"The keys to our unity are under attack from our Government and from intellectual elites who seem embarrassed by America," said Mr.
Dole, the Senate majority leader, whose front-running Presidential campaign has recently lost some momentum.
He spoke to the 77th national convention of the American Legion here.


Market Place; Home Depot will hit the road to show that it's still growing.
NEXT week, for the first time, top executives from Home Depot Inc., long a paragon of growth stocks, will journey from corporate headquarters in Atlanta to Wall Street for extensive meetings with securities analysts.
Ostensibly, the trip is being made to show off Home Depot's newest Expo Design Center, a gleaming 150,000-square-foot expanse at the Roosevelt Center in Westbury, L.I., that will carry what the company calls the largest selection of interior design products and home fixtures available to the public.


In Bosnian Serbs' Capital, No Sympathy for Sarajevo
As two NATO warplanes wheeled and turned above the houses and military sites strung along this mountain valley where Bosnian Serbs have made their capital, Savica Kovac simply continued to prepare coffee for her husband this afternoon.
When what appeared to be a surface-to-air missile rose to attack the jets, Mrs.
Kovac, the mother of twin boys, smiled and clenched her hand into a fist to show that she felt her people were strong.


3 Nations to Resume Bargaining On the Naming of New Elements
AN international crisis of sorts involving the United States, Russia and Germany has been temporarily averted, and although some feathers remain badly ruffled, the parties have agreed to return to the peace table.
There is now at least a chance that during the next two years they may be able reach an agreement on the disputed naming of a half dozen man-made elements.
The substances in question, numbers 104 through 109 on the periodic table of chemical elements, were all created during the last two decades using nuclear accelerators.
Only a few atoms of each of these elements were generated in any experiment, and all of them decay radioactively within a few seconds of their birth.
They are of interest mainly to a small group of nuclear physicists and chemists probing the limits to which assemblages of protons and neutrons -- the nuclei of atoms -- can be pushed.


PRESIDENT REBUTS SOME G.O.P. THEMES ON ECONOMIC WOES
Directly challenging some of the Presidential campaign themes of California's Republican Governor, President Clinton today told a cheering crowd here that immigration, affirmative action and welfare were not responsible for the economic distress of the middle class.
In a day that strongly resembled a Labor Day campaign kickoff, in a state crucial to his re-election hopes, Mr.
Clinton said the answers to stagnant wages lay instead with a higher minimum wage and more education and training programs for workers, two initiatives the White House has advocated against Republican opposition.
And he reminded his listeners to remember their roots.


Fascinating Rhythms and Costumes at the West Indian Parade
A shallow wooden bowl of corn and nuts in one hand, a long bottle of perfume in the other, Michael Manswell marched down Eastern Parkway yesterday, casting blessings every few feet in New York City's largest and most outrageous street celebration, the West Indian-American Day Parade.
"The food signifies wealth and constant growth,' said Mr. Manswell, dressed in a white flowing robe, who was at the head of a group called Something Positive. "The perfumes.
Well, so we will always have sweetness in the air."


Some Advice on Streamlining
A United States Congressional committee will travel to Montclair State University on Saturday to get ideas from local officials on how to streamline the Federal Government.
The Government Reform and Oversight Committee, whose chairman is Representative William F. Clinger Jr., Republican of Pennsylvania, will hear testimony from Mayor Bret Schundler of Jersey City; James W. Treffinger, the Essex County Executive, and others in business and government.


Hillary Clinton in Beijing as Women's Conference Opens
Hillary Rodham Clinton arrived early today to a Chinese capital under tight security for the Fourth World Conference on Women, the largest ever gathering of its kind.
During a stopover in Guam, she expressed hope that her participation would focus world attention on improving the condition of women, children and families.


Hernandez Shuns Homework, Gets 'F'
Keith Hernandez's name was listed on the roster of announcers for the Baseball Network's games on NBC last Friday.
It was faxed to me.
So he must have known he was assigned, too.
But to judge from his abominable work, he wandered -- clueless and unprepared -- into the Bronx for the A's-Yankees game.
It was truly an awful performance, worthy of filming by the dreadful director Ed Wood.
He was banal, obvious, condescending and lacking in the basics of communication.
He wrapped up Yankee news by referring to "Paul O'Neill with the three home runs." Was that in one game?
A week?
A month?


Kunstler Dies
William M. Kunstler, the lawyer who defended the pariahs of society, died yesterday at 76.
Page B6.


Next Weekend's Only 4 Workdays Away


In Spirit of the Day, Praise for Ripken
On a Labor Day when most of America paused to celebrate their crafts and careers, Cal Ripken Jr. went to work.
For the 2,129th consecutive game.
That amazing accumulation, begun in 1982, speaks to a work ethic all but unheard of in this baseball era of interchangeable parts.
It has put Ripken two games away from breaking Lou Gehrig's record for consecutive games played, and has unleashed a tidal wave of emotions and celebrations in Baltimore, and they are sure to grow Tuesday and Wednesday if Ripken, as expected, ties and then surpasses a record once considered unassailable.


Swirling Canes and Veils and History
The Battery Dance Company opened its 14th Annual Downtown Dance Festival on Sunday afternoon with an outdoor performance by five groups at the South Street Seaport.
The free program lasted more than three hours and spectators could come and go as they wished, yet many stayed from beginning to end to enjoy a stimulating mixture of dance forms.
Lori Belilove and Company honored the beginnings of modern dance with reconstructions of works by one of its founders, Isadora Duncan.
Gentle movements abounded in pieces created early in this century.
Dances from the 1920's, when Duncan lived in the Soviet Union, emphasized heavily weighted steps, and Ms.
Belilove was impressive in two dramatic solos, "Mother" and "Revolutionary," from that period.


Pumped but Compassionate, Seles Prevails Again at the Open
Monica Seles listens hard to hard-edged techno music as she battles the traffic on the way to do battle at the United States Open, the better to pump herself up to pummel the competition.
By the time she reaches Queens she is, quite literally, wired for sound and fury, and it shows.
But on this second time around the tennis circuit, the comeback diva is determined to skip the tunnel vision that left her isolated after her original climb to No. 1.


First Lady Lands in China


U.N. Forums Have History of Harassment
To the Editor:
As one who was involved in the three previous United Nations world conferences and nongovernmental organization forums on women, let me remind you that China is only the latest host government to harass participants.


International Briefs; 70,000 Workers Strike At Volkswagen Plants
Tens of thousands of Volkswagen A.G. workers walked out and held demonstrations yesterday to drive home demands for higher wages and job security before monthlong labor talks resume today.
Union I.G.
Metall said some 70,000 workers held brief strikes at all of the company's six German plants, including the first strike at Volkswagen's main plant in Wolfsburg since 1990.


Mad Dogs Awarded Formica Accounts
The Formica Corporation in Cincinnati, a subsidiary of BTR P.L.C., has selected Mad Dogs and Englishmen in New York to handle its consumer account, which has been inactive for the last decade.
Mad Dogs was also named to handle the Formica trade account, previously at Chillingworth/Radding Inc. in New York, and an assignment to introduce Formica design centers.
The total billings were not disclosed.
Mad Dogs was chosen on Friday after a two-month review that was narrowed to that agency and two other finalists, Hunt Murray in Minneapolis and White Good Luca in New York.


A Rabbi Is to Be Sentenced
An Orthodox rabbi who was found guilty of assaulting a 13-year-old boy in a baseball card store is to be sentenced tomorrow evening in Municipal Court.
Rabbi Zev Liebowitz said he had scolded the teen-ager, Justin Vallier, of Lake Hiawatha, and pushed him against a wall after the youth taunted him with anti-Semitic and off-color remarks.
The rabbi, who officially resigned his post at Congregation Ahavat Torah last week, could be sentenced to six months in jail and fined $1,000.


Ingmar Bergman Awarded Gish Prize
The film maker Ingmar Bergman has been awarded the second annual Dorothy and Lillian Gish Prize, which is worth about $25,000.
The prize was established by a provision in the will of Lillian Gish, who died in 1993, to honor an individual each year for creativity and outstanding contributions to the arts.
Last year's recipient was the architect Frank Gehry.
Mr.
Bergman, whose many films include "Wild Strawberries," "The Seventh Seal" and "Cries and Whispers," was chosen from among nearly 200 nominees.
The selection committee members were the film director Arthur Penn, the painter Chuck Close, the choreographer Martha Clarke, the writer Francine Prose and the architect Hugh Hardy.
Mr.
Hardy served as chairman.


International Briefs; Extradition Hearing Set
A German prosecutor said yesterday that he expected a hearing to be held within two weeks on the extradition of Jurgen Schneider, despite a delay caused by a Federal judge's ruling on United States extradition law.
The prosecutor, Job Tilmann, also said German authorities would not negotiate with Mr.
Schneider, who is being sought on fraud charges in connection with the collapse of his real estate empire.
Germany's effort to extradite Mr.
Schneider, 61, and his wife, Claudia, was set back on Friday because of a potentially precedent-setting decision about extradition laws. (Reuters)


INSIDE
Station House Killing
A taxi driver was shot and killed by the police at an Upper West Side station house after stabbing an officer in the chest.
The officer was also shot in the knee.
Page B1.
Demoralized Democrats
New York's Democratic Party is in a funk: in debt, factionalized, unsure of its message and anxious about its ability to carry the state for President Clinton next year.
Page B1.
Salaries at Charities Rise
A survey found that leaders of the largest charities often earn $200,000 a year or more, and their salaries continue to grow.
Page A12.
Rising Up on 2 Legs
Scientists are trying to explain the most important step in human evolution: the shift to upright walking.
Science Times, page C1.


Observer; Excursion Into Jabber
This being the back-to-school season, let's see if we can help the students of Michael D. Gray's social studies class at Bracken County High in Brooksville, Ky.
Mr.
Gray writes that he is assigning his class to "determine the meaning of the terms 'liberal,' 'conservative,' 'radical' and 'reactionary' by sidestepping bland, basic dictionary definitions" and consulting people who use them nowadays in political discourse.
Will we help?


British, Irish and Pro-I.R.A. Leaders Discuss Ulster Peace Effort
In an urgent attempt to get approval for a new plan to advance the peace effort in Northern Ireland, Sir Patrick Mayhew, the British Northern Ireland Sectetary, met today with Dick Spring, the Irish Foreign Minister, and Gerry Adams, the political leader of the Irish Republican Army.
The participants gave no details on their discussions, but Mr.
Adams, the president of Sinn Fein, the I.R.A. political arm, said, "This could well be a defining moment."


Daniel M. Galbreath, 67, a Leading Sportsman
Daniel M. Galbreath, whose family owned the Pittsburgh Pirates when they won three World Series and the Darby Dan Farm when it won the Kentucky Derby twice, died at the farm in Galloway, Ohio, outside Columbus on Sunday.
He was 67.
The cause of death was cancer, a family spokesman said.


Big-Brother Cable? Maybe the Day Is Here
To the Editor:
Not so long ago, talk of "big brother" cable company monopolies seemed the rantings of a paranoid few.
But as evidenced by Alexander Stille's "Media Moguls, United" (Op-Ed, Aug. 28), maybe those few were not so paranoid after all.


Korda Takes Control, Spadea Says Goodbye
Vince Spadea lost his first set at this United States Open.
Then he lost his second.
Then he lost his third.
Finally, he took a seat and tried to explain why he was able to upset seventh-seeded Yevgeny Kafelnikov in the third round on Friday night but could only get upset with himself against Petr Korda in yesterday's fourth round.


Large Charities Pay Well, Survey Finds
Top executives of the largest charities and foundations often earn $200,000 a year or more, and their salaries continue to grow even as the pay scales of these groups come under increased scrutiny, according to a survey to be made public this week by The Chronicle of Philanthropy, a trade publication.
The survey found that by far the highest salaries in the nonprofit field last year were paid to chief executives at large metropolitan hospitals like Mount Sinai Medical Center, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center and New York Hospital, all in New York City.


His Season at An End, Woodson Puts Blame On Artificial Surface
The dispute over artificial turf, fueled by preseason injuries, could heat up following the loss of the Pittsburgh Steelers' star cornerback Rod Woodson to a knee injury Sunday.
Woodson tore the anterior cruciate ligament in his right knee, will undergo surgery this week and is expected to be out for the season.
That's a huge blow to a team that made it to the American Football Conference championship game last year and seemed destined to return this season.


Last of New Schools in Five-Year Plan Are Opening, but Overcrowding Persists
Jason Gonzalez, 11, gazed up at Public School 8, a brand new school with yellow trim rising from the sea of auto chop shops and rundown apartment buildings in Washington Heights.
"It's cool," he said as he surveyed the building. "I like the air-conditioning."


CHRONICLE
The brother of the singer BOY GEORGE appeared in court yesterday on a charge of murdering his wife.
GERALD O'DOWD, 31, did not enter a plea during the hearing in Hemel Hempstead, 20 miles northwest of London.
Mr.
O'Dowd was arrested on Sunday at his home in Tring, 35 miles northwest of London, where the police found his 32-year-old wife, JILL, with a stab wound in the chest.
She died later in the day.


At Union Square, Discovering Salt of the Earth
To the Editor:
Who ever doubted New Yorkers are the salt of the earth?
It became obvious to me on a recent visit when I had an almost surreal experience.


Unions Open Drive to Recruit Immigrants
With a nod to the past and an eye to the future, leaders of labor unions in New York announced an organizing effort among the thousands of new immigrants now working for low wages and no benefits in supermarkets, factories and stores throughout the city.
"This will be an effort that has not been seen in this city since the 1960's, when the taxi drivers and public employees pushed for collective bargaining," said Brian McLaughlin, an Assemblyman from Queens who is also the president of the New York City Central Labor Council, an umbrella group of union locals chartered by the A.F.L.-C.I.O.
The council donated $250,000 to begin the campaign, which will first focus on a score of stores in upper Manhattan where it says Hispanic immigrants are paid $250 for 72-hour weeks.


People
*
Mark Buckman, senior vice president and international media director on the Coca-Cola Company account at McCann-Erickson Worldwide, New York, a unit of the Interpublic Group of Cos., was promoted to the new position of worldwide media director on the account.


Gail Collins Is Joining Times Editorial Board
Gail Collins, a former columnist for New York Newsday, is joining the editorial board of The New York Times today.
Her appointment was announced by Howell Raines, editorial page editor.
Ms.
Collins served as a columnist at New York Newsday from 1991 until that paper ceased publication this summer.
Before that she had been a business writer and then columnist at The New York Daily News from 1985 to 1991.
She had previously worked for United Press International and founded the Connecticut State News Bureau, a news service covering the state capitol and Connecticut politics.


Sharp Rebound for U.S. Makers of Memory Chips
Straight out of Boise State University, Steven R. Appleton joined a local memory-chip maker called Micron Technology Inc. in 1983.
It soon seemed that he had chosen a dead-end career.
In the mid-1980's, the memory-chip business appeared to be lost forever to Japan.
One major American semiconductor company after another, even Intel, the memory-chip pioneer, dropped out of the field, figuring that it would always be a poor business.


Acura to Revive Regional Marketing
The Acura luxury car division of the American Honda Motor Company is returning to a regional marketing strategy, effective Nov. 1, giving local dealers the autonomy to hire their own agencies.
Since 1993, dealer advertising, with billings estimated at $40 million, had been consolidated at Ketchum Advertising Los Angeles, part of Ketchum Communications Inc.


CHRONICLE
Silenced by a stroke 10 years ago, MICHELANGELO ANTONIONI still had much to contribute to the Venice Film Festival.
Extra showings of the director's comeback film "Beyond the Clouds" were scheduled because of huge demand for seats.
It received a standing ovation at each showing on Sunday.
WIM WENDERS directed the film with the 83-year-old Mr.
Antonioni, who was awarded an Oscar this year for his career.
The film, based on short stories that Mr.
Antonioni wrote in 1983, has an international cast including JOHN MALKOVICH, FANNY ARDENT, PAUL WELLER and SOPHIE MARCEAU, and musical interludes featuring the Irish rock group U2.


Patterns
Fast-Lane Fashion
In a town where fast fashion rules, Fred Segal/Ron Herman Melrose operates like a retail version of the movie "Speed" -- to slow down is to die.
The store's secret is a stable of young local designers that includes one of its buyers, John Eshaya.
Each week, Mr.
Eshaya comes up with a concept for the young-fashion department and gives the other designers "homework," to keep the store looking fresh.
The ground floor is a hot hangout for teen-agers, who lunch daily at the in-store cafe and then shop, "Clueless" style.
One clothing line, called Fever, is designed by a store discovery, John Cherpas.
Pieces of his first collection -- stretch-satin western shirts and lean trousers -- were bought by R.E.M.'s Michael Stipe, the Red Hot Chili Peppers' Flea and the actor Stephen Dorff.
For fall, Mr.
Cherpas cut indigo-dyed blue jeans like old flared Wranglers.


METRO DIGEST
ASTHMA ON RISE IN DUSTY SOUTH BRONX "Fatigo" is a common word in the South Bronx, but it does not mean precisely what it means everywhere else in the Spanish-speaking world: tired.
Instead, it is used for a condition so universal, only the most ordinary of words will do.
The condition is asthma.
In parts of the 10 ZIP codes that make up the South Bronx, asthma is so common that the pockets of men on street corners bulge with small breathing pumps the way they might bulge with cigars elsewhere.
It is so common that mothers, waiting on line for a school lunch, point to one of their own children when asked at random about asthma.
It is so common that doctors at the area's main hospital, Lincoln, say they have received close to 13,000 visits a year for asthma in the last several years, a number that may be increasing.  [ Page A1. ] NEW YORK CITY  5 NEW SCHOOLS TO OPEN THIS WEEK Jason Gonzalez, 11, gazed up at Public School 8, a brand new school with yellow trim rising from the sea of auto chop shops and rundown apartment buildings in Washington Heights.
"It's cool," he said as he surveyed the building.
"I like the air-conditioning." The school, at the corner of 167th Street and Amsterdam Avenue, is one of five new schools that will open this week.
The others are P.S. 4, also in Washington Heights, P.S. 15 in the Bronx, Long Island City High School in Queens and the first phase of the Petrides Educational Complex on Staten Island.  [ B3. ] UNIONS OPEN DRIVE TO RECRUIT IMMIGRANTS With a nod to the past and an eye to the future, leaders of labor unions in New York announced an organizing effort among the thousands of new immigrants now working for low wages and no benefits in supermarkets, factories and stores throughout the city.
About 12 people, including several police officers attempting to break up the fight, suffered cuts, bruises and other minor injuries, the police said.
Four people were taken to Elmhurst Hospital Center for treatment and later released.
Hundreds of people were aboard the party boat, the Skyline Princess, when the fight broke out as it was returning to the dock, said Officer Debra Kearns, a police spokeswoman.  [ B2. ] REGION  POWERBOATS DRAW CRITICISM Tim Clancy was out fishing on Lake Hopatcong late one night when his boat was almost run over by two sleek cigarette boats, one 30 feet long, the other 27 feet, he said.
Both were cruising slowly.
Mr.
Clancy is convinced the operators saw him but did not care about his boat and fishing lines.
"As far as I'm concerned, they're both too big for a lake this size," he said.
"It gets hairy out on the lake now, to the point of being dangerous." As summer draws to a close on Lake Hopatcong, New Jersey's biggest and busiest lake, an anti-boat chorus is strong and steady.  [ B5. ] Chronicle B4


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  NO ACTION FROM BOSNIAN SERBS  The deadline that NATO had set for the Bosnian Serbs to move weapons near the capital passed, but the weapons were still in place and there was no immediate sign of renewed air strikes.
A1  DEFIANCE IN SERB STRONGHOLD  Many people in the Bosnian Serb town of Pale seemed eager to resist demands to avoid more NATO bombs, and they accused the West of taking the Muslims' side.
A9  Greece and Macedonia said they would end their dispute.
A9  SIBERIAN TIGER THREATENED  With economic chaos and wide-open borders, a new generation of poachers in Russia is threatening the Siberian tiger, and a whole range of other wildlife has fallen prey to the Asian medical market as well.
A1  WOMEN'S CONFERENCE BEGINS  Hillary Clinton arrived in Beijing, where the world conference on women got under way, and the Prime Minister of Pakistan cut to the core of issues by denouncing violence against women.
A3  COLOR OF ANGER IN CHINA  Women in the parallel meeting to the world conference of women held a protest dressed in black to show anger about violence against women, but conflicts with Chinese security kept them out of Beijing.
A3  BIG STEEL DEAL IN GERMANY  Commerzbank A.G. has bought a 15.4 percent stake of a giant steel company, one of the powerhouses of German industry, in a deal valued at $1 billion.
D1  A meeting to try to advance Northern Ireland peace.
A6  A bomb set by Kashmiri separatists killed 13 people.
A7  Jerusalem marked its 3,000th anniversary, but with controversy.
A8  Paris police found another bomb, powerful but unexploded.
A5  A powerful hurricane bore down on the Caribbean.
A8  Muzarabani Growth Points Journal: A beastly drought.
A4  National A12-15, D9  CLINTON TAKES ON CALIFORNIA  Challenging some of the Presidential campaign themes of California's Governor, a Republican, Bill Clinton said immigration, affirmative action and welfare were not responsible for the economic distress of the middle class.
A1  BIG LIST FOR CONGRESS  As Congress returns from vacation, the Republican majorities in the House and Senate take up a list of commitments as incomplete as it is ambitious.
A1  CUTBACKS AT LEGAL AID  Legal aid programs for the poor are laying off lawyers because of Federal budget cuts, at the very time when demand for their expertise is growing.
A1  LIGHT TRUCKS' UNSEEN COST  The boom in light trucks like Jeeps or Chevy Suburbans is reversing American gains in fuel efficiency, helping to increase pollution and dependence on foreign oil.
A1  SALARIES AT CHARITIES RISE  Top executives of the largest charities and foundations often earn $200,000 a year or more, and their salaries are growing even as the finances of the groups come under scrutiny, a survey found.
A12  HAWAII'S CHANGING DREAM  Hawaii has an image as a paradise of lush scenery and balmy trade winds.
But for many residents who came for the good life, the state has become paradise lost.
A12  DOLE ATTACKS LIBERALS  Senator Bob Dole said elitist liberals were trying to undermine American values by "hijacking" the United States' schools and other cultural institutions.
A15  Newt Gingrich said his plans might hinge on Gen.
Colin Powell's.
A14  The Social Security office was criticized for not catching fraud.
D9  Metro Digest B1  A BRONX ASTHMA EPIDEMIC  Doctors are talking about an emerging epidemic of asthma in the South Bronx, pointing to hospitalization rates as high as 17.3 per 1,000 people and death rates as high as 11 per 100,000.
Both rates are eight times the national average.
A1  Science Times C1-11  The crucial transition from quadruped to biped in prehumans.
C1  A new flower species in just a few generations.
C1  The case of the cowardly lions.
C1  A protein's role in cell division, and how to shut it off in cancer.
C3  What's in a name?
A fuss, when it involves an element.
C5  Q&amp;A C6  Personal Computers C7-8  Arts/Entertainment C13-16  Anniversary exhibitions at the Schomburg Center.
C13  Marketing classical music.
C13  Stephanie Miller, late-night talk-show host.
C13  Dance: A festival at South Street Seaport.
C14  Racing to preserve "Eye on Dance." C14  Books: "The Horse Whisperer," by Nicholas Evans.
C15  Fashion Page B7  It's high-stakes time at Anne Klein.
Patterns By Design  Business Digest D1  Obituaries B6  William M. Kunstler, lawyer known for defending unpopular causes.
Alonzo Church, mathematician and teacher.
Sports B8-14  Baseball: Yankees win, 13-3.
B9  Mets lose to Padres, 2-1.
B11  Column: Anderson on Simms.
B9  Football: Cowboys trample the Giants, 35-0.
B9  Another Simms plays quarterback, and takes the heat.
B12  The Jets' problem?
They're just too tight.
B13  Horse Racing: French Deputy remains undefeated.
B13  Television: Hernandez drops the ball.
B11  Tennis: Seles is tested, slightly.
B9  Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17  Editorials  The information "have nots."  Next step in Ireland.
Time to legalize syringe sales?
Adjustable New Yorkers.
Letters  Russell Baker: Excursion into jabber.
Louis G. Sarris: McNamara's war, and mine.
Chronicle B4 Chess C10 Crossword C14


A Too-Free Enterprise Endangers Siberian Tigers
Fueled by economic chaos and wide-open borders, a new generation of poachers has chased the Siberian tiger and many less renowned animals nearly to extinction in the lush cedar forests here.
Russians in this Pacific Coast region 6,000 miles from Moscow -- where unemployment is high and the minimum monthly wage is little more than $20 -- have in the last three years begun to flood nearby Asian markets with animal parts sought by hundreds of millions of Chinese, Japanese and Koreans for use in traditional medicines.


Unknown to Challenge Leno and Letterman
With David Letterman and Jay Leno towering over the landscape of late-night television, and newsy "Nightline" often beating the two comedians in the ratings, it would seem there's precious little room in that midnight world for yet another talk-show host.
Especially one who is almost totally unknown, who comes from talk radio and who is definitely not one of the boys.


A Small Pasta Importer Takes On Big Competitors
What three big American pasta makers call unfair trade practices, Claudia Vitelli considers just good business -- and the only way a small company such as hers can get its products on the nation's grocery shelves.
The Vitelli-Elvea Company, which employs about 20 people in modest offices in this northern New Jersey suburb and at a warehouse in Linden, N.J., began importing pasta from a Turkish manufacturer, Maktas, in 1987 and marketing it under the brand name Luigi Vitelli, the great-grandfather of Ms.
Vitelli's husband, Bruno.


Please Say It Isn't So, Simba: The Noble Lion Can Be a Coward
THE spectacle is becoming all too familiar.
One by one heroes are being knocked from their pedestals, their veils of nobility, bravery and omnipotence stripped way to reveal a selfish, cowering heart.
Now, to the legion of fallen sports stars, artists, politicians and religious leaders must sadly be added the cream of cats, the universal symbol of courage and royalty, a beast powerful enough to match Mickey as one of Disney's biggest money machines: the lion.
Where once they considered the lion to be a model of cooperative behavior and unflinching boldness, scientists have discovered that some lions can in fact be malingering cowards, Bert Lahr with no Wizard of Oz in sight.
The new findings challenge conventional theories about how cooperation among social animals evolved, and suggest that life out there in the wilderness is even nastier than anybody thought.


Dole Goes After Liberals
Senator Bob Dole said elitist liberals were undermining American values in schools and other cultural institutions.
Page A15.


Bomb Set by Rebels in Capital of Kashmir Kills 13, Wounds 25
A bomb set by Kashmiri separatists killed at least 13 people and wounded 25 others today in Srinagar, the summer capital of the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir.
The police described the blast as the worst of its kind in the five-year-old insurgency.
The explosion occurred outside two state-owned banks handling payrolls for Indian army and police units.
Witnesses said at least seven of the dead were soldiers or policemen.
The other victims appeared to have been Kashmiri civilians, including at least two women.


Asthma Common and on Rise In the Crowded South Bronx
"Fatigo" is a common word in the South Bronx, but it does not mean precisely what it means everywhere else in the Spanish-speaking world: tired.
Instead, it is used for a condition so prevalent in the area, only the most ordinary of words will do.
The condition is asthma.
In parts of the 10 ZIP codes that make up the South Bronx, asthma is so common that the pockets of men on street corners bulge with small breathing pumps the way they might bulge with cigars elsewhere.
It is so common that mothers, waiting in line for a school lunch point to one of their own children when asked at random about asthma.
It is so common that doctors at the area's main hospital, Lincoln, say they have received close to 13,000 visits a year for asthma in the last several years, a number that stuns colleagues outside New York, and a number that may be increasing.


Time to Legalize Syringe Sales?
A study in Connecticut has found encouraging evidence that a simple change in drug laws might greatly reduce the spread of AIDS among drug addicts, who comprise the chief source of infections in some parts of the country.
The AIDS virus spreads with great speed among addicts when they share contaminated needles, thus transferring the infection from one individual to another.
Past efforts to slow the spread have relied on supplying addicts with clean needles and syringes, often in exchange for turning in syringes that they have already used.
Such programs have had a measurable effect in reducing the sharing of dirty equipment and, in some cases, seem to have slowed the spread of AIDS.
But clean-needle programs have a major disadvantage.
The sites for needle exchanges are limited and so are the hours they are open.


The Information 'Have Nots'
The most basic promise of the information age -- that books, facts and figures will be widely and cheaply disseminated over the telephone lines -- will come to nothing unless public access to computers and telecommunications technology is broadly expanded.
The public libraries should be one source of easy access.
They are struggling to offer the services, but are faltering because of high telecommunications costs.
A recent survey of what the Department of Commerce describes as the "information have nots" revealed that about 20 percent of America's poorest households do not have telephones.
Only a fraction of those who do will be able to afford the computers and related equipment that grant access to the information society.
The children of those households start out at an obvious disadvantage, as do adults who could benefit from on-line training or avail themselves of on-line job search materials and so on.
States that house a disproportionate number of the country's poor will need to take special care to secure broad access, to avoid creating an information underclass.


Battling Against Big Powerboats
Tim Clancy was out fishing on Lake Hopatcong late the other night when his boat was almost run over by two sleek cigarette boats, one 30 feet long, the other 27 feet, he said.
Both were cruising slowly.
Mr.
Clancy is convinced the operators saw him but did not care about his boat and fishing lines.
"As far as I'm concerned, they're both too big for a lake this size," he said.
"It gets hairy out on the lake now, to the point of being dangerous."


Treasury's Auction To Offer Only Bills
The Treasury's schedule of financing this week is confined to the regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills, which will be held today instead of yesterday, because of the Labor Day holiday.
According to traders, at the close of the New York cash market on Friday the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 5.28 percent and the rate on the six-month issue was also 5.28 percent.


SRDS Names Chief Executive
SRDS, the media information company in Des Plaines, Ill., has named Christopher M. Lehman as chief executive, succeeding Jill Smith, who left in May.
Mr.
Lehman, 54, was previously vice president and publishing director of the publishing group of the Meredith Corporation in Des Moines.
At SRDS, which is owned by investors led by the Continental Illinois Venture Corporation and the Dunning Group, Mr.
Lehman will focus on the company's core print services and new electronic media ventures.


Racing to Save Dancers' Interviews
Dance, routinely called the most ephemeral of the arts, has gone largely undocumented in writing and on film.
One exception has been the work of Celia Ipiotis, who in 1981 began the public television series called "Eye on Dance," presented on WNYC and WNYE in New York City.
Ms.
Ipiotis set about exploring all forms of dance in her weekly programs, which consisted of interviews with dancers and choreographers illustrated with brief segments of their work.
All of the programs were preserved on videotape, but some of that documentation is also proving to be ephemeral, and Ms.
Ipiotis is in a race with time to save her irreplaceable tapes.


Aiming for More U.S. Deals; 3 European Banks Get Serious About Wall Street
John R. Rolls, chairman of Deutsche Bank's North American unit, proudly cites his firm's management of the United States portion of a $1.8 billion worldwide offering of stock for a major automobile company as evidence of the German banking giant's nascent power on Wall Street.
But the auto maker was not one of the Big Three.
It was Daimler-Benz of Germany, which is not only a loyal customer but is partly owned by Deutsche Bank.
As for doing stock deals for American companies, the bank's record is far less impressive: it has led only four issues so far this year, raising $81.5 million.
That ranks it 55th in that category among Wall Street firms, according to the Securities Data Corporation.


Paramount and NBC Do 'JAG' Infomercial
The Paramount Network Television unit of Paramount Pictures and NBC Entertainment are teaming up for an infomercial to promote "JAG," a series Paramount is producing to appear on NBC for the 1995-96 season.


Egypt Views Press Freedom as Privilege
To the Editor:
Your profile of the leftist Rose el-Youssef magazine (Cairo Journal, Aug. 28), on Egypt's tradition of tempered press freedom that has distinguished it from many of its less enlightened neighbors, neglects to mention the Government's amendment of articles of the Penal Code that pertain to "crimes of publication," known as Law 93 of 1995.


Muzarabani Growth Point Journal; Life With Man-Eating Crocs and Testy Elephants
After the dirt roads peter out in his village of cubic mud huts that resemble chocolates in straw hats, Ruwizhu Rufira leads the way on foot.
The path twists through clutches of wait-a-bit thornbushes, past a snake hole in a baobab tree with a cobra skin decorating the entrance, and down a slope of fine powdery dust into the bed of the former Musengezi River, now no more than a series of pools separated by mud.
Without breaking stride, he passes some elephant footprints, shucks his frayed brown trousers and enters the green water.
When he is up to his waist, about 30 feet from shore, he has reached the dead body.
The goat was taken in the middle of her last drink by one of 100 crocodiles he says are in the pool.


CHRONICLE
CHARLIE SHEEN celebrated his 30th birthday on Sunday by marrying a 25-year-old model, DONNA PEELE, after a whirlwind six-week courtship.
After they were pronounced husband and wife, the actor pronounced himself "the luckiest guy alive."
"She's my best friend, and we've both found our soul mates," Mr.
Sheen said.
Hours before the wedding, which took place at sunset at a ranch in Malibu, Calif., he acknowledged that he was suffering a case of prenuptial jitters.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Truck Boom Erodes Gains From Fuel Savings The boom in mini-vans, pickups and sport utility vehicles has had unwanted side effects: increased air pollution and a greater dependency on oil imports.
That's because light trucks are far less fuel efficient than cars, getting an average of 20 miles to a gallon of gasoline, while cars average 28.


French Deputy Reappears, As Fast as Ever and 4 for 4
A new star streaked across the sky at Belmont Park yesterday: French Deputy, a 3-year-old colt from California who was competing for the first time since February, blazed through the mile in 1:332/5 to win the Jerome Handicap by four lengths for his fourth victory in four races.
It was only the fourth race of his career because he has been resting a foot injury for the last six months.
He missed all of the Triple Crown action and also is likely to miss the Breeders' Cup at Belmont on Oct. 28 because the only race on the program for him would be the Classic, at a mile and a quarter.
And this colt looks like a miler who would struggle trying to outrun accomplished distance horses such as Cigar and Thunder Gulch.


Alonzo Church, 92, Theorist Of the Limits of Mathematics
Alonzo Church, an eminent contributor to mathematical logic and teacher of a generation of American logicians, died in Hudson, Ohio, on Aug. 11.
He was 92.
Dr.
Church's principal achievements lay in extending the work of Kurt Godel on the foundations of mathematics in a direction that bears on modern philosophy and on computer science.
"If you ask who is the greatest logician of this century, no question it's Godel, but Church was really pre-eminent among American logicians," said Simon B. Kochen, professor of mathematics at Princeton University.


CHRONICLE
As a singer, TONYA HARDING is a terrific figure skater.
Loud boos nearly drowned out her voice as her band, the Golden Blades, played on Sunday at an event in Portland, Ore., to raise money to fight muscular dystrophy.
Throughout her three-song, 15-minute set, the booing crowd turned thumbs down and lobbed plastic bottles at the stage.
Ms.
Harding dodged a few and kept singing as she picked one up and waved it in the air.


Gwynn Hits The Spot And Sinks The Mets
There are the Mets, a team of young, inexperienced players who can execute with remarkable consistency one day and not have a clue the next.
Then there is Tony Gwynn, a marvelous model of constant production, no matter the season, no matter the setting.
Gwynn delivered a lesson tonight at Jack Murphy Stadium that the Mets would be wise to remember by pounding out three hits and positioning Bip Roberts for the game-winning run in the Padres' 2-1 victory in 10 innings.


Jersey Offers a Model On Cutting School Cost
To the Editor:
If Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani would like to cut the bureaucracy in the New York City public schools, he must provide the same types of incentives that Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman has provided New Jersey as she recently signed a bill that limits spending on administration.


'Women in Black' Defy China's Police
The women wore black, and stood in silence.
Yet even they, in a peaceful vigil against violence, would soon come face to face with Chinese officialdom in a confrontation over the right to demonstrate.


A Vote on Earlier Bar Closings
The City Council is scheduled to vote tonight on an ordinance that would force establishments that serve liquor to close an hour earlier on weekends.
Morgan Roth, a spokeswoman for the city, said the proposal to shut down the bars at 2 A.M. instead of 3 A.M. on Saturday and Sunday mornings was prompted by persistent complaints from residents that noise from the bars kept them awake.
But Anthony Vestre, owner of the Old Bay Restaurant and vice president of the New Jersey Restaurant Association, said an earlier closing time would merely encourage people to spend the last hour drinking outside and would harm an important sector of the local economy.


Why promote cereal with ice cream giveaways and why do Coke ads ape Pepsi's 'Congo' commercials?
IT'S time again to ask 20 questions about advertising, marketing and the media:
*Would the proposed amendment to the Constitution to stop desecration of the American flag cover a National Football League campaign promoting the 1995-96 season, which uses a flag-like logo and urges fans to "pledge allegiance" to individual teams?


Infinitely Adjustable New Yorkers
Sometime next spring, New Yorkers will have a better idea of whether the five boroughs constitute a monument to sanity, a very large funny farm or something in between.
The city proposes to commission a Mental Health Index, which, based on suicide rates, domestic violence reports, substance abuse rates and other such instances of psychic upheaval, will serve as a measure of New Yorkers' emotional well-being.
One thing is certain.
Evidence of their infinite tolerance exists already.
Consider, for instance, what several of the 250,000 people who live near the elevated trains told a Times reporter about the noise recently.
They see as much sun as does the mole, and their view -- of girders, tracks and hurtling cars -- is not much better.
"If the trains stop for a while, I miss it," said one of them.
Her kids "love it," said another.


Japan's Job Market Shocks Collegians
While most Americans observed Labor Day by taking the day off, more than 12,000 college students in Japan, who graduate next spring, packed into the giant Tokyo Dome sports stadium today with the anxious hope of landing jobs.
Hundreds lined up before dawn, some having traveled from distant cities by plane or train.
Wearing their trademark "recruit suits" -- navy blue suits, white shirts, striped ties and black shoes -- they came for a huge job counseling program organized by the Ministry of Labor.


Trucks' Popularity Undermining Gains In U.S. Fuel Savings
Americans who might sneer at driving a gas-guzzling Cadillac are tickled to be seen in a Jeep, Range Rover or Chevy Suburban.
But the enormous popularity of these light trucks is reversing the nation's impressive gains in fuel efficiency.
Because the Government sets a much looser standard for trucks -- including sport utility vehicles, mini-vans and pickups -- they use far more fuel than cars.
Light trucks get only 20 miles to a gallon of gasoline, on average, while cars get 28, according to the Department of Transportation.


Young Simms Starts to Follow Father's Footsteps
Although Phil Simms's No. 11 jersey was officially retired last night in a ceremony at Giants Stadium, his oldest son, Chris, had put that celebrated number behind him last week when he opted for No. 12.
"They didn't have a No. 11, and I really don't like the number too much, anyway," said Chris, a freshman quarterback at Ramapo High School here.
"It would probably put extra pressure on me. I'm going to stay with No. 12."


Cooler Economy in Hawaii Makes a Paradise Look a Lot Like Other Cities
Randy Schoch, one of the best-known restaurateurs in Hawaii, first came to the islands 18 years ago to surf the wild waves of Oahu's North Shore, but stayed to ride the tide of Hawaiian prosperity that turned him into a millionaire by the time he was 32.
He had worked his way up from being a busboy in Honolulu to co-owner of Nick's Fishmarket, a celebrity hangout in the heart of Waikiki, and the fashionable Black Orchid restaurant.
With his new-found wealth, he built a $1.8 million palace in paradise, at the top of Hawaii Loa Ridge, with a view that stretched from Koko Head to the cane fields of Ewa.


Next Step in Ireland
When Prime Minister John Bruton of Ireland and his British counterpart, John Major, meet tomorrow, they will be under considerable pressure to break the current impasse on Northern Ireland.
A year has now passed since the cease-fire declared by the Irish Republican Army.
Terrorism is no longer a part of daily life in Northern Ireland.
But Britain's unrealistic insistence on having the I.R.A. surrender its weapons before it will sit down to talk peace has created a stalemate.
The British and Irish Governments have been working behind the scenes all summer on a deal.
It would involve the establishment of an international commission to disarm both the I.R.A. and the Loyalist paramilitary organizations.
Former Senator George Mitchell, who now acts as President Clinton's adviser on Northern Ireland, is reported to be the commission's likely head.


Fireworks on Jerusalem's 3,000th Year
To the boisterous accompaniment of fireworks, dancers, laser beams, politics and controversy, the city of Jerusalem today began a 15-month celebration of the 3,000 years since King David wrested the hilltop town from the Jebusites and proclaimed it the capital of the Jewish people.
"United Jerusalem is the heart of the Jewish people and the capital of the state of Israel," Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin declared in opening ceremonies outside the Parliament.
Mr.
Rabin, who was born in Jerusalem and led the Israeli Army when the Old City was taken in the 1967 war, added: "United Jerusalem is ours! Jerusalem forever!"


Q&amp;A
Autumn Leaf Display
Q.
What factors determine whether there will be a particularly brilliant autumn leaf display?


Signs of Unrest At Time Warner As Talks Go On
In the face of possible management turmoil, Time Warner Inc.'s chairman, Gerald M. Levin, considered more possibilities yesterday on how to shuffle his top executives if his company completes its proposed $8 billion takeover of Turner Broadcasting System.
At Turner, executives over the weekend prepared a variety of proposals for resolving another potential problem for Mr.
Levin: how to buy out Turner's largest shareholder, the Liberty Media Corporation, which is controlled by John C. Malone, the president of Tele-Communications Inc.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article and picture caption on Saturday about the arrest of four reputed members of the Latin Kings gang misstated in some copies the source of a photograph showing an infant with two pistols next to her head.
The picture was discovered by police officers during the arrests; it was not made by the police.


As Welfare Overhaul Looms, Legal Aid for Poor Dwindles
Legal aid programs for the poor are laying off lawyers and curtailing activities because of Federal budget cuts, at the very time when demand for their expertise is growing as a result of imminent changes in welfare, Medicaid, housing and immigration laws.
The cuts are particularly hard on 16 national organizations that provide specialized legal advice to lawyers handling an immense variety of cases in neighborhood offices.
Congress has already cut the budget for these "national support centers" by 24 percent this year, to $8 million, and most of them expect to receive no Federal money next year.


It's High-Stakes Time at Anne Klein
In the fast-moving game of fashion there are few companies that, once caught off balance, can marshall the dexterity to make a comeback.
Once-glorious names -- from Halston to Pierre Cardin -- have found themselves, like Norma Desmond, in has-been purgatory, recognized but no longer important.
Anne Klein has gone through a turbulent period in the last two years and now must move quickly to regain its standing as one of America's premier fashion companies.


Congress Returning to Face Long List of G.O.P. Promises
The Congress everyone discusses in superlatives -- most sweeping, most radical, most impatient -- returns to town on Tuesday.
This time, it faces a job almost beyond words.
With eight months gone and deadlines circling overhead like vultures, the Republican majorities in the House and Senate take up a list of commitments this week as incomplete as it is ambitious.
Legislation to overhaul Medicare, marked for passage this fall, has yet to be introduced.
Bills to trim Medicaid and disassemble the welfare system have barely moved out of the House.


A Former Knick Speaks Out on Riley
Include DOC RIVERS, a former Knick, among those who believe that PAT RILEY left the Knicks for two reasons: money and power.
"Pat's trying to make himself look like a saint," said Rivers, commenting about Riley's claim that he resigned as Knicks coach because of a power struggle with DAVE CHECKETTS, the president of Madison Square Garden.
"For the kind of deal he got in Miami, almost anybody would have left. He got money; he got part ownership. As players, we understand that. We renegotiate contracts all the time. The only difference is, we can't quit, then go sign a contract somewhere else. That'd be nice.


A Blaze Is Down but Not Out
A fire that blackened 750 acres of a state forest near the Delaware Water Gap and forced the closing of six miles of the Appalachian Trail was contained on Sunday night, but fire officials said it would be several days, at least, until the blaze was brought under control.
"All it will take is one ember to cross the fire line, and we'll be fighting the fire again," James Mangine, an assistant division warden with the New Jersey Forest Fire Service, said yesterday.
The fire, which began last Thursday, may have been started when someone defied the state ban on campfires, Mr.
Mangine said.


French Police Find Unexploded Bomb at Busy Square in Paris
Paris was put on edge again today when police found a powerful but unexploded bomb in a public toilet on a busy square in the south of the city, 24 hours after another bomb injured four people in a crowded open-air market here.
The latest bomb, discovered this morning on the Charles Vallin square in the 15th Arrondissement, was a 55-pound metal gas canister packed with explosives and hidden in a bag.


Accounts
*
Congoleum Corp., Mercerville, N.J., to Waring &amp; LaRosa, New York, to handle the account of the vinyl floor-covering manufacturer, previously at Howard, Merrell &amp; Partners, Raleigh, N.C.
The billings were estimated at $3.7 million.


HILLARY CLINTON, IN CHINA, DETAILS ABUSE OF WOMEN
Speaking more forcefully on human rights than any American dignitary has on Chinese soil, Hillary Rodham Clinton catalogued a devastating litany of abuse that has afflicted women around the world today and criticized China for seeking to limit free and open discussion of women's issues here.
"It is time for us to say here in Beijing, and the world to hear, that it is no longer acceptable to discuss women's rights as separate from human rights," Mrs.
Clinton told the Fourth World Conference on Women assembled here.


For Coziness That Just Won't Quit
THE stove ad in the magazine tugged at the heartstrings of Anglophiles who yearned to import a touch of English country for their kitchens.
The picture showed an inviting fire in the hearth, but helping to keep the chill at bay was the true centerpiece of the room -- a clunky, irresistibly British, shiny red enamel cast-iron stove, complete with the family dog napping in front of it and flannel nightshirts drying on racks above.
Arranged on the stove top was -- what else? -- a gladdening array of English comfort foods like breads, biscuits, scones and porridge.
It was seven years ago that Tana Christie of Austin, Tex., first spotted an ad for the Aga (an acronym for Amalgamated Gas Accumulator, the name given by the manufacturer, Aga/Rayburn of Telford, England) and decided her kitchen had to have one.
It wasn't the culinary possibilities that excited her: it was the thought of giving her dog something cozy to curl up in front of.
"It was so exotic," she said.


Wine Talk
WHAT do you think of when you think of Champagne?
Elegance, sophistication, success?
You're right on track.
The people who make the stuff strive unremittingly to convey precisely that image.
The winner's circle, the finish line, the opening-night party, the charity ball.
They see to it that their fizz is at the right place at the right time, in the company of the right people.
Take Bollinger, for example, certainly one of the more distinguished Champagne houses, and its long relationship with England's royal family.
Queen Victoria awarded Bollinger the first of its seven royal warrants in 1884.
Prince Charles chose the 1975 Bollinger for his bachelor party, and the 1973 was served at the reception before his wedding.


Death-Rate Rankings Shake New York Cardiac Surgeons
It was happening again, and Dr.
Richard Dal Col could hardly believe it.
An emergency cardiac patient, yet another "salvage case," was dead, this time before surgery could even begin.
Enraged and frightened, Dr.
Dal Col stormed from the operating room into the administrator's office of St.
Peter's Hospital in Albany.
"We've got to do something!" he recalls shouting in his anger at the system.
"They're going to pull my license if this continues."


Courier Wins With Ease Against Muster
They were supposed to lock horns like two billy goats and batter each other until only one was left upright.
They were supposed to wield their racquets like bludgeons.
Like a pair of Grim Reapers, each was supposed to be intent on achieving the other's demise with the flick of a forehand, his "money shot."


Packwood Tells Why He Wants Hearings
For the first time since he reversed himself and said he wanted public hearings on allegations of sexual misconduct against him, Senator Bob Packwood explained his reasoning to fellow Republicans, most of whom had voted last month, at his request, against public hearings.
Senator Packwood spoke to his colleagues at the Republicans' private weekly luncheon as the Senate reconvened after the summer recess.
He said in an interview after the luncheon that he had told his colleagues, in essence, that the Ethics Committee process was unfair and that he should be treated as any American on trial would, indicating that he felt the process was a trial rather than a hearing.


Rest Does Isringhausen A World Of Good
A rookie in the big leagues is supposed to encounter the difficulties that go with any learning process.
There are supposed to be pitfalls and setbacks when things don't go as planned.
That's the usual pattern.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ASSOCIATED NATURAL GAS CORP., Denver, a subsidiary of Panhandle Eastern Corp., announced an agreement to purchase Continental Energy Marketing Ltd.
Calgary, Alberta, a natural gas marketing company, for an undisclosed amount.
DIGITAL EQUIPMENT CORP., Maynard, Mass., said it would market its family of consumer personal computers through electronics retailer Circuit City Stores Inc. of Richmond.
HASTING MANUFACTURING CO., Hastings, Mich., a maker of automotive parts, plans to sell its filter operations, or more than one-third of its assets, to Clarcor Inc.
Rockford, Ill, for $14 million to focus on its core automotive-tool business.
NATURAL MICROSYSTEMS CORP., Natick, Mass., makers of voice-processing equiprment, agreed to acquire VOX S.A., Paris, which also makes computer telephony equipment, for about $18 million in stock.


Once Garages, Now Illegal Bodegas; Entrepreneurs Wedge Shops Into Residential Areas
In a pinch, Gloria Diaz shops at the one place where she is sure to find plenty of yucca, black beans, rice and other staples from her Caribbean homeland: the garage next door.
Two years ago, El Rocio, a tiny bodega, opened in the garage along a residential strip in North Corona, Queens, providing a short trip to the store for residents who need to do light shopping.
It has also become a favorite of children, who fling open the glass door seemingly by the minute to buy Charms Blow Pops, Mary Jane candies, potato chips and tropical drinks.


Book Notes
What Next for Snyder?
Ever since his abrupt dismissal as the chairman of Simon &amp; Schuster in June of 1994, speculation about Richard E. Snyder's next move has been a hot topic on the book-publishing gossip circuit.
His reputation as both a publishing genius and a hot-tempered boss have done little to slow the chatter.
But Mr.
Snyder, who has been carefully plotting his next move over the past year, may soon put the gossip to rest.
Publishing sources say he is involved in talks to take over Western Publishing Group, a little-known children's-book publisher.


International Briefs; Eurotunnel Reports 30% Rise in Traffic
Eurotunnel said yesterday that its tourist traffic increased 30 percent in August and that it was the leading carrier of cars between the English ports of Dover and Folkestone and Calais in France, with 39 percent of the market.
The European Ferries unit of the Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company disputed Eurotunnel's numbers and contended that it was the leading car carrier.


John Regan, 66, Law Professor Who Championed Elderly, Dies
John J. Regan, who dealt with human mortality first as a Roman Catholic priest and later as an authority on the legal rights of the elderly, died on Friday at his home in Garden City, L.I.
He was 66.
The cause was cancer, said Michael B. DeLuise, a spokesman for the Hofstra University School of Law, where Dr.
Regan taught.


Knicks' Smith Fouled Before Season Starts
Charles Smith just returned from vacation. He needed one.
The Knicks forward is executive vice president of the National Basketball Players Association, making him a target for criticism all summer during the league's labor dispute.
Players and agents who want the union to be decertified believe that Smith helped negotiate a bad deal for the players.


NATO Resumes Bombardment of Serbs
NATO resumed its bombardment of the Bosnian Serbs today after a four-day pause for negotiation failed to achieve the withdrawal of artillery that has kept Sarajevo under a 40-month siege.
A statement from NATO headquarters in Brussels said the bombing began again "after United Nations and NATO concluded that the Bosnian Serbs had failed to demonstrate the intent to comply with United Nations demands to remove military threats against Sarajevo."


No Headline
"It is a violation of human rights when babies are denied food, or drowned, or suffocated, or their spines broken, simply because they are born girls, when women and girls are sold into slavery or prostitution for human greed." -- HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON, in China.  [ A1:3. ]


2,130 and Counting


I.B.M. Finance Chief Leaves Rich Cash Legacy
As Jerome B. York leaves his post as chief financial officer of I.B.M., he leaves the chairman and chief executive, Louis V. Gerstner Jr., with the best gift any boss could ask for: more than $10 billion in cash.
In little more than two years at I.B.M., Mr.
York's reputation as a passionate and feared cost-cutter made him the executive most credited by Wall Street for the company's financial revival.
His surprising departure to join the Tracinda Corporation caused I.B.M.'s stock to decline nearly 2 percent on a day other computer stocks were up.


Sports of The Times; Cowboys' Owner Takes a Stand Against the N.F.L. Welfare State
THERE were many sad and stern faces at Giants Stadium on Monday night.
For one thing, the hated Cowboys had waltzed and shimmied over the Giants, 35-0.
Worse, there was a sense that Jerry Jones, the Cowboys' flamboyant owner, had upstaged the Giants on what was supposed to have been a special night.
The team held a halftime ceremony to retire Phil Simms's jersey.
Jones, the master marketer, used the game to unveil a blockbuster deal between Nike and his Texas Stadium.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about the lawyer William M. Kunstler misstated the title of David Lerner at the Center for Constitutional Rights, which Mr.
Kunstler helped to found in 1966.
Mr.
Lerner is a spokesman for the center; its executive director is Ron E. Daniels.


Annie Kriegel, 68, Historian; French Expert on Communism
Annie Kriegel, a French ex-Communist who was a historian and analyst of Communism, died on Aug. 26 in a Paris hospital.
She was 68 and lived in Paris.
She had cancer, said the French newspaper Le Figaro, which reported her death on Aug. 28.


10-Year Pact for Calipari
JOHN CALIPARI has signed a 10-year contract worth an estimated $4.5 million to $5 million, the University of Massachusetts announced yesterday.
Calipari, already the most successful basketball coach in school history with a 158-69 record in seven years, will receive the same $132,000 base pay he received in his previous contract.


Arctic Refuge Drilling Won't Threaten Wildlife; Complacent Caribou
To the Editor:
"In Alaska, Nature Under Siege" (editorial, Aug. 28) predicts dire consequences if oil is produced in Alaska's Arctic National Wildlife Refuge.
The history of oil production at Prudhoe Bay, 70 miles west of the refuge, doesn't support those conclusions.


Sports of The Times; Byron Black Wears Shoes These Days
TALK about tennis at the grass-roots level.
Byron Black learned the game barefoot and unorthodox, surrounded by 235 acres of avocados out in the countryside of Zimbabwe.
His father built his own grass courts, where tennis shoes were not encouraged.
Donald Black played at Wimbledon back in the 1950's, and he kept his passion even when he came home to raise avocados.
The boy started out at the age of 3 with a two-hand grip from both sides, and even when he was big enough to grip a racquet with one hand, he kept both hands on it.


Arctic Refuge Drilling Won't Threaten Wildlife
To the Editor:
"In Alaska, Nature Under Siege" (editorial, Aug. 28), opposing oil exploration and development in Alaska's Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, distorts the effect of such activity on wildlife resources and gives short shrift to legitimate concerns about United States economic security.


Kyoto Journal; The Mob's Truly Sorry: Killing Upsets the Police
Residents of this ancient city, best known for its temples and gardens, were understandably shaken recently when members of Japan's biggest organized-crime gang shot and killed a police officer after mistaking him for a rival mobster.
But no one was the least bit surprised when two sharply dressed gang members walked into police headquarters the next day, surrendered and cried as they apologized for their mistake.


Ferguson Quits Ottawa
JOHN FERGUSON resigned as director of player personnel for the Ottawa Senators yesterday, apparently upset over recent budget cuts and the National Hockey League team's plan to trade center ALEKSEI YASHIN.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about a dispute over the size and number of powerboats on Lake Hopatcong in New Jersey misattributed a quotation in some editions.
As the article reported, it was a marina operator, speaking on condition of anonymity, who said, "The lake doesn't belong to one person or people with lakefront homes"; it was not Marvin Haas, the boat owner shown.


Romanian H.I.V. Case Was Certain Tragedy
To the Editor:
Re "Parents Sue Romania Over Child's H.I.V. Infection" (news article, Aug. 31): Arriving in Romania as a volunteer at a hospital in rural Nicoresti in 1992, I observed children classified as "irrecoverable" (severely handicapped) being tested for H.I.V.
There was a complete absence of sanitary procedure.
Used syringes were heaped with other discarded supplies behind the hospital, where handicapped children rummaged for things to play with.


Real Estate; In White Plains, a new mall and perhaps a movie multiplex may revitalize downtown.
THE merchants of White Plains -- -- say they are hoping that the city's downtown will be the next area of revitalization.
Their hopes have been heightened by the opening in March of the Westchester, a 2.5-million-square-foot mall on Westchester Avenue and Bloomingdale Road on the outskirts of downtown.


Arctic Refuge Drilling Won't Threaten Wildlife; Slipping Past Congress
To the Editor:
It is bad enough that Alaska's three members of Congress are driving that institution to ruin the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge and the Tongass National Forest (editorial, Aug. 28).
Worse, the decision on oil drilling in the Arctic refuge is likely to be made without open debate.


Police Arrest Four In Truck Hijacking
Four men suspected of hijacking trucks containing valuable goods in several incidents in New York City were arrested yesterday afternoon after they commandeered a truck carrying $200,000 worth of women's clothing in Greenpoint, Brooklyn, the police said.
The police are investigating whether the previous hijackings can be linked to the four men, said Detective Mark Patterson, a police spokesman.
He would not release details of the previous incidents.


A Possible Hitch Is Seen as Talks On Turner Slow
The terms of payment for the Liberty Media Corporation's stock in Turner Broadcasting System Inc. appeared to be a major sticking point in the negotiations yesterday over Time Warner Inc.'s proposed purchase of Turner Broadcasting.
Negotiations have slowed in recent days, and several people involved seemed skeptical that a deal could be completed by Thursday, when Turner Broadcasting's board is scheduled to meet.


Streak Alive as Yankees Veto 13th Stadium Plan in a Year
The New York Yankees yesterday criticized the city's current proposal to keep the baseball team in the Bronx, increasing pressure on the Giuliani administration to present the team with more specific proposals for a new stadium elsewhere in New York City.
But Yankee officials, who criticized the city plan in a press release, went to great pains to say that while they intended to consider new stadium sites, they were not necessarily rejecting the Bronx or the stadium's current site.


Americanization Of a Film Festival
Time was, Venice was the poor relation of the film world.
Its Golden Lion, the top award of the annual Venice Film Festival, could never match the clout that the Oscar wielded in the bellwether American film market.
Nor did this city ever claim to compete with the Cannes International Film Festival when it came to influencing the buying and selling of movies.
That back-seat approach had its advantages, notably the lack of frenetic commercial activity, which meant that serious films really were the center of the showcase.
The decision to open the 52d Venice Film Festival last Wednesday with Tony Scott's submarine thriller "Crimson Tide" reflects how far Venice has come.
As an added touch, Denzel Washington, one of the stars of the film, dropped by for a drink with the crew aboard an Italian Navy submarine anchored in the lagoon.


At a School, Clinton Campaigns for Education Spending
Seeking to return to Washington on the political offensive, President Clinton stumped today for education spending before a crowd of thousands gathered outside a middle school in California's farm country.
Mr.
Clinton's appearance at Abraham Lincoln Middle School was one of many events the White House has planned to rally public support for the President's fiscal priorities as he and the Republican-controlled Congress move into the crucial months of their confrontation on the budget.


When School Begins, It's Haircut Time


Personal Health; Beyond ragweed, allergenic combinations.
SO you think ragweed is causing your late-summer hay fever.
Before you lay the blame entirely on that highly allergenic plant, consider this: the cantaloupe or the iced chamomile tea you found so refreshing at lunch or the banana you sliced into your breakfast cereal could be adding to your discomfort.
These and other foods, in particular watermelon and honeydew, as well as a few plants like chrysanthemums and sunflowers, cross-react with ragweed and in some people can intensify the allergic response to the inhaled pollen.
They may also cause some discomforts of their own, like tingling of the lips, tongue and palate and itching and swelling of the mouth and throat.


Opening the Schools Amid Confusion
Some one million students will burst through the doors of 1,000 school buildings in New York City over the next two days.
They will encounter a school system that is reeling from budget cuts and political strife sharp enough to cause lasting damage.
For weeks now Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and the Board of Education have battled over three main issues: how to choose a successor to Schools Chancellor Ramon Cortines, whose announced resignation is effective Oct. 13; how the system can cope with a $230 million budget cut, and who should be responsible for school security.


Press Is Shown the Pain of the Civilians
In the safety of a basement cafeteria in this suburb of Sarajevo controlled by the Serbs, about 60 civilians, most of them elderly or children, were taking refuge today from NATO bombs.
The scene -- old women in black scarves sitting frozen as mothers tried to calm anxious children -- was a duplicate of those in the shelters of Sarajevo during the last three years.


Snags Postpone Peace Talks Between Irish and British Premiers
A meeting scheduled for Wednesday between Prime Ministers John Major of Britain and John Bruton of Ireland was postponed today because of differences over how to deal with the disarmament of the Irish Republican Army and when to start all-party peace talks that would include Sinn Fein, the I.R.A. political wing.
Officials in Dublin said the postponement came after two days of urgent effort, including three telephone conversations between Mr.
Major and Mr.
Bruton, to iron out the differences in their proposals.
The meeting, which was to be held at Mr.
Major's country home, was to deal with the question of I.R.A. disarmament, which has blocked progress in the peace effort for months.


Area Code Changes Suggest Easier Solution
To the Editor:
Re "Lost Amid Change? Take a Number" (Business Day, Aug. 28), on the proliferation of new telephone area codes:


Corrections
A chart yesterday showing the salaries of executives of selected nonprofit organizations misstated the income of the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith in some editions.
Its annual income is $36 million, not $36 billion.


After Sailing for Cup, Women Try Calmer Waters
It's a long way from the rarefied world of America's Cup yacht racing to the reality of life after the cup.
Even the women on Mighty Mary, the focus of crushing attention in the 1995 sailing trials off San Diego, are easing back into old ways.
But world-class racing is still part of their agenda.
Despite a summer job on the maintenance crew of a small yacht club in this sleepy town across the bay from Newport, Joan Touchette is planning an Olympic campaign in a 470 dinghy.
Hannah Swett, who also lives in Jamestown, roller skates and bikes each day to stay in shape for racing a Europe dinghy in the 1996 Games in Atlanta.


Injured Student to File Suit
A Princeton University student who was maimed in 1990 when he climbed on top of a parked shuttle train and touched a power line connection is to file suit today in Federal District Court against the university, which owns the shuttle station, and New Jersey Transit, the train operator, his lawyers said.


INSIDE
France Begins Nuclear Tests
In a long-awaited and widely condemned action, France detonated a nuclear device beneath a remote Pacific atoll today.
Page A3.
Big Bank Merger in Atlanta
Nationsbank, already the largest in Georgia, plans to acquire Bank South of Atlanta for stock worth $1.6 billion and to cut 2,000 jobs.
Page D1.
Whitewater Case Dismissed
A judge quashed an indictment against Gov.
Jim Guy Tucker of Arkansas, saying the Whitewater prosecutor had gone too far.
Page A20


Role of the Artist In a Stark Opera From Hindemith
When the curtain rises on the New York City Opera's new season tomorrow evening, the stage will not be filled with the revelry of Violetta and her Parisian friends or the decadence of the Duke of Mantua's court.
The company will visit those places later in the week.
Instead, opening night is to be given over to the ruined landscape that is the central (and persistent) image in the company's new production of Hindemith's "Mathis der Maler," a work about political and religious strife and whether an artist's response can make a difference.
The work is the City Opera's latest foray into the world of neglected 20th-century opera, a repertory it has been systematically exploring during Christopher Keene's six years as general director.
"Mathis" is also part of what the company is calling its "Freedom Cycle," a series of operas about oppression that began with last season's "Harvey Milk." The production, which is directed by Rhoda Levine, with sets and costumes by John Conklin, will be the first professional staging by an American company.
Mr.
Keene is to conduct the performances.


International Briefs; Renault Introduces 2 Midsize Models
The French auto maker Renault introduced yesterday the first two models of its new Megane midsize line aimed at increasing its share of the biggest and most competitive segment of the European market.
The company rented the Olympic Stadium in Barcelona, Spain, to bring out a hatchback and a two-door coupe, which go on sale in France in November and in most of Europe by March.


L.I. Fire Is Officially Under Control, but Others Continue to Burn
While firefighters on Long Island finally declared the two-week-old Westhampton blaze officially under control, stubborn brush fires continued to burn today on a mountaintop in the Palisades Interstate Park in Rockland County and in Worthington State Forest in New Jersey.
Gov.
George E. Pataki surveyed the 5,000 charred acres of the Long Island Pine Barrens from a helicopter this morning.
"When you see the drought, when you feel the wind, you know there is still a tremendous risk out there," he said.
"But the risk from this particular fire, I think it is safe to say, is now over."


BUSINESS DIGEST
Ex-Chrysler Executive Joins Kerkorian Effort  Seeking to add legitimacy to his attempt to gain control of Chrysler, Kirk Kerkorian hired Jerome B. York, the automobile giant's former chief financial officer.
The move sets the stage for a possible battle by Mr.
Kerkorian to win seats on the Chrysler board for his own slate of directors.
In a filing late yesterday, he said he was considering such a fight to elect Mr.
York to the Chrysler board.
Stocks traders viewed Mr.
York's move as a blow to I.B.M., where he was serving as chief financial officer.  [ Page A1. ] Kodak Management Changes  Eastman Kodak is establishing a three-member chief operating office to manage its day-to-day activities.
The office will include George M. C. Fisher, Kodak's chief executive, who is taking the title of chief operating officer, and two former vice presidents who have each been promoted to executive vice president and assistant chief operating officer.  [ D2. ] USAir Sees Higher Earnings  Shares of USAir rose nearly 22 percent, to $9.75, after the company said it expected to report a pretax profit for the third quarter and the full year, its first annual profit since 1989.
Other airline stocks also rose.  [ D4. ] Kansas City Southern in Deal  Kansas City Southern Industries said it would form a joint venture with Transportacion Maritima Mexicana to conduct some railroad operations in the United States and participate in the Mexican railroad business.  [ D2. ]
Heileman Sees Possible Default  The G. Heileman Brewing Company, burdened with debt as a result of a leveraged buyout by Hicks, Muse, Tate &amp; Furst last year, said that it would probably default on an interest payment due Jan. 31.
That could damage the ability of Hicks, Muse -- one of the nation's largest and busiest buyout firms -- to raise money for future deals.  [ D3. ]
K-III to Go Public  K-III Communications, publisher of New York and Seventeen magazines, plans to go public and is expected to use the proceeds to repay debt.  [ D6. ] N.L.R.B.
Cites Fieldcrest Cannon  The National Labor Relations Board has ruled that Fieldcrest Cannon engaged in unfair labor practices "so numerous, pervasive and outrageous" while battling union organizers that it must provide sweeping remedies.  [ D5. ] Federal Air Subsidy in Danger  The $33 million-a-year Federal program that subsidizes commuter flights to 108 remote towns may be cut.
The Senate has passed a bill that would reduce financing 20 percent next year, and a House version would cut it by more than half.
The Clinton Administration wants the program abolished.  [ A1. ] Detroit Strike Turns Violent  With bargaining stalled, the seven-week standoff between Detroit's daily newspapers and their striking unions has erupted into violence.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D6. ] Longs, Shorts and Manipulators  A disclosure by Sam D. Schwartz, the chairman of Incomnet, a small reseller of long-distance telephone services, that he had been actively buying and selling the company's stock to defend it against short-sellers has raised questions of manipulation.
Floyd Norris: Market Place.  [ D8. ]


Much Ado About a Boy In Quest of a Park Toilet
HERE is another actual story from the annals of law enforcement in this city where mayhem is no stranger and where the struggle for peace, order and enviable quality of life demands ever constant vigilance.
It is the true story of what happened when William Frederick Schlesinger, who is 4 years old, tinkled behind a bush in Central Park.
It was on May 23, a Tuesday, and William, who lives in Passaic Park, N.J., was spending the day in Manhattan with his grandmother, Nancy Stein.


Showalter Makes a Choice, and Mariners Make Yanks Pay
The fifth inning was fateful for the Yankees last night, and Manager Buck Showalter contributed to their demise with one agonizing decision.
Why was Bob MacDonald pitching to Jay Buhner with two runners on base?
MacDonald, who had just retired Tino Martinez, rarely faces right-handed hitters.
Why was Buhner suddenly facing him in such a critical situation?
Of course, Showalter was privately bothered by his choice because Buhner crushed a three-run homer on MacDonald's second pitch to give the Mariners a 6-0 lead in a game they won, 6-5.
Showalter has emphasized the importance of these late-season games, but he should have heeded his own words.
Last night was not the night to discover whether MacDonald could retire Buhner.


Two Sides to Twins' Story
They are identical twins.
They think the same, dress the same, attend the same high school classes, like the same girls, receive the same grades, want to attend the same college.
Mike and Bob Bryan say their only difference is in the hand that grips the tennis racquet.
Mike is right-handed, and Bob is left-handed.
Two days ago, they were separated by victory and defeat: Bob beat Andrei Biziak of Slovakia in the first round of the junior United States Open; Mike lost to 15th-seeded Vladimir Voltchkov of Belarus.


Kerkorian, Eye Still on Chrysler, Hires Its Former Finance Officer
In a move to add new legitimacy to his attempt to gain control of the Chrysler Corporation, Kirk Kerkorian, the company's largest and most dissatisfied shareholder, hired the automobile giant's former chief financial officer yesterday.
The hiring of the executive, Jerome B. York, sets the stage for a possible battle by Mr.
Kerkorian to win seats on the Chrysler board for his own handpicked slate of directors.
In a regulatory filing late yesterday, Mr.
Kerkorian said he was considering such a fight to elect Mr.
York to the Chrysler board.


Eating Well; F.D.A. Target: Baby Formula
A SEVEN-MONTH Government investigation has uncovered extensive scams to market bogus, outdated or mislabeled baby formula, and there are indications that other counterfeit products, from shampoo to coffee to prescription drugs, are also being sold to unsuspecting consumers.
The baby-formula investigation, begun by the Food and Drug Administration after 45,000 pounds of counterfeit infant formula was seized in California in February, has uncovered at least 10 operations in eight states that have apparently sold bogus formula by having it made by small producers and placed in cans with counterfeit labels.


Judge Sets Aside Whitewater Indictment Against Governor
A Federal district judge today quashed one of two indictments against Gov.
Jim Guy Tucker of Arkansas and two other defendants, finding that the special prosecutor looking into the Whitewater matter, Kenneth W. Starr, had exceeded his jurisdiction in charging them.
The judge, Henry Woods, threw out indictments that had been returned by a grand jury in June against Mr.
Tucker; his personal lawyer, John Haley of Little Rock, and William J. Marks Sr. of San Francisco.
Those indictments charged Mr.
Tucker and Mr.
Marks with obtaining a bank loan under false pretenses for use by a Texas cable television company in which they were partners, and contended that all three men participated in a scheme to avoid capital gains taxes when they sold the business.


Women as Chattel: In China, Slavery Rises
In the shadow of the ancient wall that still surrounds this city, several hundred people gather each day along a muddy street to offer themselves to employers at an unofficial labor market.
Many are young women from the countryside, and for them the market holds a special danger: it may be the first stop on a journey that begins with the promise of a job, sees rape and violent beatings along the way and ends in a life of domestic slavery.


At a Clinic, Young Men Talk of Sex
ON a recent Monday night, a group of young men got together in Washington Heights to talk about sex.
Some wore their baseball hats backward, a few had dreadlocks.
Some slumped quietly in their chairs, and others sat up straight and spit out rapid-fire questions and answers about testosterone, condoms and sexually transmitted diseases.


Simpson Jury Hears of Racist Incidents
Ravenous for testimony after a week without it, jurors in the O. J. Simpson case were fed five witnesses today, three of whom offered graphic testimony about the virulent racial animus of Mark Fuhrman.
Finally privy to a story that was chewed over for months outside their presence, jurors heard one witness recount how Mr.
Fuhrman told her that he had used spurious pretexts to pull over interracial couples.
She also said Mr.
Fuhrman, the former Los Angeles detective who was involved in the investigation that led to the charges against Mr.
Simpson, had said he would like to put "niggers in a pile and burn them."


A Festival Stretches Limits at Lincoln Center
From today until Saturday, Lincoln Center won't play host to its usual crowd.
Instead, T-shirts and tattoos, ripped jeans and navel rings are as likely to be seen as business suits; people will be carrying guitar cases as well as cellular phones.
Avery Fisher Hall, Alice Tully Hall and the Walter Reade Theater have been taken over by the CMJ Music Marathon, the 15th annual convention and showcase for alternative music presented by CMJ, formerly the College Media Journal.
The Music Marathon is the largest and longest-running music convention in New York City, having outlived the New Music Seminar.
About 6,000 people are expected to attend; 400 bands will perform at clubs around the city.


Ripken's Run for the Record Book Puts Pressure on His Rivals, Too
David Howard of the Kansas City Royals is no second coming of Hal McRae, Jorge Fabregas of the California Angels is no Don Baylor and Troy Percival, also of the Angels, is no Bob Gibson.
For all of that, Cal Ripken can be grateful.
The Baltimore Orioles shortstop, who made history out of longevity last night, can look to his fellow major leaguers and offer gratitude that they all come from a kinder, gentler generation of ballplayers.


Some Law Firms Practice Art for Art's Sake
During the 1980's, an art collection became the symbol that separated the in-vogue law firms from the unhip ones.
Recession-provoked budget trimmings soon replaced the desire for cachet, and collecting dropped off.
But it didn't go away.
Currently, more than 70 American law firms with collections ranging from 50 to 1,400 artworks have listed themselves in the International Directory of Corporate Art Collectors.


Senate Votes $242 Billion For Spending by Military
Returning from its summer recess, the Senate today approved a $242.7 billion military spending plan that covers purchases from bullets to blimps, the salaries and benefits for nearly 1.5 million military personnel and the costs of developing a new generation of fighter aircraft and ballistic missiles.
The spending bill was approved by a vote of 65 to 35 that interrupted the debate on a companion $265.3 billion military authorization bill, which is ordinarily larger because it represents some future spending.
The authorization bill is also larger than the $257.6 billion that the Pentagon said it needed for its post-cold-war mission, but also includes some anti-missile defenses inspired by "Star Wars" that have been blocked for years by treaties with the Soviet Union or by Democratic-controlled Congresses.


Legal Aid Society Worker Quits Over Plan for Protest at Prisons
The Legal Aid Society said that a paralegal resigned yesterday after admitting that she had improperly promoted a statewide prison demonstration this month to mark the prison uprising at Attica 24 years ago.
But society officials said the paralegal, Jean DeMay, had acted on her own in urging prisoners to pass around packets of information printed on Legal Aid stationery and slipped into at least one prison through confidential legal mail.
The officials said there was no indication any other employees -- and particularly the lawyers who work on cases about prison conditions and prisoners' rights -- had been involved in circulating the material.


After 7 Weeks, Detroit Newspaper Strike Takes a Violent Turn
With bargaining stalled, the seven-week standoff here between two newspapers and their striking unions has erupted into violence, as police battled pickets who were illegally blockading a printing plant late Saturday and again late Monday.
In Monday night's melee, police officers in riot gear fired pepper spray at pickets who pelted them with auto parts and swatted them with their signs.
The demonstrators, on strike against The Detroit News and The Detroit Free Press, dispersed about 2 A.M. today, permitting replacement workers to enter and leave the plant.


India Project in the Balance
In the next month, Rebecca P. Mark will learn whether she is to be remembered as the executive whose perseverance pushed through the largest- ever foreign investment in India, or as the most visible symbol of a corporate vision gone horribly wrong.
Ms.
Mark, a 41-year-old Missouri native, heads an Enron Corporation subsidiary -- the Enron Development Corporation -- that has spent three years planning, and starting to build, the largest power plant India has ever seen.
As one of the first American companies to explore the opportunities opened up by India's decision to scrap its socialist economic system, Enron was widely hailed as a groundbreaker for the billions of dollars in American investments India has said it needs to help break out of poverty.


Revisions to Tables On Mutual Fund Highlights
The mutual fund spotlight table, appearing today on page D16, reflects changes in the grouping of mutual funds made by Morningstar Inc., which supplies mutual fund tables to The New York Times.
The spotlight tables highlight the performance of similar funds, showing the performance of the 10 largest funds of a type, as well as of the 10 best performers and the 10 worst performers over the previous year.
There are 15 spotlight tables, and each one appears once every three weeks.


Time Questions Newsweek On Powell Memoirs Scoop
In the news business, there is still nothing that beats scooping the competition -- particularly when it involves big time rivals.
Newsweek, a unit of the Washington Post Company, did just that to Time this week with its cover story on the memoirs of Gen.
Colin L. Powell.
Time, which is owned by Time Warner Inc., had bought exclusive rights from Random House to excerpt the book, by outbidding Newsweek and U.S.
News &amp; World Report last year.
Time planned to publish a 7,500-word cover story next week, coinciding with the Sept. 15 publication date of General Powell's book, "My American Journey."


Corrections
A picture caption on Aug. 5 about a synagogue in Woodstock, N.Y., that serves former members of the counterculture misidentified a woman photographed in the 1960's and again at a recent bar mitzvah.
She is Laurie Schwartz, not Bonnie Meadow.
Ms.
Schwartz pointed out the error on Aug. 7, but this correction was delayed when her phone message was directed to a reporter who was vacationing.


Simpson Jurors Need to Hear Full Tapes
To the Editor:
As a former Times reporter who covered countless trials, including many for murder, I believe Judge Lance A. Ito's ruling on the Fuhrman tapes in the O. J. Simpson trial missed the point.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
4.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.88
5.72
4.81
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.30
5.28
4.58
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.30
5.28
4.89
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.18
6.22
7.25
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.57
6.61
7.54
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.48
7.53
8.40
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.04
6.07
6.37
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Senate Is Losing a Liberal Voice


Spurrier Blasts Fans For Booing the Gators
STEVE SPURRIER blasted Florida fans yesterday for booing the team in its season-opening victory and suggested he may have worn out his welcome as Gators coach.
In a stunning start to his weekly news media luncheon in Gainesville, Fla., Spurrier related how he had spoken before the previous day's practice with the freshman punter, ROBBY STEVENSON, a prime target of jeers after he averaged only 21.5 yards on two kicks.


In Hanoi, Bush Defends Delay in Opening Normal Relations
Former President George Bush, who refused to open diplomatic relations with Vietnam while in office, defended that decision and the American role in the Vietnam War today before an audience of Vietnamese officials and business leaders.
"There is no point in me trying to convince people in this room the rectitude of what we did," Mr.
Bush said in response to a question after his speech.


Sprewell Is Arrested
Golden State Warriors guard LATRELL SPREWELL was arrested on traffic violations and for allegedly threatening a police officer who chased his truck, the police said yesterday. (AP)


CHRONICLE
CAROL THATCHER, Margaret Thatcher's daughter, is writing a book about . . . her father, DENIS THATCHER.
"When my mother was writing her second book," she said in a telephone interview from London yesterday, "it occurred to me that my father is the only man in the world who will ever be able to say, 'My wife was Britain's first woman Prime Minister,' so his story, whatever it is, is a considerable slice of history. So I said, 'Come on Dad, what was it like being you?' "


Dallas Exploits Giants' Weak Defensive Line
Giants defensive lineman Michael Strahan stood at his locker in the minutes after his team's humiliating loss to the Dallas Cowboys on Monday night, and the lost look on his face typified the feelings of most Giants players.
He was frustrated by his performance, upset about being pulled out of the game late in the second half, and wondering just what happened on a night when the Giants were trying to prove they could play with Dallas.
"This is a bad night," Strahan said.
"I don't want to get into me being pulled from the game. I'm upset about it, but more importantly I want to focus on this team getting better. We have a long way to go, and we're going to have to stick together to get better."


Plea Bargain For One of 5 In a Bar Rape
One of five men charged with raping a woman who had passed out in a northern New York State bar has agreed to testify against the others in exchange for avoiding jail time, the latest twist in a case that drew national attention when the defendants were initially just fined $750 each.
The man, Gregory L. Streeter, 29, pleaded guilty in St.
Lawrence County Court in Canton yesterday to sexual abuse.
He admitted that he had sexual intercourse with the victim, 24 at the time, in 1991 after she collapsed from drinking too many cocktails at the Casablanca restaurant in nearby Gouverneur, 95 miles north of Syracuse.
In return for his testimony against the other four on first-degree rape charges this fall, the State Attorney General's office is expected to recommend that he be placed on probation with no prison time.


Depression in the Old Can Be Deadly, But the Symptoms Are Often Missed
THE patient was a 70-year-old grandmother who lived alone in an apartment building for the elderly.
The doctor was asked to see her because she had twice been taken to the emergency room in danger of a diabetic coma.
But when the doctor examined her, he found the pressing problem was not her diabetes, which could be controlled by diet and medication.
Rather, it was depression, which rendered the woman apathetic about taking care of herself.


METRO DIGEST
TEACHERS RETURN TO AIR OF UNCERTAINTY
The story of two doctors illustrates how the elite world of New York cardiac surgeons has struggled to adjust to a new set of rules aimed at improving care.
The changes have led to turmoil within the insular cardiac community, forcing at least 21 low-performing doctors out of heart surgery in New York.
At the same time, doctors suspect that some high-risk patients are pressured to go out of state.  [ A1. ] NEW YORK CITY  CLOSING ARGUMENTS BEGIN IN BOMB TRIAL
A Federal prosecutor pointed to a blind, stooped Muslim cleric in a Manhattan courtroom and declared that he had led a "war of terrorism against the United States" that included the bombing of the World Trade Center, and plots for other bombings.  [ B3. ] MUCH ADO ABOUT A BOY AND A QUEST
Here is another actual story from the annals of law enforcement in this city where mayhem is no stranger and where the struggle for peace, order and enviable quality of life demands ever constant vigilance.
It is the true story of what happened when William Frederick Schlesinger, who is 4 years old, tinkled behind a bush in Central Park.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman.  [ B3. ] YANKEES CRITICIZE STADIUM PROPOSAL
The New York Yankees criticized the city's current proposal to keep the baseball team in the Bronx, increasing pressure on the Giuliani administration to present the team with more specific proposals for a new stadium elsewhere in New York City.  [ B3. ] PARALEGAL ADMITS TO PRISON PLOT
The Legal Aid Society said that a paralegal resigned after admitting that she had improperly promoted a statewide prison demonstration this month to mark the prison uprising at Attica 24 years ago.  [ B2. ] REGION  L.I.
BRUSH FIRE UNDER CONTROL
While firefighters on Long Island finally declared the two-week-old Westhampton blaze officially under control, brush fires continued to burn on a mountaintop in the Palisades Interstate Park in Rockland County and in Worthington State Forest in New Jersey.  [ B6. ] FLAMBOYANT DINER IS CHARGED WITH FRAUD
In the last few weeks, Alessandro Nardone became a regular at Paisley's Eatery in Mastic, L.I., dropping by for dinner several nights a week and often bringing friends.
So when two police detectives stopped in on Sunday night with his picture, staff members were not only able to identify him, they were able to point him out at a table.  [ B6. ] STATE DEMOCRATS OFFER PLAN TO REGROUP
Even as they acknowledged daunting problems, New York State's Democratic leaders told a gathering of loyalists that the state party was in better shape than should be expected, given the licking it took in 1994.  [ B6. ]


Colleges Ease Parents' Fears With Orientation Programs
Parents of freshmen at the University of North Carolina at Wilmington get this advice from an administrator: After the fourth or fifth week of classes, mail your freshman a card that says $50 is enclosed so he or she can have a nice dinner with a friend.
"But don't put in the money," said the administrator, Richard H. Mullendore, associate vice chancellor for student affairs.
"You'll hear from your student. Works every time."


A Recipe for Weight Gain: Adding Alcohol to Fatty Food
When people eat high-fat meals with alcoholic beverages rather than nonalcoholic drinks, they tend to consume many more total calories, researchers say.
Canadian scientists say studies indicate that consuming alcohol, with its added calories, has no inhibitory effect on food intake but rather can lead to a caloric intake far beyond what the body requires.


Kodak Picks Team to Run Operations
George M. C. Fisher, the chief executive of the Eastman Kodak Company, has reached down into his executive ranks and selected a new generation of operating management to run the photographic products company.
Kodak announced yesterday that it was establishing a three-member chief operating office to manage the day-to-day activities of the company, which is based in Rochester.
The office will consist of Mr.
Fisher, who is taking the title of chief operating officer in addition to chairman, president and chief executive, and two former vice presidents who have each been promoted to executive vice president and assistant chief operating officer.


ON THE SET WITH: Mariel Hemingway; Home Sweet 'Central Park West'
NEVER mind that she was born in California, raised in Idaho and has the broad-shouldered, outdoorsy good looks that are more likely to summon up visions of hiking in the Tetons than shoving into the subway.
Mariel Hemingway considers herself a New Yorker.
Certainly, she looks like one in her pin-stripe Donna Karan power dress, seated behind a large desk on the elegant set of "Central Park West," the prime-time soap opera about rich, hip, beautiful overachievers colliding in the city's toniest orbits.
The CBS series, which is being shot on location in New York, begins on Sept. 13 at 9 P.M.


Don't Look in Usenet For Ayn Rand's Ideas
To the Editor:
Re "Scary New 'Isms' at the Speed of Light" (Op-Ed, Aug. 30):
Barbara O'Brien, believing "parents should worry" that their children will be exposed to the ideas of Ayn Rand on the Internet, supports this claim with a collection of quotes taken from Usenet discussions.


Mrs. Clinton's Unwavering Words
Hillary Rodham Clinton proved to be just the tonic for the besieged meeting of women in Beijing.
With their surly Chinese hosts trying to stifle debate and spontaneity, the women needed a leader prepared to challenge the constraints and defend the principle of women's rights.
Mrs.
Clinton delivered on both counts yesterday in an unflinching speech that may have been her finest moment in public life.
Many in Washington had argued that the First Lady should not attend this conference.
Human rights advocates feared that her presence would be taken as an official American endorsement of Beijing's gross mishandling of the gathering and more general abuses of human rights.
Some conservative Republicans caricatured the agenda of the conference as somehow offending mainstream American values.
Diplomats worried about a chance incident that might damage already troubled Chinese-American relations.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  NATO RESUMES BOMBING SERBS
NATO resumed its bombardment of the Bosnian Serbs after a four-day pause for negotiations failed to achieve the withdrawal of artillery from around Sarajevo.
A1  Serbs sought refuge from latest NATO strikes.
A12  FIRST LADY SPEAKS IN CHINA
At an international women's conference, Hillary Rodham Clinton spoke more forcefully on human rights than any American dignitary on Chinese soil.
A1  WOMEN'S LIVES FOR SALE
For many Chinese women, provincial labor markets are the first step on a journey that begins with the promise of a job and ends in a life of domestic slavery.
A1  FRANCE CONDUCTS NUCLEAR TEST
France detonated a nuclear device in the South Pacific, the first of a planned series of nuclear tests condemned by foreign governments and environmental groups.
A3  HURRICANE HITS CARIBBEAN
The 140-m.p.h. winds of Hurricane Luis tore off roofs and snapped telephone lines in Antigua and other eastern Caribbean islands before veering to the north.
A3  Radio Marti was again the center of a Congressional dispute.
A8  Mexican villagers demonstrated against a development project.
A9  France tightened its borders to combat a wave of bombings.
A14  British and Irish leaders postponed a meeting.
A15  Kyoto Journal: The Japanese mob is truly sorry.
A4  National A16-22, D20  NEW CHRYSLER BATTLE SEEN
Bolstering his effort to gain control of Chrysler, Kirk Kerkorian has hired the auto maker's former chief financial officer.
A1  FIGHT OVER FLIGHT SUBSIDIES
Montana is the nation's largest user of commercial air services and thus it is bound to be the largest loser if Congressional budget-cutters succeed in eliminating a little-known program that such services.
A1  SIMPSON JURY HEARS OF FUHRMAN
The O.J.
Simpson jury heard three witnesses who offered graphic testimony about the racial animus of Detective Mark Fuhrman.
A16  The ruling on Mr.
Fuhrman threw the defense into turmoil.
A16  WHITEWATER INDICTMENT OUT
A Federal judge quashed an indictment against Arkansas's Governor, Jim Guy Tucker and two other defendants, finding that the Whitewater special prosecutor had exceeded his jurisdiction.
A17  VIOLENCE IN DETROIT STRIKE
The seven-week standoff between Detroit's two daily newspapers and their striking unions here has erupted into violence.
A21  MILITARY SPENDING APPROVED
The Senate approved a $242.7 billion military spending plan that covers purchases, the salaries for military personnel and a new generation of fighter aircraft and missiles.
D20  CLINTON ON EDUCATION
On a trip to California, the President stumped for education spending before a crowd of thousands outside a middle school.
D20  DOLE ISSUES A WARNING
Senator Bob Dole warned that Congress's fall session would be a rough affair unless the White House joined with Republicans.
D20  PACKWOOD OFFERS EXPLANATION
For the first time since he reversed himself and said he wanted public hearings into the accusations of sexual misconduct against him, Senator Bob Packwood explained himself to his fellow Republicans.
D20  Northfield Journal: One military academy has long been co-ed.
A16  Education B10  Metro Digest B1  A TEACHER DASHES FOR A CLASS
If the opening of New York City schools this week seems more chaotic than usual, consider the case of Karen Bloom, would-be teacher, who woke up unemployed, by midmorning was hired as a substitute and by noon had landed a full-time teaching job.
A1  SURGEONS UNDER A MICROSCOPE
The story of Drs.
Jeffrey Gold and Richard Dal Col illustrates how the elite world of New York cardiac surgeons has struggled to adjust to a new set of rules aimed at improving care.
In 1991, New York became the first state in the nation to release surgeon-specific death rates for coronary bypass surgery.
A1  Arts/Entertainment C11-16  Venice Film Festival.
C11  Staging "Mathis der Maler." C11  Art at law firms.
C11  Alternative music festival.
C16  Books: Book Notes C13  "Virtually Normal." C15  Television: The debate on managed health care.
C16.
The Living Section C1-9  Eating Well: F.D.A. investigates baby formula.
C1  Health Page C10  Sports B11-17  Baseball: Yanks lose to Mariners.
B11  Ripkin ties record.
B11  Columns: Vecsey on the Open.
B11  On baseball.
B13  Rhoden on Jerry Jones.
B15  Football: Giants' weakness exposed.
B11  Tennis: Courier defeats Muster.
B11  Sports People.
B17  Obituaries D21  Vaclav Neumann, led the Czech Philharmonic Orchestra.
Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials  Mrs.
Clinton's unwavering words.
Congress returns.
Opening schools amid confusion.
Letters  Thomas L. Friedman: Don't kick sand at Taiwan.
Gertrude Himmelfarb: America's moral diversity.
James Bovard: The Feds under our beds.
Chronicle D26  Crossword C15


School Board Narrows Field In Search for a Chancellor
New York City's Board of Education has whittled its search for a new schools chancellor to a pool of about 35 candidates that includes a number of prominent educators from around the nation -- but only a few business leaders of the sort that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has advocated for the job.
As the first of the city's one million schoolchildren return to classes, the board's seven members plan to meet today to start the more difficult, politically sensitive task of paring the list further.
The board, officials said, hopes to come up with a more manageable list of 10 to 15 candidates this week, with an eye to starting formal interviews next week.


At Penn State, So Many Freshmen, So Few Dorms
Pennsylvania State University, caught by surprise when far more of the students it accepted actually enrolled, has been forced to house more than 700 freshmen in study lounges and to appeal for rooms in private homes.
This year's freshman class of 4,263 is the largest in university history, said Dr.
John Romano, vice provost for enrollment management and administration.
Usually, 35 percent of the applicants accepted by Penn State enroll there; this year, 38 percent did, he said.


Retrial Nears in a Murder Case
Jury selection began yesterday in the retrial of James D. Clausell, who was sentenced to death in a 1986 murder-for-hire case.
His conviction was overturned by the State Supreme Court, which found that the jury had been improperly instructed, said a spokesman for the Burlington County Prosecutor's office.
Prosecutors said that Roland Bartlett, the leader of a Philadelphia drug ring, offered Mr.
Clausell and Dwayne A. Wright $5,000 for killing Edward L. Atwood, a neighbor who had filed a lawsuit against Mr.
Bartlett for failing to clean up after his dog.
Mr.
Wright is serving a life sentence, and Mr.
Bartlett died in prison.


Treasury Securities Rise in Price
Prices of Treasury securities gained yesterday for the fourth straight trading day, with the long maturities posting the biggest gains.
Since last Friday's economic reports suggested that growth was not fast enough to ignite inflation or to keep the Fed from lowering interest rates, the market has been pricing in a rate cut, even with the latest auto sales showing gains.
Analysts say that the auto sales while good should not give rise to inflation.


Corrections
An article on Monday about the Edinburgh Festival misidentified the author of the play "Hunting Humans." He is Richard Thompson, not Robert Thompson.


A Primary School, Once Unneeded, Is Reborn
For a lesson in the life cycle of a community, one need look only as far as the red-brick Beechwood Elementary School here.
Built for baby boomers of the 1950's, it was converted to a community center during the baby bust of the 70's and 80's.
On Wednesday, it opens again as an elementary school.
On the last precious weekend before the beginning of a new school year, it seemed to those who had spent seven months preparing the building that a miracle had occurred: Beechwood was almost ready for its first pupils in 14 years.
Brand-new clocks in the classrooms, stuck on 12 o'clock, would be set right; the fire alarm would stop going berserk, and the yellow Post-Its on the doorways, designating "principal," "cafeteria" and "nurse," would be replaced with painted signs.


Leaky Cylinder Blamed in Fire
A fire that set off a chain of explosions at the Matheson Gas Products plant early Sunday was probably caused by a leaky gas cylinder whose contents ignited through contact with the air, fire officials said yesterday.
The cylinders, which held hydrogen chloride, propane and other gases, were stacked on wooden pallets, said William Sandvig, vice president of operations for Matheson.
No one was hurt in the incident.


Foreign Affairs; Don't Kick Sand at Taiwan
During the 1950's Taiwan and China used to shell barren areas of each other's territory every day.
It was a ritual that allowed both nations to demonstrate that they were carrying on the ideological struggle, but without any risks.
In 1958 the two sides quietly reached a novel agreement to further routinize their conflict and save money: They would shell each other every other day.
China would shell Taiwan Monday, Wednesday and Friday and Taiwan would shell China Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.
On Sunday they rested.
It is the proven ability of China and Taiwan to reach such quiet, under-the-table arrangements when it suits their interests that leaves me feeling a glimmer of optimism that Beijing and Taipei will step back from the brink of their current crisis.


Donor Cards Honor Mantle
Mickey Mantle's final wish was to publicize organ donations, which he called the best gift he had ever received when his liver was replaced on June 8.
So last night his three sons visited Yankee Stadium for the first time since his death on Aug. 13 to honor his wish and initiate Mickey's Team Organ Donor Awareness Program.
Donor cards, which featured Mantle's picture, statistics, a message from the Hall of Famer and a place for the potential donor to sign the legal document, were distributed to adult fans before the game against the Mariners.
Mantle's sons, David, Danny and Mickey Jr., each tossed out a first pitch.


Nobel Peace Laureates Draft a Plan to Govern Arms Trade
A group of Nobel Peace Prize winners is planning a new initiative aimed at establishing a "code of conduct" to govern the international arms trade.
Under the proposal, which is to be introduced at the United Nations, countries that take part would agree not to export weapons to countries with repressive governments or countries at war.


CHRONICLE
CHRISTOPHER D'AMATO, 25, a son of Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, started a new job yesterday: he was sworn in as an assistant district attorney in the office of the Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau.
Mr.
D'Amato, a graduate of Syracuse Law School, is one 61 new prosecutors in the office, chosen from 2,000 applicants.


Will Stars' Contract Status Lead to Devils' Unraveling?
When the Stanley Cup champion Devils assemble for training camp this weekend, they will be most concerned with the contract status of goalie Martin Brodeur, defenseman Scott Niedermayer and forward Claude Lemieux.
Brodeur and Niedermayer are restricted free agents who aren't expected to report.
Lemieux agreed to a new contract last spring, but is expected to request a renegotiation and may hold out.
Another star, also seeking a new pact, may be close to signing.
He is Stephane Richer, a sniper from the wing, who is about to start his option year at $905,000.
Richer's agent, Richard Teoli, said yesterday that he has been negotiating with Lou Lamoriello, the team's president and general manager, about a new deal that would pay Richer at least $4.5 million over three seasons.


Rockport says shoes, like fine wine, can improve with time.
IN most shoe ads, the product, whether a wingtip or a wedgie, gleams as brightly as it did the first day on the last.
But the Rockport Company is hoping to burnish its brand image by celebrating not shiny new shoes but worn used ones.
That arresting ploy is at the heart of an unconventional testimonial campaign by Leo Burnett U.S.A. in Chicago, the first work from the agency since being awarded the worldwide Rockport account in November.
Print and broadcast advertisements, as well as promotions in stores, feature actual shoes borrowed from customers who have exposed them to mud, mountains, marathons and -- mercy! -- even the streets of Manhattan.


Embattled Police Chief Returns
Robert A. Spina, the embattled Police Chief who was found by a Superior Court judge in Essex County to have abused his wife, returned to his post yesterday as his six-week paid leave of absence came to an end.
"I'm not very happy about his return," said Herbert Waldman, president of the Town Council, which tried unsuccessfully last week to have Mr.
Spina extend his leave.


Race for Bridgeport Casino Is Down to 2 Big Operators
The competition to develop a casino in Bridgeport narrowed today to two of the nation's most prominent gaming operators -- the Mashantucket Pequot Indians of Ledyard and Las Vegas-based Mirage Resorts Inc. -- as 10 other candidates dropped out, saying the stakes were too high.
In issuing a request for proposals for the casino in July, the state said it would only select a developer who could guarantee the state $610 million over the next three years, a sum many gaming analysts called unrealistic.
To weed out less serious candidates, the state required that potential developers submit a $610 million letter of credit with their proposals, which were due today.


Insignia Buys New York Property Managers
Insignia Financial Group, Inc., a real estate service organization based in Greenville, S.C., said yesterday that it had acquired two prominent New York area apartment managers.
The companies acquired are the Kreisel Company, one of the leading managers of cooperative and condominium apartments in metropolitan New York, and the residential real property management division of Douglas Elliman-Gibbons &amp; Ives, one of the oldest New York management companies.


Trump Loses a Suit to Block A State-Run Keno-Style Game
In a quick appeals court decision yesterday, Donald Trump lost his attempt to block the New York State Lottery from introducing a keno-style game today, but said afterward that the fight wasn't over.
The heavily advertised game, called Quick Draw, will begin at more than 1,800 bars, restaurants, Offtrack Betting parlors and other locations at 10 A.M. today, said William Knowlton, a lottery spokesman.
By the end of the month, the game will be in 2,250 locations.


Tagliabue Plans To Take Jones to Task
Jerry Jones, the Dallas owner, thumbed his nose at the National Football League during the Giants-Cowboys game on Monday night when he announced a commercial sponsorship agreement between Nike and Texas Stadium.
Now Paul Tagliabue, the National Football League commissioner, is preparing to slap his wrist.


Mourning a Girl Slain In a Gang Feud


At Oxford, Fascination With U.S.
An Oxford undergraduate 35 years ago, Daniel Howe remembers scouring the course list for something about the United States and finding precious little.
There was nothing at all on American literature and only a single course in American history -- Slavery and Secession, 1850 to 1862, a dusty staple that had been taught since 1924.
That is not true now.
Fueled in part by the spread of American pop culture through movies and television and in part by the post-cold-war emergence of the United States as the dominant superpower, there has been an explosion of interest in American studies in Britain.


International Briefs; Carlsberg Deal in Israel
The Danish brewer Carlsberg A/S said yesterday that it had bought a 20 percent stake in Israel Breweries Ltd. in a bid to deepen its presence in a market dominated by two local brands.
Carlsberg declined to say how much it paid.
The Israeli financial daily Telegraph said the transaction cost Carlsberg $6 million. (Bloomberg Business News)


Group Wants Concessions by Teachers
The New York City school system could save almost $250 million a year if teachers gave up some preparatory periods and all paid sabbaticals and made other changes in work rules, according to a report released yesterday by a business-financed watchdog group.
The concessions would mean a loss of more than 3,000 teaching positions.
The recommendations by the group, the Citizens Budget Commission, came one day before the start of the new school year, as the Board of Education struggled to make the remaining $230 million in city-ordered cuts in its $8 billion budget.
The changes proposed by the commission, similar to recommendations made by the board earlier this summer, have been opposed by the United Federation of Teachers, which represents nearly 100,000 members.
The union's contract expires next month.


International Briefs; Ericsson Pacts in China
The Swedish telecommunications company L. M. Ericsson said yesterday that it had signed two strategic agreements that will strengthen its position in the fast-growing Chinese market.
One agreement is a general purchasing contract signed with the Ministry of Post and Telecommunications covering deliveries of 2.6 million so-called AXE switching lines.
Ericsson also signed a memorandum of understanding with the ministry to increase cooperation on a transmission method known as synchronous digital hierarchy. (Dow Jones)


Bank Cash Is Fished Away
Some inventive thieves used long poles with hooks on the end to fish bags of money from a night deposit box at a bank in Long Island City, Queens, the police said yesterday.
The thieves broke open the door of the night deposit box at the Chemical Bank at 47-11 Queens Boulevard sometime between 3 P.M.
Friday and 8 A.M. yesterday, said Doram Tamari, a police spokesman.


Color Tile Talking To Five Agencies
Color Tile in Fort Worth, a retail chain owned by Investcorp International, said yesterday that it was talking to five agencies about handling its account, with billings estimated at $40 million.
The account had been at Grey Advertising in New York since 1987.
Todd Fogarty, a spokesman for Color Tile, confirmed a report of a review this week in Adweek.
He identified the participants as W. B. Doner &amp; Company in Baltimore; GSD &amp; M in Austin, Tex., a unit of Gold Greenlees Trott; Harris Drury Cohen in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.; Publicis/ Bloom in Dallas, a unit of Publicis S.A., and the Chicago office of Hal Riney &amp; Partners.
A decision is expected by Sept. 15, he added.


Drought, Rain and the Price of Olive Oil
Americans who use olive oil may be experiencing sticker shock.
Starting last spring, prices of imported olive oils, especially the cheaper grades like pure, began to climb.
Two years of drought in Spain, the world's largest producer, have reduced the crop by about half.
Heavy rains in southern Italy have also affected supplies, as have shortfalls in Turkey and Tunisia.
Typically, a half-liter of Bertolli pure olive oil, often featured in supermarkets for about $2.39, is now likely to cost $3.70 to $4.50.
Yet, the price of extra virgin olive oils from Italy has hardly changed and is not likely to increase this year.
A half-liter of Colavita, the largest selling extra virgin olive oil, is still around $6.
The cold-pressed estate-bottled extra virgin olive oils from Tuscany, where a good harvest is expected this year, are also relatively stable, but they can cost $20 or more for a half-liter.


After 2,130 Games, Mr. Ripken Meets Mr. Gehrig
Baseball, a sport that memorializes not only its heroes but also their vaunted numbers, celebrated with Cal Ripken tonight as the Baltimore Orioles' indefatigable shortstop matched a legend and a record many thought would never be broken: Lou Gehrig and his consecutive-game playing streak of 2,130.
Ripken's achievement, 13-plus years and running, was punctuated by a series of standing ovations and a home run he hit in the sixth inning of the Orioles' 8-0 victory over the California Angels.


Radio Marti Whistle-Blowers at Center of Debate in Congress
A little-noticed Congressional amendment would eliminate the jobs of several Radio Marti employees whom the management sought to dismiss after they complained about mismanagement at the Government-financed broadcaster to Cuba.
While Congress has often embraced the cause of whistle-blowers, several lawmakers assert that the measure, approved by the House, would abolish the jobs of several whistle-blowers at Radio Marti before a Federal inspector general issues a report that it is expected to conclude that the management had improperly sought to dismiss them.


Lamb Burgers Enhanced With Onions, Garlic and Olives
IN the old days, adding bread crumbs to a burger meant you were trying to extend it, and save money.
Today, it can also mean you are trying to reduce the fat in the meal while saving your heart in the process.
No matter the reason, the results are delicious in this recipe for lamb burgers in pitas.


'Mathis' Baritone Is Ill
William Stone, the baritone who was to sing the title role in the New York City Opera's new production of Hindemith's "Mathis der Maler," is withdrawing from tomorrow night's opening performance because of a throat infection.
He is to be replaced by Stephen Powell, who is to be making his company debut.
The company's spokeswoman, Susan Woelzl, said that Mr.
Stone hoped to return to the cast for the later performances, which are on Sunday afternoon and on Sept. 15, 20 and 26.


International Briefs; 30% Stake in Gucci To Be Put on Market
Gucci Group, the luxury-goods maker owned by Investcorp International of New York, plans to sell more than $150 million in stock on the New York, London and Milan stock exchanges.
Investcorp, which is controlled by investors from Bahrain, will sell a 30 percent stake in Gucci in October, the company said.


Ruling on Fuhrman Tapes Intrigues Legal Experts
A week ago, O. J. Simpson's lawyers could barely contain their glee over the public airing of Mark Fuhrman's racist remarks and his boasts of framing suspects and fabricating evidence.
But Judge Lance A. Ito's subsequent decision to allow the Simpson jury to hear only the most innocuous snippets of those remarks, made during Mr.
Fuhrman's discussions with a would-be screenwriter, has since enraged the defense, and prompted often loud and strenuous second-guessing as well from some lawyers and legal scholars.


Giants' Lewis Out 6-8 Weeks
He has shown promise and speed, but injuries seem to be playing a more prominent role than anything else in the development of Giants receiver Thomas Lewis.
In Monday night's loss to the Dallas Cowboys, Lewis suffered a broken big toe in his right foot and will miss six to eight weeks.
Last year, his rookie season, he missed the last seven games because of cartilage damage in his knee.


Budget Cuts Threaten Air Links to Remote Towns
Boarding passes for Big Sky Airlines do not offer frequent flyer promotions.
They offer the mailing addresses of Montana's Congressmen in Washington.
Serving the thinly populated eastern end of this state, Big Sky stays aloft only because of a little-known Federal program that subsidizes commuter flights to 108 remote towns scattered from Maine to Alaska.
But if budget cutters have their way as Congress reconvenes, the Essential Air Service, as the subsidy program is known, could go the way of the paddle wheel steamboat.


CHRONICLE
The playwright NEIL SIMON is mighty pleased that he will be among the recipients of the Kennedy Center Honors of 1995.
One of the things that delight him the most is that he will not have to utter a word at the presentation ceremony.
"One of the great things about this award is that you don't have to get up and make a speech," Mr.
Simon said yesterday.


Heileman Says It May Default On January Interest Payment
The G. Heileman Brewing Company, burdened with debt as a result of a leveraged buyout by Hicks, Muse, Tate &amp; Furst last year, said today that it would probably default on an interest payment due on Jan. 31.
Heileman's situation suggested that for all the pledges by financiers to avoid repetition of the optimistic buyouts rampant in the late 1980's, some recent deals have been risky enough to blow apart even during flush economic times.


Traffic Killed 6 Over Holiday
Six people one more than last year -- lost their lives on New Jersey roads over the Labor Day weekend in six accidents, the state police said yesterday.
Three of the accidents involved alcohol, and two of the people killed were pedestrians, said Trooper Al Della Fave, a police spokesman.
A new laser speed detector was officially brought into use over the holiday weekend, but Trooper Della Fave said no figures were available on how many speeding motorists were caught with the device.


Frustrated Teachers Have Sacrificed Plenty
To the Editor:
I have been a teacher in the New York City public schools for the last two years, but I will be teaching in a private school this fall.
The sacrifices you would have teachers make (editorial, Aug. 31) and the ones we are already required to make every school day are the reasons I am leaving the city system, along with many other teachers every year.


Evans to Acquire Floathe Johnson
The Evans Group in Salt Lake City has agreed in principle to acquire Floathe Johnson in Kirkland, Wash., the companies said yesterday.
Floathe Johnson will become the Evans Group Technology unit of Evans.
The terms were not disclosed.
Floathe Johnson, with 50 employees, has billings estimated at $31 million from clients like Hewlett-Packard and Blue Cross of Washington and Alaska.
They will be added to Evans, with 350 employees in 9 offices and billings estimated at $270 million.
Clients of Evans include the Northwest Ford Dealers Association and Papa Gino's Inc.


Strike Threat in School Districts
Classes were set to begin today for 1.1 million public school students in New Jersey, but teachers in at least two districts -- Moorestown in Burlington County and Monroe Township in Gloucester County -- threatened to strike rather than report to work without a contract.
Last-minute negotiations were scheduled in Moorestown last night, but no bargaining was planned for Monroe Township until Thursday night, The Associated Press reported.


Nationsbank To Acquire Bank South
Ending its reputation as the thriftiest bargain hunter of the big banks, Nationsbank said yesterday that it would pay $1.6 billion for Bank South of Atlanta, a price that analysts said was unusually high.
Nationsbank offered stock worth $27.06 based on Friday's close for every Bank South share, 2.4 times Bank South's book value.
The average large acquisition this year was for 1.8 times book value, which is a measure of the value of a company's assets.
Nationsbank, based in Charlotte, N.C., has grown to be the country's third- largest banking company through a string of bold acquisitions, at lower prices and correspondingly higher risk than many other bank deals.


World News Briefs; Haiti Paramilitary Chief Is Ordered Deported
A Federal immigration judge in Baltimore has ordered the former chief of a Haitian paramiltary force deported to Haiti to face murder charges, court officials said today.
The order, signed late Friday, is subject to appeal.


Corrections
A brief report yesterday about the Lillian Gish Prize in the arts misstated its dollar value.
The prize, given this year to the director Ingmar Bergman, is about $200,000, not $25,000.


Rapist Sought in Queens
The police said yesterday that they were searching for a man who had broken into five houses in Queens since late July and had raped two of the residents during burglaries of their homes.
All the attacks took place between 2:30 and 5:30 A.M. in Rosedale, a neighborhood north of Kennedy International Airport on the Nassau County border, the police said.
Officials said the most recent reported attack occurred on Saturday, following two others on Aug. 28 and Aug. 30.
The first case was on July 27, and the second on Aug. 19.


Metropolitan Diary
THE credits were rolling on and the audience filing slowly out after a recent showing of "Pocahontas" at the 86th Street East Twin.
In a row toward the back of the theater a woman sat with a toddler on her lap.
An elderly couple in front of them stood, waiting to merge into the aisle.


Golf Course Inflames Mexico Town
The Mayor of this village resigned today after residents occupied the town hall and seized hostages to block plans, approved by the Mayor, for Mexican and American corporations to carve a golf course and industrial park from an ecological reserve.
Leaders of the 12-day protest by an odd coalition of peasant farmers, small-business men and environmentalists called the Mayor's forced withdrawal an initial victory in their campaign to scuttle the project.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  Barnett Banks Inc., Jacksonville, Fla., is selling $150 million of notes due in 2005 through Morgan Stanley.
The notes are priced at 99.855 to yield 6.92 percent.
The noncallable issue is rated A3 by Moody's Investors Service, BBB+ by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and A- by Duff &amp; Phelps.
Common  Henry Schein Inc. , Melville, L.I., filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to sell 6.2 million shares in an initial public offering.
William Blair &amp; Co. will be the lead underwriter.
Insignia Financial Group Inc., Greenville, S.C., filed to sell 2.5 million class A shares.
Lehman Brothers will be the lead underwriter.
Matrix Pharmaceutical Inc., Menlo Park, Calif., filed to sell three million shares.
Cowen &amp; Co. will be the lead underwriter.
Optical Cable Corp., Roanoke, Va., filed to sell two million shares in an initial public offering.
Unterberg Harris will be the lead underwriter.


Preparing for the Worst


A Stand on Homosexuality for Both Left and Right
VIRTUALLY NORMAL An Argument About Homosexuality  By Andrew Sullivan  209 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $22.
Over the last decade or two, as homosexuality has, as it were, begun to speak its name in public, there have been many reflections on the experience of gayness.
Now, Andrew Sullivan, the British-born editor of The New Republic magazine, has added a sober, reasoned reflection on "how we as a society should deal with that small minority of us which is homosexual."


Congress Returns
Though the deadline can be extended, Congress is supposed to complete a budget this month by passing 13 spending bills for discretionary programs and a bill to change tax rates and entitlement programs.
The Republicans have set out to use budget cuts to radically shrink Federal programs.
How well they succeed will be determined by scores of votes that will take place over the next several weeks.
Five of these votes stand out as vital in their own right and for what they signify about the Republican onslaught.
Welfare.
Everyone wants to put able-bodied recipients to work.
But no one knows how to institute that pleasant-sounding reform and still protect innocent children.
The best course is to go slow with welfare-to-work requirements.
Instead the Republicans want to end the 60-year-old entitlement program and provide block grants to the states.
Some elements of the party, led by Senator Phil Gramm, want to go further, forbidding states to provide cash to teen-age mothers or others the G.O.P. deems unworthy.


Judge Rules Clerical Error Voids Officer's Homicide Charges
Homicide charges against a police officer accused of killing a man in a confrontation over a late-night football game were thrown out yesterday because someone in the Bronx District Attorney's office punched the wrong computer key, printing out an indictment with an incorrect charge listed.
If the District Attorney's office does not get the decision overturned on appeal, it will have to present the case to a new grand jury and seek a new indictment.
That could throw the case into jeopardy, since grand juries have historically been reluctant to indict police officers for their actions on duty.
In this case, the grand jury indicted Officer Francis X. Livoti in March on the least severe homicide charge, criminally negligent homicide.


Vaclav Neumann; Conductor, 74, Led Czech Philharmonic
Vaclav Neumann, the conductor of the Czech Philharmonic Orchestra for more than 20 years, died on Saturday in Vienna.
He was 74.
Through his many recordings, his tours with the Czech Philharmonic and his occasional guest appearances in the United States -- including a series of Janacek's "Jenufa" at the Metropolitan Opera in 1985 -- Mr.
Neumann established a reputation as a versatile conductor with a special affinity for Dvorak, Martinu, Janacek, Smetana and Mahler.
He had completed a recording of Mahler's Seventh Symphony in Prague last month.


France, Despite Wide Protests, Explodes a Nuclear Device
France detonated a nuclear device buried deep beneath a remote coral-ringed atoll today, the first of a planned series of tests in the South Pacific that have brought condemnation from foreign governments and environmental groups.
The explosion at Mururoa Atoll, about 750 miles southeast of the French-administered island of Tahiti, was carried out at 12:30 P.M. in Mururoa and was detected within minutes by seismic monitoring stations as far away as Australia.


The Complexities of Managed Care
Tonight's "Fred Friendly Seminar" may not set to rest anyone's concerns about the future of health care, but it does a good job of airing the most troubling of them.
Packed into these 60 minutes are the often-conflicting views of patients, doctors, hospitals, employers, insurers, managed-care operators and, of course, professors.
"Your Money and Your Life: America's Managed Care Revolution" begins with the moderator, Arthur R. Miller of the Harvard Law School, taking the role of a pregnant woman named Mary Harris who has been given the choice by her employer of switching from the obstetrician she knows and likes to a different one who is part of the health group with which her company has lately signed up.
If she wants to stay with her own doctor, it will cost her an extra $150 a month.


A Question of Compensation
Here are the 10 companies that Grael S. Crystal, a compensation expert, has listed in a forthcoming issue of his newsletter as having the largest gap between what they pay chief financial officers and what the officers would be paid under what he calls competetive pay, a package based on the companies' performance.
Chief financial officer's pay varies widely and not necessarily because of the way companies perform.
Performance is measured by the return to shareholders.
An analysis by Mr.
Crystal discovered large disparities in compensation at many companies.


New York Fiscal Chaos Gives First-Day Jitters to Teachers
If the opening of New York City schools this week seems more chaotic than usual, consider the case of Karen Bloom, would-be teacher, who woke up yesterday unemployed, by midmorning was hired as a substitute at Public School 124 and by noon had landed a full-time teaching job at P.S. 111.
Yesterday, on the first day 65,000 New York City teachers returned from summer vacation, principals were still making last-minute staffing decisions after an angry summer of budget negotiations ended without resolving basic questions, like how many teachers the city will have, how large classes will be and which teachers will teach where.


Cooperate, Dole Tells Clinton, Or Face Brawl With Congress
In one of his sharpest attacks yet on President Clinton, Senator Bob Dole warned today that the fall Congressional session would be a rough-and-tumble affair unless the White House joined with Republicans to balance the budget, cut taxes, eliminate bureaucracy and rework the welfare system.
Mr.
Dole, the Senate majority leader and current front-runner among Republican Presidential candidates, said Mr.
Clinton could either climb on board the Republican legislative juggernaut or face all-out political warfare.


Food Notes
Fill-Them-Yourself Tea Bags
In the "why didn't anyone think of that before?" category: Grace Tea, 50 West 17th Street, has introduced tea filters, oversize empty tea bags open at one end that can be filled with up to four teaspoons of loose tea to simplify brewing and pot cleaning.
The filters should be a boon to tea lovers because the teas that are normally used in commercial bags are of an inferior quality to most loose teas.
A box of 50 is $4.95, including shipping, or $18 with a half-pound tin of Keemun breakfast tea.
Orders can be placed by calling (212) 255-2935.
Honey Gifts for the Holidays
Two kosher mail-order gift companies have special assortments for the Jewish high holidays, which begin the evening of Sept. 24.
The Kosher Connection, based in Portland, Ore., has an apple and honey gift box for $35 including shipping.
Orders can be placed by calling (800) 950-7227.
The deadline for regular delivery in time for Rosh ha-Shanah is Friday.
Overnight delivery is extra.
Kosher Cornucopia in Jeffersonville, N.Y., offers a honey gift with four jars of honey, a dipper and a cookbook for $19.95.
For children, there is an array of apple and honey confections and toys for $24.95.
Prices do not include shipping.
Orders can be placed by calling (800) 756-7437.
For delivery by regular mail in time for Rosh ha-Shanah, the deadline is Sept. 18.
City Harvest Fair
This year, New York City's Harvest Fair, which was held annually at Floyd Bennett Field in Brooklyn, will take place on Saturday at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue (Eastern Parkway), near Prospect Park.
Gardeners in the city who want to compete for ribbons in any of 19 categories must bring in their entries from 10 A.M. to noon the day of the fair.
More information about the contests can be obtained by calling (212) 788-8059.
Admission to the fair is free.
Off the Menu Downtown-Uptown Commuter
Romeo De Gobbi, a former maitre d'hotel at Le Cirque who has been co-owner of Le Pactole in the World Financial Center for the last six years, will be commuting to midtown.
He has become the food and beverage manager of the Hotel Michelangelo, 51st Street and Seventh Avenue, where he will supervise catering and room service.
Later this year, he hopes to open an Italian restaurant in the space at the corner of 51st Street once occupied by Bellini.
He will continue to run Le Pactole.
Empire Building
The restaurant empire of Lynn Wagen knecht, an owner of Odeon in TriBeCa and Kiosk on the Upper East Side, is expanding.
In about a month, she plans to open the Bodega at 136 West Broadway (Thomas Street).
It will be her answer to fast food and takeout, with an international menu of informal specialties like porchetta (roast suckling pig) sandwiches, fried fish, filled focaccia and the like.
Her partners are Stephen Lyle and Edward Youkilis, respectively the chef and manager of Odeon.
In November, Ms.
Wagenknecht plans to open a Vietnamese restaurant, as yet unnamed, at 100 West Houston Street with partners Nell Campell and Eamon Roche.
More Room for Pizza
Lombardi's, the pizzeria at 32 Spring Street (near Mulberry Street) that opened about a year ago and paid homage to what was considered the first pizzeria in the city -- if not the country -- has expanded.
Andrew Bellucci and his partners have taken over the adjoining space, just about doubling the seating capacity of the restaurant.
They will accept reservations for groups of six or more.
More Malaysian Food
A year ago, Penang Malaysia, a restaurant at 38-04 Prince Street in Flushing, Queens, opened a branch at 109 Spring Street in SoHo.
Now, a third location, on the Upper West Side at 240 Columbus Avenue, is scheduled to open in early November.


So You Thought a Potato Must Be From Idaho or L. I.
THE busy Sunday market in Chinchero, a Peruvian village in the Andes, is no Dean &amp; DeLuca.
Except for the purple potatoes.
Though they are a trendy curiosity in fancy-food shops and restaurants in the United States, they raise no eyebrows in Peru.
Along with purple potatoes were nearly two dozen kinds, in pink, white, blue, yellow and brown, piled in front of the many vendors dressed no less colorfully than their wares.
In the hardscrabble Peruvian Indian villages this is not designer food but everyday sustenance.
And no wonder.
Peru is their country of origin.


Maddux Makes 16th Victory Look Easy
Braves 1, Cardinals 0
Greg Maddux became the first 16-game winner in the major leagues with his fourth consecutive complete-game victory as Atlanta beat visiting St.
Louis by 1-0 last night.


Ayer Will Lose De Beers Account
De Beers, the gem and diamond marketing consortium, said yesterday that it would end its 57-year relationship with N. W. Ayer &amp; Partners in New York on Jan. 1.
De Beers will consolidate its account in the United States, with billings estimated at $35 million to $50 million, at the New York office of J. Walter Thompson, which handles the account overseas.
Stephen Lussier, consumer marketing director of De Beers in London, praised Ayer but said there were "significant advantages" to using "a single multinational agency with global resources." Thompson, a unit of the WPP Group, now becomes the sole De Beers agency.


International Briefs; Mexican Plant to Close
Three years after announcing that it planned to close its Mexico City truck and van plant, the General Motors Corporation said yesterday that the factory would shut down on Friday.
Gary Cowger, head of the Mexican subsidiary of G.M., said that with the company's new assembly plant at Silao in the state of Guanajuato now fully operational, the Mexico City plant could be closed. (Reuters)


After the Meal, First the Check, Then the Police
In the last few weeks, Alessandro Nardone became a regular at Paisley's Eatery here, dropping by for dinner several nights a week and often bringing friends.
So when two police detectives stopped in on Sunday night with his picture, staff members were not only able to identify him, they were able to point him out at a table where he was treating 10 friends to dinner.


Northfield Journal; Women Are 'No Big Deal' At an Old Military College
It was Rook Week at Norwich University, the country's oldest private military college, and it was nothing like The Citadel, in Charleston, S.C., where the cadets cheered when the first woman among them, Shannon Faulkner, dropped out.
Inside the Norwich's stately brick barracks on the first day of the school year, Joseph Glasser, an upperclassman who is a squad leader, was watching as Kerry Marinecz, a 19-year-old rookie, raced to make her bed for inspection.
"She's good," Mr.
Glasser told the platoon sergeant, Kevin LeBlanc.
"She's fast."


Market Place; A seeming case of manipulation -- and the rationale behind it.
IN the never-ending battle between "longs" and "shorts," accusations of market manipulation are frequently hurled and just as frequently denied.
But in one case it seems that one side is admitting a bit of manipulation.
Sam D. Schwartz, the chairman and chief executive of Incomnet Inc., a small reseller of long-distance telephone services based in Woodland Hills, Calif., disclosed last week that for much of the last year he had been actively buying and selling shares of the company's stock.
Until last month those trades had not been disclosed to the Securities and Exchange Commission, which was already investigating Incomnet.


International Briefs; Recovery at Wedgwood
The Irish fine china and tableware company Waterford Wedgwood P.L.C. reported a 45 percent increase in pretax profits yesterday and paid its first dividend since 1988 as the company's recovery continued.
Pretax profits were 7.4 million Irish pounds ($11.8 million) in the six months to June 30, compared with 5.1 million pounds ($8.10 million) a year earlier.
The dividend announced was 0.25 pence a share. (Reuters)


Sheik Called An Architect Of Terrorism
A Federal prosecutor pointed to a blind, stooped Muslim cleric in a Manhattan courtroom yesterday and declared that he had led a "war of terrorism against the United States" that included the bombing of the World Trade Center, plots for other bombings and the assassination of a Jewish militant.
The cleric, Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, "called himself the servant of God" but told his followers that the Muslim struggle against enemies was to be waged "with the sword, the cannon, the missile," said the prosecutor, Assistant United States Attorney Patrick Fitzgerald.
And in Mr.
Abdel Rahman's mind, Mr.
Fitzgerald said, the United States was one of Islam's "main enemies."


New York Democrats Offer On-Line Information Service
Even as they acknowledged daunting problems, New York State's Democratic leaders told a gathering of loyalists today that the state party was in better shape than should be expected, given the licking it took in the 1994 elections.
Though the mood on this first day of a two-day meeting of the state Democratic Committee was not all glum, the phrase "cautious optimism" seemed as far as most people wanted to go in describing the party's near-term future.
Time and again, speakers talked of the "adversity" they faced in this period of Republican dominance, of the party's $400,000 debt and of the need to unify their divided ranks.


Chirac Orders French Borders Tightened to Combat Bombings
President Jacques Chirac signaled today that he may suspend France's participation in an open-border agreement among seven European Union members unless all tighten measures to check the movements of potential terrorists.
In his first television interview since a series of bombings have rocked Paris, Mr.
Chirac said he had given orders "to take extremely firm measures beginning today to check the borders."


TRANSACTIONS
Auto Racing NASCAR -- Named Bill Covington executive vice president of Speedway Motorsports Inc.
Fined Gary Cogswell, crew chief for Chad Little, $500, and five crew members $100 apiece, for running onto the Darlington Raceway track during Saturday's Busch Grand National event.
Baseball  American League  MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Added Ron Rightnowar, pitcher, to the 40-man roster.
Moved Turner Ward, outfielder, from the 15- to the 60-day disabled list.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Recalled Darren Bragg, outfielder, and Arquimedez Pozo, infielder, from Tacoma of the Pacific Coast League.
Football  National Football League  BUFFALO BILLS -- Signed Filmel Johnson, cornerback, to the practice squad.
CAROLINA PANTHERS -- Placed Michael Reed, cornerback, on injured reserve.
Signed Reggie Jones, wide receiver, to the practice squad.
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Waived Vaughn Dunbar, running back, and Travis Davis, free safety.
SEATTLE SEAHAWKS -- Waived Deon Lambert, cornerback. Signed Selwyn Jones, cornerback.
WASHINGTON REDSKINS -- Signed Jeff Brohm, quarterback.
Hockey  National Hockey League  NEW YORK ISLANDERS -- Agreed to terms with Joby Messier, defenseman; Danton Cole, right wing; and Micah Aivazoff, center.
OTTAWA SENATORS -- Announced the resignation of John Ferguson, director of player personnel.
PITTSBURGH PENGUINS -- Named Herb Brooks scout.
ST.
LOUIS BLUES -- Named Adam Fell director of public relations.
International Hockey League  CHICAGO WOLVES -- Signed Greg Smyth, defenseman.
MINNESOTA MOOSE -- Acquired Sandy Smith, right wing, from the Detroit Vipers for future considerations.
Olympics  United States Olympic Committee  USOC -- Named Lori Gilstrap strength and conditioning coordinator for the ARCO Training Center in San Diego.
College
CORTLAND STATE -- Named Frank Tschan men's soccer coach.
DRAKE -- Named Scott Roberts men's and women's assistant track coach.
EASTERN ILLINOIS -- Named Matt Painter and Kevin Mouton men's assistant basketball coaches.
KEAN COLLEGE -- Announced the resignation of Mike Gatley, men's basketball coach.
KENT -- Named Kent Pagel associate track and field coach.
MANHATTANVILLE -- Named Dale Abeling men's lacrosse coach.
MASSACHUSETTS -- Signed John Calipari, men's basketball coach, to a 10-year contract.
MORGAN STATE -- Named Robyn Marks assistant sports information director.
NORTHWESTERN STATE-LOUISIANA -- Named Tamra Mander assistant athletic director for marketing and promotions.
PENN STATE -- Named John Smith athletic trainer for the men's basketball team and William Dorenkott assistant swimming coach.
PRINCETON -- Named Brandy Nettles assistant swimming coach.


Murrell to Help Jets Get Back in Running
Having cut loose Johnny Johnson, the Jets went to training camp not knowing who their featured running back would be or if one would emerge.
None did.
And after Sunday's calamitous 52-14 beating by the Miami Dolphins, the question remains.
But Zeke Bratkowski, the Jets' offensive coordinator, remains upbeat.


M. B. Bornstein, 77; Known for Research In Multiple Sclerosis
Dr.
Murray B. Bornstein, who was known for his research involving multiple sclerosis, died on Thursday in Gainesville, Fla.
He was 77 and lived in Norwich, Vt.
The cause was a cardiac aneurysm, his family said.
He was stricken at Gainesville Regional Airport after testifying in a Florida court as an expert witness in a case involving multiple sclerosis.


Man Is Charged in a Killing
A 21-year-old Roselle man was charged with murder yesterday, a day after his mother was accused of wiping his fingerprints off the murder weapon and throwing it into the trash, said Robert O'Leary, an assistant prosecutor for Union County.
The man, Karriem Able, was arrested in Plainfield and charged in the April 1 shooting death of Michael Jenkins, who Mr.
O'Leary said was caught in the crossfire during a gun battle over a stolen television set.
Mr.
Able's mother, Sharon Able, 42, was charged with hindering prosecution, Mr.
O'Leary said.


Greeks to Lift Ban on Trade That Crippled Macedonia
Greece will lift its trade embargo against the former Yugoslav republic of Macedonia once the Foreign Ministers of the two countries sign an agreement here next week that resolves most but not all of their differences, the American mediator involved said today.
Cyrus R. Vance, who has mediated the dispute on behalf of the United Nations and Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, said the Greek trade sanctions imposed on Macedonia since Feb. 17, 1994, would end, even though the biggest issue dividing the two countries remains unresolved.


A Fed Governor Sees Danger in Shift to a National Sales Tax
Switching from the income tax to a national sales or value-added tax would probably plunge the economy into a steep recession, a Federal Reserve Board member said today.
The prediction by one of the 12 Fed governors, Lawrence B. Lindsey, long an advocate of lower income tax rates, was a setback to the retail sales tax championed by Senator Richard G. Lugar of Indiana, an aspirant for the Republican Presidential nomination.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CULLEN-FROST BANKERS, San Antonio, a bank holding company, agreed to buy the largest bank in San Marcos, Tex., the closely held SBT Bancshares, owner of State Bank and Trust Co., for an undisclosed price.
HOVNANIAN ENTERPRISES INC., Red Bank, N.J. will take a fourth-quarter charge of as much as $1.5 million, or 6 cents a share, as it cuts staff by 10 percent and closes offices.
This move will eliminate the jobs of about 110 of its 1,100 employees and consolidate the six Northeast regional offices into one.
OCCUSYSTEMS INC., Dallas, a provider of occupational-health services, agreed to buy 11 health centers for about $21 million in cash and stock.
RECOTON CORP., Lake Mary, Fla., maker of accessories for consumer electronics equipment, acquired STD Holdings Ltd., Hong Kong, an international maker of multimedia and computer accessories, for $21.5 million in cash and stock.


Man in the News: Cal Ripkin Jr.; 2,131: A Child of Baseball, an Iron Man
For those who have watched Cal Ripken Jr. adeptly ply his trade, his incubation in the major league environment was obvious.
Ripken was, in a sense, a child of baseball.
Ripken's father, Cal Sr., managed and coached in the Baltimore Orioles organization for 29 years.
For five and a half years of Ripken's 13-plus seasons, he played shortstop alongside his younger brother, Billy, a second baseman.
In 1987, Cal Sr. managed both Cal Jr. and Billy, the only time in the majors a father has managed two sons simultaneously.


ETHICS COMMITTEE, 6-0, ASKS SENATE TO OUST PACKWOOD; HE VOWS TO FIGHT CHARGES
The Senate Ethics Committee voted unanimously today to recommend that Bob Packwood of Oregon be expelled from the Senate on grounds of sexual and official misconduct.
Senator Packwood immediately declared at a news conference tonight that he would fight the charges, saying he had been impaled by an Inquisition-like process without a fair chance to respond.


A Welcome Change in Harlem
Gov.
George Pataki announced last week that he was shutting down the Harlem Urban Development Corporation and replacing it with a new entity controlled by the state.
He made the right decision.
Established nearly a quarter of a century ago to encourage development in a blighted community that desperately needed better housing and more commercial activity, the semi-independent corporation has little to show for its efforts -- despite receiving more than $100 million in public funds over the years.


Williams Loses Sleep Over This Decision
Most Yankees were on the field three hours before last night's game with Seattle, but Bernie Williams was standing in the clubhouse looking as if he had just stumbled out of bed.
Probably because he had.
Williams worked the telephone yesterday to monitor his wife, who is nine months pregnant, and the path of Hurricane Luis near his home in Bayamon, P.R.
His eyes were glassy and his short hair was unkempt, but Williams was elated because he said the hurricane passed 100 miles north of the home, where his wife, Waleska, and the couple's two children are.
Although the Williams's home lost electricity and endured high winds and forceful rain, there were no injuries or damage.


McDowell And O'Neill Do the Talking
Paul O'Neill's voice was serious and sullen as he discussed how the Yankees did not need a losing streak.
Not even two straight games.
Not today.
Not yesterday.
Not next week.
Not with the wild card still up for grabs in the American League.
O'Neill recognized the danger.
So did Jack McDowell.
O'Neill translated his pre-game words into action and helped make certain the Yankees would overcome a three-run deficit and defeat the Mariners, 4-3, tonight, by smoking a two-out, run-scoring single off former Yankee Lee Guetterman in the sixth inning.


Now Jones Must Prove How Smart Nike Deal Is
Jerry Jones is a rebellious and savvy outlaw.
Now he will have to prove how smart and legal his bodacious new multimillion-dollar deal with Nike is.
Does it violate National Football League revenue-sharing strictures or does it exquisitely skirt the long arm of Commissioner Paul Tagliabue's law?


Vietnamese Plaque at U.S. Embassy Revives Bitter Memories
Just one month after American diplomats opened a new embassy in Hanoi, pledging to put old hostilities behind them, a small plaque commemorating a pivotal battle here is reviving bitter memories of the Vietnam War and slowing reconciliation.
The problem is a simple stone tablet hanging on a wall outside the old United States Embassy compound in this city once known as Saigon.
It marks the site where a battle was fought during the Tet offensive in 1968.
Five G.I.'s were killed defending the compound.


Bay Networks to Acquire Xylogics in $330 Million Stock Deal
Bay Networks Inc., a supplier of computer networking hardware and software, moved toward filling a critical hole in its product line yesterday by announcing an agreement to acquire Xylogics Inc. for $330 million in stock.
Xylogics produces remote technology: hardware and software that allow users of laptop computers to dial into corporate networks from hotel rooms, airports or home.
Users can send and receive files and other data that would normally be available only at their offices.


Buckley And 2 Pals Hitting 70 In Stages
The three birthday boys did not vote for the same Presidential candidate in 1992 and may not vote for the same one next year.
They do not always agree on issues like capital punishment, abortion rights and taxes.
But last night there was a consensus that 1925, the year they were born, was a very good year.
One can almost hear William F. Buckley Jr., the youngest of the three, drawing out the syllables on a word like "nonpareil" to describe the other two: Warren Steibel, Mr.
Buckley's longtime producer on the public television program "Firing Line," and Leon Levy, who gained fame and fortune running Oppenheimer &amp; Company.
As of right now, Mr.
Steibel is the only septuagenarian in the bunch; his birthday was on Monday.
Mr.
Levy will hit the big seven-oh next Wednesday.
Mr.
Buckley will not get around to it until Nov. 24.


John Megna, 42, 'Mockingbird' Star
John Megna, who as a boy starred in Broadway plays and in the movie "To Kill a Mockingbird," died on Monday at Midway Hospital in Los Angeles.
He was 42 and lived in Los Angeles.
The cause was AIDS, his family said.


Wiley (John) Sons (JWA,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 31


Test for Disposals
New Yorkers may eventually be allowed to use a modern convenience that many Americans have taken for granted for decades.
The City Council has approved an experiment for garbage disposals.


Bosnia Serb Leader Hints He Will Lift Siege of Sarajevo, but City Is Still Surrounded
The leader of the Bosnian Serbs said today that he was willing to lift the siege of Sarajevo and pleaded for a halt to NATO bombing.
But there was no sign of any movement of the Bosnian Serb artillery that encircles the Bosnian capital or of an end to the NATO bombardment.
"Please stop it," Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader, said in an interview with BBC television, adopting an unusually humble tone.
He argued that the guns still surrounding Sarajevo were there to protect Serbs living in the capital's suburbs and could not be withdrawn.


Lost Jobs, Found Directions
WHEN John and Carol Brooks lost their jobs three years ago in a downsizing move at I.B.M., to cut costs they gave up their four-bedroom home in a San Francisco suburb and moved to a smaller house outside Fort Worth.
A mechanic recently told them that if they hoped to squeeze more miles from their nine-year-old Lincoln, they had better baby it.
Once, Mr.
Brooks, 53, and his wife, 51, earned more than $150,000 together at the International Business Machines Corporation, but now they make less than half that.
Yet, they say they do not resent the dizzying drop, because as a result of being shunted off the fast track -- two among the hundreds of thousands of workers displaced by job cuts in recent years -- their values have changed.


Nijinsky Diaries: A Giant's Ardent Effusions
An extra-meticulous accountant could have written these pages, so neat and sure is the handwriting.
The nondescript little black notebooks could have been used by an industrious young scholar for note taking.
But tumbling out across the lined pages are the fevered thoughts and emotions of one of the great artists of the century, Vaslav Nijinsky, in a diary written in 1918 and 1919, at the start of a descent into schizophrenia that ended the Russian dancer's career.
Now, the diary may be viewed for the first time in America in "The Collecting Adventure, 1895-1995," a yearlong, rotating exhibition that celebrates the centennial of the New York Public Library.
The diary will be on view through Oct. 4 in the Edna Barnes Salomon Room of the library's Center for the Humanities on Fifth Avenue at 42d Street, together with a drawing by Nijinsky, a photograph of him and 11 photographs of George Balanchine and the New York City Ballet.


Incomnet Says Chief Did Not Sell Stock Short
Incomnet Inc., a small long-distance telephone company, said yesterday that its chairman and chief executive, Sam D. Schwartz, had never sold the company's stock short.
The statement was apparently issued in response to a column yesterday in The New York Times, which described his trading.
Mr.
Schwartz had reported a string of trades in the stock to the Securities and Exchange Commission, and on Tuesday a company official, Stephen Caswell, said those trades were all the trading that had been done by Kaliber Management, a company owned by Mr.
Schwartz.


METRO DIGEST
PORT AUTHORITY DECIDES ON LAYOFFS
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey has decided to lay off 5 to 9 percent of its 8,800-member work force by the end of the month to try to close a projected budget deficit, senior officials at the agency said.
With these reductions, it appears that the authority will not have to raise its bridge and tunnel tolls and the fare on the PATH commuter railway to balance its books.  [ Page A1. ] NEW YORK CITY


Gay Congressman From Dole's Party Brings Fire on Him
Representative Steve Gunderson, the only openly gay Republican in Congress, denounced Senator Bob Dole today for returning a Presidential campaign contribution from a gay Republican group.
The attack on Mr.
Dole, the Senate Republican leader, came in a letter to him from an eight-term Congressman from Wisconsin who was an early and enthusiastic backer of his Presidential bid and has only recently become outspoken about issues concerning homosexuals.


Despite Wave of Protest, France Defends Pacific Nuclear Test
Battered by a wave of global outrage over its resumption of nuclear tests in the South Pacific, the French Government gritted its teeth today, sniped at the "hysteria" of some of its critics and gambled that short-term damage to its image would be compensated by long-term respect for its firmness.
The loudest protests came from Australia, New Zealand, Chile, Peru and the Nordic countries -- all of which had already denounced the plan.
The reaction of major powers, including the United States, Russia, Britain and Germany, was more muted, suggesting a reluctance to risk a broader crisis in relations with the new French Government.


Cuba Passes Law to Attract Greater Foreign Investment
Government officials said today that they expected a significant infusion of capital after passing a new foreign-investment law this week, but few observers, including the Cubans, are predicting a huge rush to invest in Cuba yet.
The law, approved by the National Assembly on Tuesday after more than a year of debate, allows foreign investors access to all economic sectors except defense, health care and education and to fully own their businesses in Cuba, either privately or in the form of public stock companies.
Currently, most foreign ventures exist through associations with the Government and foreign companies are allowed less than 50 percent ownership.


Market Place; PP&amp;L spurns Peco, bad news for merger hopes of big utilities.
DIRECTORS of PP&amp;L Resources Inc., a low-cost producer of electricity based in Allentown, Pa., turned down a hostile takeover bid yesterday from Peco Energy, which operates in the densely populated area of southeastern Pennsylvania, including a large part of Philadelphia.
The decision puts in sharp focus the difficulties that Peco and other high-cost metropolitan utilities face in trying to solve their problems through mergers.
For Peco, a merger with PP&amp;L would have helped prepare it for the increasing competition in the utility industry.
PP&amp;L's coal-fired plants would greatly strenghten Peco's ability to hold on to industrial customers demanding lower rates.


Blades Is Charged With Manslaughter
Seattle Seahawks receiver BRIAN BLADES was formally charged with manslaughter yesterday by Florida prosecutors in the shooting death of his cousin.
The 29-year-old former University of Miami player had been charged by the police in July with the death of Charles Blades.
But after further investigation by the Broward County state attorney's office and the Plantation, Fla., police, a formal charge of manslaughter with a firearm was filed.
Blades, who is free on bond, plans to file a written plea of not guilty within two days, his agent, DREW ROSENHAUS, said.


Glavine Wins His 14th For Braves' 4th in Row
Braves 6, Cardinals 1
Ryan Klesko's two-run double highlighted a six-run fourth inning and Tom Glavine had a run-producing double and gained his 14th victory as the Braves defeated the St.
Louis Cardinals, 6-1, yesterday in Atlanta.
It was the Braves' fourth straight victory.


Council Votes to Extend Life of Department for the Homeless
The City Council voted yesterday to extend the life of the agency that serves homeless people in New York City but warned that it must end the practice of using commercial hotels to house them or face extinction next year.
In a 32-to-13 vote with one abstention, the Council passed legislation that maintains the Department of Homeless Services as an independent agency.
But the measure, which Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani is expected to sign, also gave the Council the authority to put the agency out of business in October 1996 if certain conditions were not met.
Prime among them is the requirement that it end its use of large hotels that do not have kitchens in each unit.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Anheuser-Busch Cos.
Inc., St.
Louis, is selling $150 million of notes due in 2015 through Dillon, Read &amp; Co.
The notes are priced at 99.894 to yield 7.26 percent.
The issue is callable in 10 years and rated A1 by Moody's Investors Service and AA- by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.
*
Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, is selling $400 million of debentures due in 2005.
The issue is callable in five years and priced at 99.84375 to yield 6.872 percent.
*
First Bank Systems Inc., Minneapolis, is selling $250 million of subordinated notes due in 2007 through Morgan Stanley.
The notes are priced at 99.074 to yield 6.99 percent.
The issue is noncallable and rated A3 by Moody's and A- by S.&amp; P. and Duff &amp; Phelps.
*
J.
C.
Penney Co., Plano, Tex., is selling $300 million of medium-term notes due in 2000 through the CS First Boston Corp.
The notes are priced at par to yield 6.375 percent.
The noncallable issue is rated A1 by Moody's and A+ by S.&amp; P.
*
Potomac Electric Power Co., Washington, is selling $75 million of first mortgage bonds due in 2025 through the CS First Boston Corp.
The bonds are priced at 99.366 to yield 7.428 percent, callable in 10 years and rated A1 by Moody's, A by S. &amp;P. and AA- by Duff &amp; Phelps.


Launching Plans Continue for Shuttle
The space shuttle Endeavour remained on the platform on Thursday and technicians continued to prepare for a liftoff despite a forecast of rain and thunderstorms.
Faced with the prospect earlier in the week that Hurricane Luis would head toward Florida, officials considered putting the shuttle in a hangar to protect it.


Blyth Industries Inc.(BTH,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 31


3DO Says It's Searching for Markets Beyond Video Games
Struggling in an ever more competitive video game business, the 3DO Company said today that it would look for new markets for its technology, including specialized circuit boards and chips for personal computers.
Coming on the same day as the introduction of the Sony Corporation's Playstation, the most heavily promoted entry in the video game market, the 3DO announcement had the appearance of a strategic retreat.
Shares of 3DO fell 62.5 cents, to $12.75, in Nasdaq trading.


Eugene Schwartz, 68, Modern-Art Collector, Dies
Eugene M. Schwartz, who with his wife, Barbara, assembled one of the nation's leading collections of contemporary art, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 68.
The cause was a heart attack, his wife said.


G.O.P. Puts Friendlier Face on Its Plans to Overhaul Medicare
Republican members of Congress informally outlined some of their plans to overhaul Medicare today, saying that doctors and hospitals would bear most of the cost while beneficiaries would experience little pain.
Republicans in both houses of Congress are committed to cutting projected Medicare spending by $270 billion, or 14 percent, over the next seven years.
In the process, they say, they will give elderly people a choice of private health plans as alternatives to the standard Federal program, established in 1965.


Mr. Chirac's Nuclear Blunder
Ignoring majority opinion in his own country and protests around the world, France's new President, Jacques Chirac, has ended a three-year French moratorium on nuclear weapons tests by exploding a Hiroshima-size bomb under the South Pacific.
This unjustified blast, and the five to seven expected to follow over the next few months, will isolate France from important allies and trading partners and weaken the fight against nuclear proliferation.
With no nuclear-armed enemies, France has no pressing need for a nuclear arsenal.
What it could use is strengthened nonproliferation efforts to prevent radical Middle Eastern or North African neighbors from developing atomic bombs and missiles capable of reaching Europe.


School Bus Innovations Aim at Safety
AS school violence and vandalism move beyond the classroom, the jaunty yellow school bus is fading as a symbol of childhood innocence and re-emerging as a battle zone.
Thus, school-bus safety is increasingly being redefined to include discipline as well as dangers from traffic.


Staff Cuts Planned By Port Authority To Avert Toll Rises
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey has decided to lay off 6 to 9 percent of its 8,800-member work force by the end of the month in an effort to close a projected budget deficit, senior officials at the agency said yesterday.
With these reductions, it appears that the authority will not have to raise its bridge and tunnel tolls and the fare on the PATH commuter railway to balance its books.
The cuts, to be announced at a news conference today, are the culmination of a campaign by Gov.
George E. Pataki and Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman to revamp the authority, which both have called overstaffed and inefficient.


Binge Drinking Dangers
To the Editor:
While the decision of the 20-somethings in the Hamptons to hire vans to transport them between bars and clubs is commendable (news article, Sept. 1), their decision to drink heavily is not.
Reports in the medical literature have warned about the dangers of binge drinking in this age group.


Theatrical Threshold Adorns Hearings on Idaho Shootout
Of all the props at all the Capitol hearings that now seem to occur here as an endless series of tabloid tableaux -- the rifle waved at the Waco hearing, the scribblings of the suicidal Presidential aide at the Whitewater inquiry -- none appeared as purely theatrical as the simple wood-and-glass cabin door displayed today as the Senate opened its inquiry into the shootout at Ruby Ridge, Idaho.
The door stood unhinged and leading to nowhere in a display bracket.
Its calico-fringed denim curtains added an American Gothic touch as the senators arrived to hear a tale about guns and backwoods individualism and Ninja-suited Government sharpshooters in which three people died in a bloody showdown in August 1992.
The door stood upright to the senators' left, looking as flimsy as a leftover prop from summer stock.


G.O.P. Sets Out on Fall Agenda and Urges Clinton to Join
On the first full day of legislative activity after Congress's summer recess, Republican leaders in the Senate and the House today promised a united drive during the rest of the year to enact the main items on the most ambitious docket Congress has considered in decades, and challenged President Clinton to join them.
If measures are approved to balance the budget, overhaul Medicare, reform welfare and cut taxes, Speaker Newt Gingrich said, Republicans will have achieved "the most decisive change in the direction of the Government since the beginning of the New Deal."


THE PACKWOOD CASE: Man in the News; Kentucky Blend of Understatement and Ambition -- Addison Mitchell McConnell
Senator Addison Mitchell McConnell of Kentucky, a sober-sided legislator with a subterranean profile from a not-very-influential state, landed with a thump on the national political scene today.
If it was not precisely the debut he might have preferred, he has only himself to blame: Mr.
McConnell is that rarest of senators who actually wanted to serve on the Senate Select Committee on Ethics.


U.S. Is Planning to Monitor Japan Compliance on Autos
Sensitive to those who contend that its hard-won agreement to open the Japanese automotive market would have little tangible result, the Clinton Administration announced a plan today for monitoring Japan's compliance.
Central to the plan, which involves what the Administration called "unprecedented collaboration" with American producers, would be a team headed by the top United States trade official, Mickey Kantor, and the Department of Commerce.
Their day-by-day scrutiny of progress in raising sales of American automobiles and parts in Japan would be documented in semiannual public reports, beginning next March.


Not a Drought Emergency, Yet
The shortage of water in New Jersey resulting from dry weather is severe but still falls short of a drought emergency requiring mandatory water-rationing, officials of the state's Department of Environmental Protection said yesterday.
"It's not dire; it's not a disaster," said Steven Nieswand, administrator for the department's water supply program, at a public forum to discuss the drought.
The reservoirs in the northeastern part of the state, which provide water for three million people, are only 62 percent full -- 17 percent below the average for this time of year, Mr.
Nieswand said.


Mitchell Energy &amp; Development Corp.(MNDA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 31


Cracker Barrel Old Country Store Inc.(CBRL,NNM) reports earnings for Yr to Jul 28


Low Marks for Handling Money
Chastising New Jersey for spending more than it is taking in, a financial magazine rates the state 37th in the nation in how it handles its finances.
Rankings released yesterday by Financial World put New Jersey behind other northeastern states, including Connecticut and Pennsylvania, but ahead of last-place New York.
Two years ago, the magazine put New Jersey in 27th place.
But the State Treasurer, Brian W. Clymer, said the report was based on "inaccurate information and speculation."


BUSINESS DIGEST
Bay Networks to Buy Xylogics for $330 Million Bay Networks, a supplier of computer networking hardware and software, moved toward filling a significant hole in its product line by agreeing to acquire Xylogics for $330 million in stock, the latest consolidation in networking.


A Wary France Cracks Down on Its Muslims
Even on good days, Barbes looks forlorn.
But over the last few weeks, with terrorist bombs exploding in subway cars and garbage containers around the city, this rundown Paris neighborhood, home to 40,000 North African Arabs, has become jittery too.
Suspecting these acts of terror to be the work of Algerian Muslim fundamentalists, the police have focused their surveillance on the five million Muslims living in France -- and in particular on the two million Algerians.


Chinese Jostle Thousands Of Women At Forum
In a scene that verged on pandemonium, hundreds of Chinese security officers jostled thousands of women eager to see Hillary Rodham Clinton at the temporary center of worldwide women's activism here today, but did not stop Mrs.
Clinton from speaking forcefully on human rights for a second day in a row.
Frustrated by a driving rain, more than 1,500 women had to fight their way past security officers to get into a converted movie theater where Mrs.
Clinton spoke.
Yet thousands more were left outside soaking in the rain, angry and complaining that China had demeaned their forum of nongovernmental groups by setting it in a small town ill-equipped to handle the meeting.


AT HOME WITH: R. L. Stine; Grown-Ups Deserve Some Terror, Too
OH, my new book is horrible," groaned R. L. Stine as he stood in the doorway of his Upper West Side apartment dressed in his writer's uniform -- tan pants, untucked blue shirt and black Reeboks. "It's awful.
Gruesome, really.
I can't believe you read it." He smiled and chuckled.
Reviewers have said basically the same thing about his latest book, "Superstitious" (Warner Books; $21.95), his first adult novel, which will be shipped to bookstores next week.


The Right Choice for the Job?
Ever wonder how the boss got his job?
In the old days, chief executives picked their successors, usually from inside the company.
Now the board of directors is increasingly making the selection, and often going outside the company.
But some choices are proving to be disappointing, or at least questionable, to judge by the stock market's reaction.
Many people are wondering if boards are up to the task.


Dow Rises 13.73 Points in Broad Advance Led by Airlines
Stock prices rose yesterday, following through on broad advances in the two previous trading sessions.
"The idea that the Federal Reserve will reduce short-term interest rates this month is being kept alive," said Hugh A. Johnson, senior vice president of the First Albany Corporation.
"The economy still appears to be laboring through a soft landing and may need a helping hand from the Fed."


Another Court Orders Mayor To Create Budget Office
A State Supreme Court justice ordered Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the City Council yesterday to end a series of stalling moves and finally create the independent budget monitor called for in the 1989 City Charter.
The ruling, by Justice Karla Moskowitz in Manhattan, is one in a series of court decisions that have ordered the city to create the $3 million budget office, which would supply elected officials and community boards with independent assessments of the city budget.
City officials have resisted creating the office since the Charter was adopted, first refusing to finance it and then agreeing but delaying the money for several years.


In Los Angeles, A 50's Flameout
There was just the slightest tinge of elegy discernible in Marilyn Shipman's voice as she sat in a booth at Ship's of Culver City, perhaps for the last time.
"Times change, times change," she said with a shrug and a rueful smile, seeking to explain why her family had decided after nearly four decades to close the last two Ship's coffee shops, both Southern California landmarks. (The other is on La Cienega Boulevard, at Olympic Boulevard.) "There's so much competition out there these days we just couldn't make it anymore."


Planned U.S. Cuts Imperil Sludge Cleanup
Barbed wire and signs warning of toxic contamination surround the old Mattiace Petrochemical site here, which is leaching poisons into nearby Glen Cove Creek.
Hundreds of barrels of chemical sludge have been carted away under the Federal Government's Superfund program.
But the Environmental Protection Agency said today that the work has been halted while Congress debates Republican-sponsored legislation that would cut the financing of E.P.A. programs by 34 percent and free some polluters from paying to clean up after themselves.


Packwood's Behavior Led To Decision, Main Foe Says
Senator Barbara Boxer, a California Democrat who is the most outspoken critic of Senator Bob Packwood, said today that the Senate Ethics Committee's 6-to-0 vote to expel the Oregon Republican demonstrated that "the Senate has zero tolerance" for his conduct.
Though her amendment earlier this summer to require the committee to hold public hearings on the case had failed, Ms.
Boxer said Mr.
Packwood damaged himself by changing his mind and making his own call for public hearings.


Packwood's Statement and Excerpts From News Conference
Following is a statement and excerpts from a news conference given yesterday in Washington by Senator Bob Packwood, Republican of Oregon, after the Senate Select Committee on Ethics voted to recommend his expulsion from the Senate, as transcribed by The New York Times: THE STATEMENT
The vote by the Ethics Committee today was totally and absolutely outrageous.
The entire process is so unfair.
I've never had a chance to cross-examine my accusers.
Not one Senator saw any complainant.
Numerous witnesses with information contrary to what the accusers have said were completely ignored by the committee.
The committee has been the judge, jury and prosecution.
This process makes the Inquisition look like a study in fairness.
THE NEWS CONFERENCE
Folks, I can't recall when any American citizen has been put through a process close to an inquisition and never had a chance to face his accusers, never, not once, never had a chance to question them -- to have a process where no single committee member ever heard any of the complainants involved in this case, not one.


He's Not Montana, But Style Is Familiar
It seems as though almost every team in the National Football League runs the West Coast offense.
Only the San Francisco 49ers run it the way it should be run.
They originated it and have the big-time players to make it purr like a sports car.
Patriots Coach Bill Parcells once described the West Coast offense as basketball played on grass.
If that's the case, Joe Montana was Magic Johnson and Jerry Rice is Michael Jordan.


Agassi and Becker Survive to Bump Heads
Andre Agassi and Boris Becker, with ample toil and trouble, struck an abundance of errant balls but managed to survive in a pair of oddball quarterfinal matches yesterday at the United States Open; the development guaranteed these slightly testy rivals that their paths will cross again in Saturday's semifinals.
The top-seeded Agassi, the Open's defending champion, slipped inelegantly into the semifinals last night at the expense of 39th-ranked Petr Korda, who failed to cope consistently with Agassi's inconsistent baseline thunderbolts and fell, 6-4, 6-2, 1-6, 7-5, in 2 hours 31 minutes.


Liberties; Bully in the Pulpit
Blade Buchanan scares me.
I mean Pat Buchanan, but that's what he was called in our neighborhood.
He was awarded the moniker by a friend's mother who dismissed him as a "gay blade." These days, he is an un-gay blade.


Japanese Police Find Body of a Lawyer Believed Killed by Cult
Digging on a remote, wooded hillside, the police today unearthed the remains of a Yokohama lawyer who disappeared six years ago along with his wife and infant son and whom the police believe was killed by the Aum Shinrikyo religious cult.
The discovery of body parts identified as belonging to Tsutsumi Sakamoto is expected to lead to new charges against Shoko Asahara, the cult leader, and five followers.
One former cult member was charged today in Mr.
Sakamoto's death.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a French nuclear test in the Pacific misstated the level of France's diplomatic relations with Australia, which opposes nuclear testing.
Australia's ambassador to France was called home briefly for consultations, but not withdrawn.


14-Year-Old Seems Behind Schedule
When Anna Kournikova was 10, there was talk of her turning professional at the age of 12.
As late as last fall, Kournikova was mentioned in the same breath as Martina Hingis, the 14-year-old wonder who advanced to the fourth round of the women's draw at this year's United States Open.
But if yesterday's junior girls second-round match showed anything, it is that while Kournikova is long on promise, the expectations surrounding her may have been a bit premature.


Basic Tackling Eludes the Jets' Secondary
It is a problem the Jets worked on today.
And if they haven't solved the dilemma, it looms as a barrier to whatever success they can attain this season.
Tackling.
Without it, they might as well be the National Football League's version of Sisyphus, doomed forever to roll a boulder uphill.
After missed tackles helped the ball-carrying Dolphins run free in the Jets' secondary last week on the way to a 52-14 drubbing of New York, the defenders now face the Colts' Marshall Faulk -- the league's next great runner -- on Sunday at Giants Stadium.


Stop &amp; Stop Cos. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Aug 12


Royal Bank Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Jul 31


Antiguans in New York Try to Call Home, and Fail
The re-dial button on Sylvia Hurdle-Reddick's phone has been taking a pounding the last two days as she tries and tries again to make contact with someone, anyone, from her large family on the battered islands of Antigua and Barbuda.
Ms.
Hurdle-Reddick, a social worker from the Bronx, has at least 250 relatives on the volanic and coral spits of land in the Caribbean that were raked by Hurricane Luis on Tuesday morning.
And while she did manage to speak with one of her aunts two days ago -- long enough to hear a resounding thud through the phone line as some large object struck her aunt's roof -- Ms.
Hurdle-Reddick has been unable to reach anyone since.


Getty Petroleum Corp.(GTY,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 31


Slain Woman's Baby Dies
The mother was beaten to death.
Now her baby girl, delivered by Caesarean section on Saturday, has died, the police said.
An autopsy on Juanita Fudge, 28, who was eight months pregnant, showed she was strangled and beaten with a blunt object, but gave no indication she was raped, as reported earlier, Irvin Taliaferro, a Newark police detective, said yesterday.
"We have leads in this double homicide and hope to be making an arrest soon," Detective Taliaferro said.


Essay; Pulling Our Punch
A high-ranking U.S. defense official tells me: "If we get the order, we can take out every Serbian tank and artillery piece threatening Sarajevo."
But the order from the U.N., NATO and the White House to destroy the 300 targets has not come.
Instead we are being treated to the illusion of the fierce application of air power in Bosnia -- complete with photographs of satisfying explosions and enumerated sorties -- but with more bombast than bombing.


Expulsions of Senators Are a Modern-Day Rarity
No one has been expelled from the Senate since the Civil War, although a Senator from New Jersey almost certainly would have been expelled in 1982 for corruption had he not resigned.
The Constitution requires the vote of a two-thirds majority for the Senate or House to expel a member.


Layoffs to Avert Toll Rises
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey will lay off 6 to 9 percent of its 8,800-member work force in an effort to close a projected budget deficit, officials said yesterday.
The reductions mean that the authority will probably not have to raise its tolls and commuter railway fare.  [ Page A1. ]


Consumer Marketers Shift Agencies
Two large consumer marketers made changes yesterday in their agency rosters.
Weight Watchers International, the unit of the H. J. Heinz Company that markets weight-loss programs, selected J. Walter Thompson New York to handle its account, with billings estimated at $30 million to $35 million.
The account had been handled for the last year by Doig, Elliott, Schur in New York, the agency spun off from Earle Palmer Brown.


Sports of The Times; Great Day For Baseball In the 90's
YOU wanted to be on time getting to the ball park here yesterday afternoon because you had the feeling that the man of the hour would not be late.
You wanted some time to relax, to reflect, so the best way to come was the way Lou Gehrig did, on the train.
Along the industrial rail corridor, passing through the bowels of Newark and Philadelphia and Wilmington, chugging into Baltimore past the decrepit row homes in the neighborhood near the old Memorial Stadium and on into Penn Station, you could let your mind wander, imagine what baseball was like when the sporting pulse of major American cities beat inside palaces like Oriole Park at Camden Yards.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15 NATO TO PRESS AIR CAMPAIGN NATO officials decided to broaden and intensify the air campaign in Bosnia after three days of bombing failed to persuade the Bosnian Serbs to lift the siege of Sarajevo, senior American officials said.
A1 A Serbian leader said again that he may lift the siege.
A10 CHINA JOSTLES WOMEN FORUM Chinese security officers jostled thousands of women eager to hear Hillary Rodham Clinton address an international meeting of women, but did not stop Mrs.
Clinton from speaking on human rights.
A8 FRANCE TARGETS NORTH AFRICANS In the seven weeks since France became the target of terrorist bombings, the police have stopped 800,000 people for security checks, most of them Muslims.
A3 LUIS SWEEPS THROUGH CARIBBEAN A hurricane skipped across a necklace of resort islands, flattening houses and closing airports.
At least 13 people died, 9 on St.
Martin.
A12 FRANCE SNIPES AT CRITICS The French Government sniped at the "hysteria" of critics of its resumption of nuclear tests in the South Pacific, gambling that damage to its image would be offset by respect for its firmness.
A9 Anti-bomb, pro-freedom protesters stormed Tahiti's airport.
A8 JAPANESE FIND ANTI-CULT LAWYER Police unearthed the remains of a Yokohama lawyer who disappeared six years ago and whom the police believe was killed by the Aum Shinrikyo religious cult.
A15 Sawrey Journal: A storied English village draws Japanese.
A4 National A16-25, A28, B11-15 EXPULSION VOTE IN THE SENATE The Senate Ethics Committee voted to recommend the expulsion of Senator Bob Packwood of Oregon, who had been accused of sexual and other misconduct.
A1 No senator has been expelled since the Civil War.
B12 FUHRMAN DECLINES TO TESTIFY A lively day in the O. J. Simpson trial included the refusal of Mark Fuhrman, the controversial police detective, to testify.
A1 HEARINGS ON SHOOTOUT BEGIN A cabin door made for a stark opening to Senate hearings into a shootout in Idaho that has left the F.B.I. under a cloud.
A1 GAY CONGRESSMAN FAULTS DOLE The only openly gay Republican in Congress denounced Senator Bob Dole, the majority leader and a Presidential candidate, for returning a contribution from a gay Republican group.
A1 A CLOSE RACE IN BALTIMORE Baltimore's Mayor, once a rising star among black politicians, has fallen on hard times.
A16 BOMB SUSPECT'S COUNTERATTACK Lawyers for Terry L. Nichols, one of the men charged in the Oklahoma City bombing, accused the Government of using unfair pressure tactics on his family.
A16 ATLANTA OFFICERS ARRESTED Six police officers were arrested in Atlanta on charges that included extorting money from citizens in exchange for protection.
A17 A MEDICARE STRATEGY Congressional Republicans said that under their plans for overhauling Medicare, doctors and hospitals would bear most of the cost.
A25 REPUBLICANS SHOW UNITED FRONT As Congress got into full swing after the summer recess, Republican leaders of the House and Senate promised a united push to enact measures on a balanced budget, Medicare and other areas.
B11 Metro Digest B1 PORT AUTHORITY LAYOFFS The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey will lay off 6 to 9 percent of its 8,800-member work force to close a budget deficit, officials said yesterday.
This will avoid increases in bridge and tunnel tolls and in the fare on the PATH commuter railway.
A1 Business Digest D1 Sports B18-23 RIPKEN MAKES HISTORY When Orioles shortstop Cal Ripken took the field against the California Angels last night in Baltimore, he was poised to break the Iron Horse record for consecutive games set by Lou Gehrig.
A1 Baseball: Ripken goes to work for a record 2,131st straight time.
B19 McDowell goes the distance as Yankees top Mariners.
B19 Back-to-back homers by Padres sink Pulsipher and Mets.
B21 Columns: Araton on Ripken B19 Pro Football: Bono and Chiefs are next for Giants.
B23 Jets are trying to solve problems in the secondary.
B23 Tennis: Agassi and Becker reach U.S.
Open semifinals.
B19 When finally pushed, Seles steels to the task.
B22 Arts/Entertainment C15-20 Twelve centuries of liaison between French arts and power.
C15 Nijinsky's diaries.
C15 Theater: "Seascape." C16 Music: Geggy Tah.
C16 The Pop Life C15 Books: "Emotional Intelligence," by Daniel Goleman.
C17 Television: "Gargoyles." C18 The Home Section C1-13 Lost jobs, found directions.
C1 A big mouse moves in.
C1 At home with R. L. Stine: Grown-ups deserve some terror, too.
C1 For safer school buses C2 For a day, embassies share the secrets of themselvesC4 A little Ikea in Manhattan C5 Obituaries B17 Eugene M. Schwartz, modern-art collector.
Mary Alice Barney Kean, prominent historical preservationist.
Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27 Editorials Rating the surgeons.
Mr.
Chirac's nuclear blunder.
The streak.
A welcome change in Harlem.
Letters William Safire: Pulling our punch.
Maureen Dowd: Bully in the pulpit.
Michael Lind: Liberals duck immigration debate.
Chronicle B28 Bridge C18 Crossword C13


For Baltimore Mayor, A Shaky Incumbency
When Kurt L. Schmoke became the first black to be elected Mayor of Baltimore, he seemed too good to be true for a once-vital smokestack city confronting the realities of a vanishing economic base.
Educated at Yale, Harvard Law School and Oxford, with credentials as a local prosecutor and star high school quarterback, he was a local politician of instant national stature.
That was eight years ago.
But when Mr.
Schmoke stopped by the Southwest Senior Center in a struggling, racially mixed neighborhood here last week, few people greeted him with encouragement as he tries for a third term.
Instead, they spoke up about filthy, crime-ravaged streets and abandoned buildings.


Keno Game Brings New Era Of Gambling to New York
Bill Fox played the numbers in his birthday, his wife's birthday, the birthday of a grandson, and then for good measure plucked a few random digits from his head.
"Ahhh, it's a shot," he said after betting -- and losing -- $5 a short time after New York State's new Quick Draw keno game went on line yesterday morning.


Rating the Surgeons
New York State's annual report card for cardiac surgeons is clearly having beneficial effects.
The report cards reveal the rate at which patients die during or immediately after coronary bypass surgery.
Many of the worst-performing surgeons have already been forced to improve or stop operating in the state.
The only hitch is evidence that many doctors may be learning to fudge the statistics to make their records look better than they are.
Such report cards are needed everywhere if, as President Clinton and majorities in Congress agree, health care is to be driven by market forces.
For the health insurance market to work properly, consumers must be able to compare not only the cost but also the quality of different health plans.
They need easy-to-understand report cards.


A Big Mouse Moves In
DIANA BURROUGHS sings M-I-C, K-E-Y, M-O-U-S-E all the way to the bank.
She has rented out her family's 145-year-old Federal town house in Greenwich Village for a month to Mickey's handlers, who wanted a place they could turn into a show house selling celebrity curios and Mickey Mouse merchandise for charity. (And of course, to gather good will for Walt Disney products.)


Protest Over Goose Hunting
Demonstrators carried signs with slogans like "Stop the Killing!" as the 10-day hunting season opened yesterday for the state's resident goose population.
Gregg Feigelson of the Committee to Abolish Sport Hunting, of Tomkins Cove, N.Y., said at least six geese were killed at Ringwood State Park.


Police Officer Is Arrested on Burglary Charges in Sting Operation
After a sting operation, a New York City police officer was arrested yesterday on charges that he took money from a safe in a Greenwich Village apartment while responding to a report of a burglary.
Earlier yesterday in Brooklyn, the 29-year-old officer, Peter Parisi, a member of the Police Department for nine years, was charged in a Federal complaint with acting as an intermediary in an automobile insurance fraud.


Statement From Senate Ethics Committee
Following is the statement and excerpts from the resolution issued tonight by the Senate Select Committee on Ethics regarding Senator Bob Packwood: STATEMENT BY THE COMMITTEE
In Sept. 6, 1995, the Senate Select Committee on Ethics unanimously approved a Resolution for Disciplinary Action recommending that Senator Bob Packwood be expelled from the United States Senate.
The Resolution requires, in accordance with the Constitution, the approval of 67 Senators.
The Committee strenuously urges, and fully expects, that its recommendation of expulsion shall be approved by the full Senate; and the Committee shall ask the Senate Majority Leader to schedule this matter promptly.


The Great Liaison Between French Arts and Power
In recent years, the culture flow between the United States and France has been largely one way, as the French, with gritted teeth, have endured Eurodisney, le Big Mac and Arnold Schwarzenegger.
Now, at an exhibition opening Friday at the Library of Congress, Americans can get a good look at what the guardians of French culture have been fighting for.
"Creating French Culture" cuts a wide swath, using more than 200 manuscripts, books, maps, prints and other items from the French National Library to trace a cultural route that begins with the Lothar Gospels, an illuminated manuscript commissioned by a grandson of Charlemagne in the ninth century, and ends with a 1979 poem by the Senegalese writer and longtime head of state, Leopold Sedar Senghor, in honor of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
4.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.69
5.86
4.74
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.31
5.30
4.52
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.29
5.30
4.85
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.17
6.18
7.28
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.58
6.57
7.56
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.48
7.48
8.42
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.04
6.04
6.38
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


No Headline
"On the women, I am accused of kissing women. On occasion of perhaps overeagerly kissing women. And that is the charge -- not drugging, not robbing, kissing." SENATOR BOB PACKWOOD  [ B12:1. ]


Stern Quarters
To The Home Section:
John Pawson's austere house ("No Hinges. No Knobs. No Jeans, Either," Aug. 31), concealed behind a London Victorian facade, seems ideal for Mr.
Pawson, who has lived in a Zen Buddhist monastery in Japan.


USAir Chief, In a Surprise, Plans to Retire
Seth E. Schofield, the chairman and chief executive of USAir, who has faced more than his share of adversity in a business famous for its difficulties, said yesterday that he would retire after 38 years at the airline where he started as a baggage handler.
Yesterday's announcement, which surprised many in the industry, came one day after the nation's sixth-largest airline trumpeted rare and similarly unexpected news -- that it would finally post a pretax profit after many disappointing years.
USAir credited cost-cutting efforts and better-than-expected revenue for reversing years of losses that have totaled more than $3 billion since 1988.


F.C.C. Speeds Repeal of Syndication Rules
Ignoring the last-gasp efforts of Hollywood studios, the Federal Communications Commission yesterday accelerated its repeal of the regulations that had impeded television networks from directly entering the syndication market.
The commission moved the date for the repeal of the financial interest and syndication rules from Nov. 10, when they had been scheduled to be lifted, to sometime next week, when the repeal will be published in the Federal Register.


Citing Burnout, Penn State Coach Resigns
BRUCE PARKHILL, who revitalized the Penn State basketball program when it joined the Big Ten, resigned unexpectedly yesterday, saying that he was burned out on coaching.
Parkhill, who guided the Nittany Lions to a 21-11 record last season and a third-place finish in the National Invitation Tournament, was replaced by JERRY DUNN, his longtime assistant.
Parkhill will remain at the school as an assistant athletic director.
"I guess 18 years as a head coach has taken its toll," Parkhill said. (AP)


Hurricane Leaves Trail of Destruction in Caribbean Isles
The most powerful hurricane to roil the Caribbean in six years skipped across a necklace of resort islands today, leaving houses flattened, hospitals damaged, airports closed and power and communications lines hopelessly grounded.
The most widespread destruction seemed to be on Antigua, where officials estimated that the vast majority of houses had been damaged or destroyed, said Paul Bell, coordinator of the Latin American and Caribbean region for the United States Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance.


NCH Corp.(NCH,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 31


Tears and Smiles on First Day of School
Alice Durst calmly raised her arms as a classroom of brightly dressed children swirled around her like wind-blown autumn leaves.
"All right, it's time to go," she called, as the giggling children scurried to their desks.
"Does everyone have their Me Bags? Does everyone have their homework folders?"


Burnishing the Newark Skyline


Covering Local News on Cable
The Star-Ledger of Newark and Cablevision Systems Corporation announced plans yesterday to start a 24-hour local news channel in northern New Jersey early next year, The Associated Press reported.
The channel, to be called News 12 New Jersey, will serve cable subscribers in 14 counties and may eventually be expanded statewide, officials of the two companies said.
"For years, New Jersey has been underserved by television news," said Jim Willse, editor of The Star-Ledger.


David D. Henry, 89, President Of Illinois U. in Time of Tumult
David Dodds Henry, a onetime English professor who served as president of the University of Illinois during a period of significant expansion in the 1950's and the era of campus unrest in the 1960's, died on Monday at a nursing home in Naples, Fla.
He was 89.
If there were times when Dr.
Henry regretted his decision to abandon the contemplative field of literature for the politically charged world of college administration, he had only his talents for leadership and his vision for public education to blame.


Affirmative Action Delivers Over Time
To the Editor:
Re "Black Students Live Down to Expectations" (Op-Ed, Aug. 31), Claude M. Steele's defense of affirmative action on America's college campuses:


Lawyer Says He Is Barred From Defense Of Jordanian
A defense lawyer for a Jordanian man accused of involvement in the World Trade Center bombing said last night that a Federal judge had removed him from the case because he is Jewish.
The lawyer, David Gordon, said the judge, Kevin Thomas Duffy, appointed him early last month to represent the defendant, Eyad Ismoil, a 24-year-old college student who was arrested in Jordan and extradited to the United States on Aug. 3.


Why Does U.S. Stall On New World Court?
To the Editor:
"No Accord in Talks on New World Court" (news article, Aug. 26) on the United Nations meeting to discuss the creation of an International Criminal Court, made only brief reference to the disappointing role played by the United States.


Avoiding Attack, Homeless Man Leaps to Death
The man with the puffy face and powder-blue sweatpants had become a fixture on the Steeplechase Pier, making his home on one of the few remaining relics from Coney Island's golden age.
All the regulars who fish the waters below knew who he was, and many of them used to give him cigarettes and food when he came begging.
On Tuesday night, four teen-agers walked onto the pier, apparently looking to settle some kind of score with him after a confrontation over the holiday weekend.
At least two of the teen-agers punched the man, and to escape his attackers, he fled to the only place he thought offered safety: he leapt from the pier into heavy windblown surf and to his death.


George deStevens, 71, Chemist Known for Blood-Pressure Drug
Dr.
George deStevens, a chemist who discovered a drug that is one of the most widely used treatments for high blood pressure, died on Tuesday at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J.
He was 71 and lived in Summit.
The cause was lymphoma, according to the Brough Funeral Home in Summit.


Burglar's Blunder: Victim, 92, Has Gun
A burglar badly miscalculated early today when he broke into a home here, pummeled the 92-year-old owner and shoved him into a closet.
It was the very closet where the owner, Conrad Schwarzkopf, kept his licensed semiautomatic pistol.
So, while the burglar was ransacking the house, Mr.
Schwarzkopf came out and shot him, the Suffolk County police said.


EASTERN COLLEGE REPORT
Penn State
No Ki-Jana Carter at running back.
No Kerry Collins at quarterback.
No Kyle Brady at tight end.
Without those graduated superstars, Penn State's never-ending cast of future football heroes will make its season debut Saturday, playing host to Texas Tech.


The Eudora Network
To The Home Section:
Nicholas Dawidoff's article on Eudora Welty ("Only the Typewriter Is Silent," Aug. 10) gives an enjoyable view of the well-known writer.
But it might have been a little more net-hip if the article could have made at least passing mention that a widely used Internet E-mail program, called Eudora, was named after her.


Gingrich Gets an Apology for 'Liar' Remark
Representative Gary A. Franks, a Connecticut Republican who called Speaker Newt Gingrich a liar in a recent dispute about affirmative action legislation, apologized today.
"There are many words in the dictionary to describe what took place," Mr.
Franks said in a prepared statement.
"I, however, picked the wrong word. Calling the Speaker a liar was simply inappropriate."


The star of the Video Music Awards may be MTV's marketing.
HITCHCOCK, Eisenstein and MTV all popularized quick-cut editing in film, but only MTV has so smoothly combined performance, advertising and product promotion.
A case in point is tonight's Video Music Awards, the 12th annual broadcast of MTV's counterpart to the Grammies and Oscars, in which the music cable channel refines its already sharp marketing skills.


For a Day, Embassies Share The Secrets of Themselves
Visitors here inevitably wonder about the grand mansions that line Embassy Row, an architecturally toothsome stretch of Massachusetts Avenue, but their curiosity is usually unsatisfied.
Once private homes to the newly minted rich -- "squillionaires," sneered the art expert Bernard Berenson on a visit in the early 1900's -- most are now foreign embassies.
On rare occasions, though, their wrought-iron gates are opened to allow the public a glimpse at the splendors that diplomatic Washington keeps behind closed doors.
On Sept. 10 at noon, visitors may explore the city's architectural wealth and rich history in the homes of diplomats, statesmen, writers, artists and a former president.
During the 11th annual Kalorama House and Embassy Tour, the doors to the residences of the Ambassadors of Thailand and Colombia will be open, as well as the doors of the Embassy of Indonesia, two private houses and the Woodrow Wilson House, where President Wilson and his wife lived after leaving the White House.


Council Approves Trial Run For Home Garbage Disposals
The City Council passed a measure yesterday that could eventually allow New Yorkers to use a modern convenience most of the rest of the country has enjoyed for decades: the garbage disposal.
By a vote of 44 to 3, the Council approved a pilot program supported by the Giuliani administration that will allow the testing of the devices in up to 1,000 homes for about 21 months.
Council leaders said that the test program, if successful, could lead to widespread use of disposals, which have been banned in much of the city because of concerns that they could cause problems for its aging sewer system.


Bridge
The World Junior Camp in Ghent, Belgium, last monthwas a success, with 175 players under age 25.
Fifty came from North America, a handful from Australia and Botswana and the rest from Europe.
The camp rules encouraged players to find partners from other countries, but on the diagramed deal two Americans were in partnership.
Joel Wooldridge of Buffalo and Chris Willenken of Manhattan, sitting West, defended brilliantly to take advantage of a slight slip by the declarer.


Student Reporters Banned at Nebraska
Nebraska Coach TOM OSBORNE has banned reporters from the student newspaper from practice for the season.
Osborne declared the ban Tuesday for The Daily Nebraskan reporters because of two cartoons that were critical of his football players.
"Attending our practices is a privilege, not a right," said Osborne.
In a cartoon published last Thursday, the paper showed a caricature of receiver RILEY WASHINGTON practicing in a prison jumpsuit and a ball and chain as four other players watched.
Washington is charged with attempted second-degree murder in a shooting Aug. 2 at a Lincoln, Neb., convenience store.
He has practiced with the team since late last month.


An Enclosed Space
To The Home Section:
The architect John Pawson has achieved his lifelong quest to divest himself of nonessentials.
He has even succeeded in divesting himself of himself.
The place he has designed and built is not a home.
It is not even a house.
It is an enclosed space.


Dole Suffers Dual Blow From Vote And Reply
Senator Bob Dole, whose chief claim to the Presidency is his ability to run the Senate effectively and accomplish Republican goals, got two pokes in the eye with a sharp stick today.
First, the Senate Ethics Committee unanimously recommended that Senator Bob Packwood of Oregon, chairman of the Finance Committee, which handles the Republican's central agenda, be expelled for sexual misconduct, evidence tampering and getting too cozy with lobbyists.


Simpson Detective, Back in Court, Refuses to Reply on Role in Case
Mark Fuhrman today strode back into the courtroom that he has dominated for the last several weeks without ever entering.
And, when asked whether he lied or planted evidence or filed false reports in the O. J. Simpson investigation, Mr.
Fuhrman invoked the Fifth Amendment.
Looking calm, his normally sleepy face appearing even more tired than when he last testified in March, the former detective fielded several questions from Gerald Uelmen, a defense lawyer.
Among them were: "Was the testimony that you gave in the preliminary hearing in this case completely truthful?" "Have you ever falsified a police report?" "Did you plant or manufacture any evidence in this case?"


Little Ikea in Manhattan
Ikea, the Swedish chain of home furnishings stores, has invented a new form of three-dimensional advertising: a miniature shop in Manhattan that offers a rotating sampling of what is sold in its big stores, like the 283,000-square-foot one in Elizabeth, N.J.
On Wednesday at 5 P.M., the Ikea Marketing Outpost will open at 131 East 57th Street.
Its first sampling will be called "Ikea Cooks." Inside the 7,400-square-foot shop, there will be kitchens, as well as pots, pans and cabinet pulls.


In September, Summer Just Melts Away


For Advisers, Turner Plan Is Already a Big Deal
After weeks on the sidelines, Wall Street advisers are back at the center of the multibillion-dollar merger mania in the media and entertainment business.
The prospect of a complex media marriage -- the proposed $8 billion merger of Time Warner Inc. and Turner Broadcasting System Inc. -- has a swarm of high-priced professionals working overtime to keep the deal on track.
Among them are representatives of the Wall Street investment banks Morgan Stanley &amp; Company and the CS First Boston Corporation, and from the law firms Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore; Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom, and Baker &amp; Botts, as well as several independent consultants.


Solving The Lizard Problem
The lizard problem is solved as well as it can be in the production of Edward Albee's "Seascape" directed by Terese Hayden at Theater 22; in fact, these lizards are marvelous.
Ever since it opened on Broadway 20 years ago, this tale about an old couple who encounter two sea lizards deciding ever so tentatively to try out life on the surface has tripped up actors and directors.
Even in that original production, with a stellar cast, those magnificently costumed lizards were fatally distracting.
This director does not allow distraction.
Her set is a beach blanket, a towel, a ball and a basket.
Her humans (Jacqueline Brookes and James Stevenson) scarcely move more than a few feet throughout, but they know things about movement, voice and expression that can be learned only in decades of acting.
Their body English tells us more than their lines about these two, who, as they themselves say, have "been through life."


Corporate Child-Care Companies to Merge
Corporate Child Care and Resources for Child Care Management will merge to form the country's largest provider of on-site corporate child care centers, the two companies announced yesterday.
Marguerite W. Sallee, president of Corporate Child Care, based in Nashville, will become president and chief executive of the newly formed company.
The founder and president of Resources for Child Care Management, Robert Lurie, will hold the title of chairman.


Nocturnal and Excited About Books
Disney's animated series "Gargoyles," seen in this area on WPIX, Channel 11, Mondays through Thursdays at 4:30, offers its fans gobs of violence spiked with occasional wit and spurts of do-goodism.
The do-goodism gets a workout today.
The show's concept is elaborate, occasionally impenetrable.
The gargoyles, possibly evolved from dinosaurs, are nocturnal creatures who fly about at night and, turning to stone, hibernate during the day.
They originated at a castle in Scotland a thousand years ago and now, sporting names like Hudson, Lexington, Broadway and Bronx, prowl the canyons of Manhattan, often with humans.
Battles using laser guns and various other mega-weapons are commonplace.


MCI Wins Mexican Long-Distance License
An aggressive joint venture between MCI Communications of the United States and Grupo Financiero Banamex-Accival, Mexico's largest financial group, today became the first company to win a Government license to compete in Mexico's long-distance telephone market when the current monopoly ends on Jan. 1, 1997.
The Government is expected to grant concessions to several other new companies over the coming weeks in what is seen as the completion of longstanding promises to encourage open competition in the $4 billion long-distance market and improve Mexico's notoriously poor telephone service.


Youth, 15, Is Guilty In Slaying of Boy, 12
A 15-year-old youth pleaded guilty to manslaughter today for strangling a classmate last year at a residential school for youths with emotional problems, the Westchester County District Attorney's office said.
The defendant, Brian Edwards, was originally charged with second-degree murder after authorities accused him of killing a 12-year-old boy and dumping the body in a wooded area on the grounds of the Pleasantville Cottage School.


Mets' Pulsipher Stumbles, Then the Bullpen Does, Too
Sometimes you can forget that Bill Pulsipher is just a rookie taking his baby steps in the big leagues.
You forget this is all new to him and he's still a long way from taking a place next to Seaver or Gooden.
There are still growing pains that have to be endured and lessons to be learned.
This afternoon Pulsipher learned that no lead is safe and that two bad pitches can be the difference between winning and losing.
Those pitches, hanging breaking balls in the fifth inning, resulted in back-to-back home runs by the Padres.
The two blasts, a three-run homer by Ken Caminiti and a solo shot by Marc Newfield, erased a seemingly comfortable four-run Mets lead and tied the game 5-5.
They positioned the Padres to win in the ninth off Jerry DiPoto when Bip Roberts powered a long drive over the head of the drawn-in left fielder, Damon Buford, to score Steve Finley from third with the winning run.


Lockout May End if Decertification Fails
If league and union officials are successful in defeating decertification, the lockout of National Basketball Association players could end within days after the results of the election are announced next Tuesday, a league official said yesterday.
Russ Granik, the N.B.A.'s deputy commissioner, said the union and the owners would have to ratify the six-year agreement the two sides negotiated Aug. 8 but added: "Once those two things happen, I don't see any reason why we wouldn't be lifting the lockout at that point. It could be a matter of days."


As High Schools Open, Mayor and Cortines Bicker
As New York City's 300,000 high school students returned to their classrooms yesterday, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines squared off yet again, blaming each other for the disarray marking the opening of the new school year.
The Chancellor, speaking at an impromptu news conference at Seward Park High School on the Lower East Side of Manhattan, pointed the finger squarely at City Hall, saying the Mayor's aides had delayed talking to the board about school staffing problems, which in turn has left school superintendents scrambling to get teachers in classrooms.
More than 1,000 teachers were still without assignments yesterday.


Liberals Duck Immigration Debate
New York Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has been praised by liberals for his courage in opposing measures to deter the use of public services by illegal immigrants.
The truth is that ignoring the rising costs of mass immigration, legal as well as illegal, is anything but courageous -- or liberal.
While business-class and populist Republicans have engaged in serious debate about immigration, discussion of the subject by Democrats is still governed by taboos.
The consensus liberal position rests on two articles of faith.


Governor Renews Call On Vouchers For Schools
Signaling his priorities for the next legislative session, Gov.
John G. Rowland today renewed his call for a voucher system that would allow students to receive public money to attend private and parochial schools.
In a speech this morning at the first meeting of the new State Board of Education, Mr.
Rowland, a Republican, said that his failure to win the state legislature's support for vouchers last spring would not deter him from trying again.
And Mr.
Rowland's aides noted that the Governor would devote more political capital to his education agenda now that a two-year budget is in place and welfare and anti-crime legislation has been enacted.


F.B.I. Unduly Pressured His Family, Says Man Charged in Oklahoma City Bombing
Lawyers for Terry L. Nichols, charged in the bombing of the Federal Building in Oklahoma City, said today that the Government's case against him was built on a series of innocent coincidences, and they accused the Federal Bureau of Investigation of using unfair tactics to pressure his family.
The lawyers met here today behind closed doors with senior Justice Department officials and Patrick M. Ryan, the United States Attorney in Oklahoma City, to argue that the Government should not seek the death penalty for their client because he is innocent.


Rodman Talks of Sitting Out
Even if the National Basketball Association's labor dispute is resolved soon, Dennis Rodman is not eager to return to the San Antonio Spurs.
Rodman, the league's leading rebounder last season, said yesterday he would welcome a trade to the Los Angeles Lakers.
The controversial forward also said he would consider sitting out next season if he cannot be promised a better contract from the Spurs or from any team that trades for him.


Police Shut Motel in Bronx, Saying It Is Used as a Brothel
Amid cheers from neighborhood residents and some grumbles from local officials about why it had taken them so long, the New York City Police Department yesterday shut down a seedy Bronx motel suspected of being a center for prostitution, putting plywood over the entrance and posting officers outside.
Officials called the closing unusual because it was rare, perhaps unprecedented, to use the nuisance abatement law against an establishment as big as the Jerome Motel, a bare concrete rectangle of 37 rooms surrounding a parking lot just off the Cross Bronx Expressway.
The next-largest site closed down in the recent past that was recalled by the commanding officer of the police department's legal bureau, Daniel J. Oates, was a dwelling of six to eight apartments, also declared a public nuisance, where drugs had been sold.


Mary Alice Barney Kean, 93, a Leader in Historical Preservation
Mary Alice Barney Kean, who was long prominent in the historical preservation field, died on Monday at her 223-year-old home, Liberty Hall in Union, N.J.
She was 93.
At her death, Mrs.
Kean (pronounced cane) was president of the Elizabethtown Historical Foundation in New Jersey.
She became the first female trustee of the New-York Historical Society and remained a trustee from 1967 to 1984.
Liberty Hall was built for her ancestor William Livingston, New Jersey's first Governor after the American Revolution.


Corrections
An art review in Weekend on Aug. 11 about "New York Now: Contemporary Cityscape Paintings," at the Museum of the City of New York, misstated the surname of the painter of "West 14th Street." He is Frederick Brosen, not Brown.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a protest in Tepoztlan, Mexico, misstated the title of a renowned anthropological study of the village.
The 1951 book, by Oscar Lewis, is "Life in a Mexican Village: Tepoztlan Revisited," not "The Life of a Mexican Village."


Earnings Surpass Estimates at National Semiconductor
The National Semiconductor Corporation today reported earnings for the first quarter that were at the high end of Wall Street estimates.
The strong results, analysts said, indicated the success of National's strategy to shift the core of the company's business to analog and so-called mixed-signal products, which are chips and circuit boards that have the ability to process both analog signals, like voice or video, and digital signals, like computer data.
Such products face a growing market in telecommunications and computer networks, and offer high profit margins.


Turner Is Said to Cancel Board Meeting on Plan
Turner Broadcasting System Inc. has canceled a board meeting scheduled for today to discuss the terms of a possible sale to Time Warner Inc., several people close to the discussions said yesterday.
These people said that the decision to cancel the meeting did not mean that the talks were dead, only that final terms for a deal had not been reached.
As a result, they said, there was no reason for board members to come to the meeting, which was to have been in New York.


In Deal With Swiss Bank, Perot Systems Plans Growth
Ross Perot's halting comeback in computer services is finally gathering momentum.
The Perot Systems Corporation and the Swiss Bank Corporation announced a partnership today that nearly doubles the revenue of Perot Systems.
After becoming an also-ran to larger competitors, including Electronic Data Systems, Perot Systems is poised to become a force in serving financial companies and the European market.


MTV Winner: Neither Rejected Nor Censored
Tonight, MTV may break a streak.
For the first time in years, the winner at the MTV Video Music Awards, to be broadcast at 8 P.M. on MTV, live from Radio City Music Hall, will be a video that has neither been rejected nor censored by this cable channel.
For some, MTV handing out awards for music videos is akin to the Motion Picture Association of America, which rates movies, handing out the Academy Awards.
In the last six years, every winner in MTV's Best Video category was initially rejected by the channel's standards and practices committee.


French Police Fight Rioters In Tahiti
Anti-nuclear demonstrators stormed the runway at Tahiti's international airport today and tried to set the terminal building on fire as hundreds of foreign travelers fled the frenzied scene.
The demonstration, led by a Polynesian political party seeking independence from France, came a day after the French military detonated a nuclear weapon deep beneath an atoll 750 miles southeast of Tahiti.


THE PACKWOOD CASE: Man in the News; Kentucky Blend of Understatement and Ambition -- Addison Mitchell McConnell
Senator Addison Mitchell McConnell of Kentucky, a sober-sided legislator with a subterranean profile from a not-very-influential state, landed with a thump on the national political scene today.
If it was not precisely the debut he might have preferred, he has only himself to blame: Mr.
McConnell is that rarest of senators who actually wanted to serve on the Senate Select Committee on Ethics.


From a Riff, Endless Mutations
Most bands assume that the instruments they start a song with are the ones they'll use all the way through.
Not Geggy Tah, a three-man band from Los Angeles that performed on Tuesday night at CB's 313.
During its set, Tommy Jordan played electric bass, steel drum, miniature trumpet and an L-shaped, 12-foot-long horn made of plastic tubing; Greg Kurstin's keyboards carried swampy funk bass lines, brittle piano notes and greasy organ chords.
Their voices harmonized, overlapped, swooped together in falsetto or alternated syllables in a phrase.
Geggy Tah could have been describing its own music when Mr.
Jordan sang, "I'm dreaming that I am awake listening to music that's repetitive." The band uses the repetition that's at the core of funk, but its songs free-associate with the capriciousness of dreams.
The riffs migrate among instruments as the songs mutate from style to style: slow and midtempo funk, hard rock, Brazilian pop and Congolese-pygmy vocal hoots and syncopations.


Economic Scene; Hurdles are still high for women who want a career and a family.
WITH Labor Day just passed and Hillary Rodham Clinton in China to discuss the status of women around the world, it seems a good time to ask how educated American women trying to reconcile careers with family life are faring.
The answer, gleaned from long-term survey data by Claudia Goldin, an economist at Harvard University, is not well.
The formal limits that prevented women from combining financially rewarding work with child-rearing are fading.
But the practical constraints are proving very durable.
Ms.
Goldin found that even by a modest definition, just one middle-aged college-educated woman in six with children can claim career success today.


CHRONICLE
If it's a boy's first day at a new boarding school, what are his parents to do?
Like doting mothers and fathers everywhere, the PRINCE and PRINCESS OF WALES took their 13-year-old son, PRINCE WILLIAM, to Eton yesterday.
PRINCE HARRY went along for the ride.
Putting aside their marital differences for the big day, the royal couple arrived at the school with Diana behind the wheel of a green Jaguar, Prince Charles next to her in front, and the boys in the back seat, the Press Association reported.


First Hearing Today on Transit Toll Rises
The first of seven public hearings scheduled on proposed increases in transit fares and bridge and tunnel tolls will be today at 6 P.M. at the New York Hilton in Manhattan, 1335 Avenue of the Americas, between 53d and 54th streets.
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority has proposed increasing the New York City subway and bus fare to $1.50 from $1.25, and express bus fares to $4 from $3.
Fares on the Long Island Rail Road and Metro-North Commuter Railroad would rise 9 percent, except for travel on Metro-North in Connecticut, where fares would rise 5 percent.


Early Private Towns
To the Editor:
Re "Many Seek Security in Private Communities" (front page, Sept. 3): Prof.
Gerald Frug of Harvard is mistaken in claiming that the new private communities are unlike anything America has ever seen.


New Country, New School -- Immigrant Student's First Day; Experiment In Teaching Immigrants Gets Rolling
Smiling shyly in the lacy pink dress she had brought with her from Bangladesh, Tania Islam turned tentatively to a classmate and quietly spoke the first words she had learned on her very first day of school in America.
"Hello, my name is Tania," she said yesterday as she shook hands with the girl, following the instructions that a teacher had delivered in Bengali.


Pall Corp.(PLL,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jul 29


Atlanta Holds Six Policemen In Crackdown
Six police officers were arrested here today on charges ranging from shaking down drug dealers to extorting money from citizens in exchange for police protection.
The arrests grew out of a nearly two-year investigation in which local law-enforcement officials cooperated with agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who eventually set up an undercover operation.
According to court papers filed today, some of the officers were caught on video cameras frantically stuffing money seized from a suspected drug operation into their uniforms.


Deal for Stake In Children's Book Publisher
Western Publishing Group, the large children's publisher best known for its Golden Books, said yesterday that Richard E. Snyder and Warburg Pincus Ventures L.P. had agreed to buy a significant interest in the ailing publishing company.
Under the proposal, Mr.
Snyder, the former chairman and chief executive of Simon &amp; Schuster, would replace Richard A. Bernstein, the Manhattan investor who bought into Western in the early 1980's, as the company's chairman.


New York Banks' Retreat From Poor Neighborhoods Hurts All
To the Editor:
Bob Herbert's "Power to the Banks" (column, Sept. 1), depicting the lack of banking services in New York City's poorer areas, is fine as far as it goes, but fails to examine the social and economic consequences or pose any pragmatic solutions to this dismal situation.


Currents; Home Depot Goes Luxe: No Lumber
ALTHOUGH the package is reassuringly familiar -- a no-frills warehouse with industrial-strength display racks as tall as a two-story house -- it is the contents that startle the eye.
Situated across from the old Roosevelt Raceway in Westbury, L.I., the Home Depot Expo, part of a new division of the Atlanta-based do-it-yourself company, bypasses the literal nuts and bolts of home improvement in favor of the softer side of life: decor.
Jim Inglis, the company's executive vice president of strategic development, says the strategy behind Home Depot Expo -- three stores around the country with more on the way -- is to ease consumer frustration.
"Typically, the average person decorates his home by spending hours going from one specialty store to another," he said.
"Pulling it together is such a mystery to people, so we thought, Why not bring all those destinations together into one great big store?"


When Finally Pushed, Seles Steels Herself to the Task
Just when it appeared her that comeback juggernaut was about to stall out in the dead zone between the quarterfinal and semifinal rounds, Monica Seles stepped up her tempo to the untouchable zone.
She escalated her grunt to the earplug zone and kept herself well within the striking zone of a third United States Open title.
Uh-huh.
A-ha.
Or, as her defeated opponent, Jana Novotna, put it after having her carefully executed game plan swatted back in her face, "But pity. She's a great champion."


Ruckelshaus Plans to Step Down as Chief of Browning-Ferris
Browning-Ferris Industries, the nation's second-largest waste management company, said today that its chairman and chief executive, William D. Ruckelshaus, would step down as chief executive in October.
He will be succeeded by Bruce E. Ranck, the company's president and chief operating officer.
The announcement that Mr. Ruckelshaus, 63, would step down had been expected.


NATO TO INTENSIFY USE OF AIR POWER AGAINST THE SERBS
After three days of bombing last week failed to persuade the Bosnian Serbs to lift the siege of Sarajevo, NATO officials decided to broaden and markedly intensify the air campaign in Bosnia, senior American officials said today.
The officials said the intensification -- which doubles the number of targets to at least 50 and expands the raids across more of Bosnia -- had been scheduled to begin on Tuesday.
But poor weather over Bosnia frustrated the plan, they said, and many of the NATO warplanes returned to their bases today without dropping any bombs.


Ex-Congressman Pleads Guilty
A former New Jersey Congressman, Cornelius E. Gallagher, pleaded guilty yesterday in Federal District Court to lying to a bank in 1986 to help his son-in-law obtain a $200,000 loan.
In 1986, Mr.
Gallagher falsely stated to Pamrapo Savings and Loan of Bayonne that his son-in-law, Michael Brennan, was employed by his corporation, Panamarkets Inc., at a salary of $100,000 a year, said R. Scott Thompson, an Assistant United States Attorney.
Mr.
Gallagher, 74, a Democrat who served in the House of Representatives from 1959 to 1973, also admitted yesterday that he omitted from his 1989 tax return $90,000 in profit that he earned on the sale of a home in the Dominican Republic.


Engineers at L.I.R.R. Reach Contract Accord
The Long Island Rail Road engineers' union has tentatively agreed to a contract through 1998 and has admitted that its one-day walkout on May 26 was illegal and agreed to pay the railroad $2 million for the strike.
But as part of the deal, the railroad has agreed not to collect the money as long as the union, the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers, does not take any more illegal job actions for the next five years.


Corrections
A chart on Tuesday about the salaries of executives of selected nonprofit organizations referred incorrectly in some editions to the worth of five foundations.
Their dollar figures should have been labeled assets, not income.


Deadline From Steinbrenner
George Steinbrenner said yesterday that the future home of the Yankees must be determined by mid-1996, whether it is Yankee Stadium or another site.
"The Bronx is not ruled out, and yes, we'll look at New Jersey," the team's principal owner said yesterday, one day after the team rejected the latest Yankee Stadium renovation plan.
"We'll need some idea by the middle of next year, to determine where we'll play after 2002," he added, referring to the year when the Bronx lease expires.


Insider Trading Case Is Settled in Luxottica Deal
The Securities and Exchange Commission said yesterday that it had settled an insider trading case arising from Luxottica Group S.p.A.'s acquisition of the United States Shoe Corporation earlier this year.
Giovanni Malavasi, secretary to the board of Luxottica, an Italian eyewear company, agreed to pay $100,000 for 12,500 shares of U.S.
Shoe on Feb. 14, more than two weeks before Luxottica's bid was announced, the commission said.
After Luxottica began its tender offer for U.S.
Shoe on March 3, Mr.
Malavasi sold his U.S.
Shoe shares for a profit of $55,855.


Pathmark Stores Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Teary-Eyed White Separatist Recalls F.B.I. Slaying of Wife
A white separatist, whose encounter with the Federal authorities on a remote Idaho mountain in 1992 has touched off a crisis for law enforcement, today told a rapt Senate panel how he watched in horror as an F.B.I. sniper shot and killed his wife while she stood at the door of the family cabin.
"She was not wanted for any crime," the man, Randall C. Weaver, recalled bitterly, opening three weeks of Congressional hearings on the incident at Ruby Ridge, Idaho.
"There were no warrants for her arrest. At the time she was gunned down, she was helpless. She was standing in the doorway of her home."


Brooklyn Killing Is Linked To a Kidnapping in Seattle
The murder of a Chinese immigrant in Brooklyn on Saturday has been linked to a spree of kidnapping and torture that includes the abduction of three Chinese teen-agers in Seattle last month and the wounding of another immigrant in Brooklyn last week, the F.B.I said yesterday.
Suspects in New York and Seattle used the same telephone debit card over a one-week period to call China in an attempt to extort money from the victims' relatives, Federal Bureau of Investigation officials said.


The Game Gets Together To Salute Favorite Son
If the worth of respect and love could be measured in dollars, Cal Ripken surely emerged from his night as the richest player in baseball.
Ripken stood before teammates, opposing players, Hall of Famers, even baseball's infamous sparring partners in labor and management, who came together in an emotional salute to one of their own.


The Streak
Woody Allen once observed that "eighty percent of success is showing up." Cal Ripken Jr. should know.
Just by showing up for work at the ball park last evening, the Baltimore Orioles' indomitable shortstop made baseball history by appearing in his 2,131st consecutive game.
As the big day approached, it was sometimes hard to tell which was more remarkable, Ripken's long march on Lou Gehrig's endurance record or the philosophizing, moralizing and general flapdoodle inspired by Ripken's final approach.


Orioles' Ripken Goes to Work And Steps Into History Books
In the brightest, most dramatic development of a season damaged by an unresolved labor dispute, Cal Ripken defied the odds of probability and baseball reality tonight, playing in his 2,131st consecutive game.
That was one more game than Lou Gehrig achieved in his legendary streak that stood untouched -- and was believed to be untouchable -- for 56 years.
Gehrig's record, which Ripken broke on the Baltimore Orioles' home field at Camden Yards, was not as glamorous as many others in baseball lore -- Babe Ruth's 60 home runs in a season and 714 in his career, for example -- but Ripken's ability to break it was perhaps an even more remarkable feat.
Playing every game for 13 1/2 seasons certainly was thought to be beyond the grasp of the modern-day player.


WMS Industries Inc.(WMS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Plan to Rename Street for Fascist Ignites a Controversy in Rome
A proposal by Rome's Mayor to name a street for the Mussolini-era Government minister who ordered Jews ejected from Italy's education system has rekindled an impassioned debate about the country's Fascist past.
The proposal to name a street for Giuseppe Bottai, who helped found Fascism in 1919 and served as Minister of National Education from 1936 to 1943, came from Mayor Francesco Rutelli, a former Communist who was elected three years ago as a Green Party candidate.


Southern Union Co. (SUG,N) reports earnings for Yr to Jun 30


Russia's Young Stock Market Cleans Up Its Act; Georgian Democracy
To the Editor:
Re "Parliament in Georgia Approves Constitution" (news item, Aug. 25): Zviad Gamsakhurdia was not "Georgia's only democratically elected President."


CHRONICLE
His wife, GRACE MIRABELLA, was the editor in chief of Vogue magazine for 17 years and of Mirabella for three and a half years, but never did it occur to Dr.
WILLIAM G. CAHAN that he might make a good fashion model.
Then came a call a few months ago from Paul Sinclaire, a fashion editor with L'Uomo Vogue, the Italian magazine.
"He asked me if I would pose for the magazine in some Armani stuff, no less," said Dr.
Cahan, 81, a senior attending surgeon at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.


Leo Goldsmith, 83, Lawyer and a Mayor
Leo Goldsmith Jr., a lawyer who had served as mayor of Larchmont and supervisor of the Town of Mamaroneck, died on Aug. 23 at his home in Larchmont.
He was 83.
Mr.
Goldsmith died of a heart attack, a spokesman for his law firm said.
He had been a partner at Bangser Klein Rocca &amp; Blum in New York and had continued to practice law there in his final years, going to the office the day before his death.


Sawrey Journal; The Japanese, Lots of Them, Call on Peter Rabbit
If Beatrix Potter were alive today, it would astound her to learn that the tiny, dark cottage called Hill Top, which she used as a sanctuary to escape a trying Victorian world, has turned into a veritable shrine.
It draws 80,000 tourists a year -- many of them from the opposite side of the globe.
The Japanese, in particular, are smitten with Peter Rabbit.
They make up nearly a third of the crowds that descend upon this perfect splotch of a hamlet in Potter's beloved Lake District, with its whitewashed, slate-roofed shops, winding lanes hemmed in by towering stone walls, and rolling green hills where even the sheep seem to space themselves for maximum esthetic impact.


Treasury Securities Are Mixed
Prices of Treasury securities turned mixed yesterday as investors consolidated recent gains, ending a four-day rally.
Trading was quiet as investors apparently waited for further evidence of slow economic growth and low inflation before commmitting more money.


Federal Monitor to Oversee Hotel Employees' Union
The Justice Department announced today that it had placed the nation's largest hotel and restaurant workers' union under Federal supervision, ending more than a decade of investigations that had repeatedly found that the union was a bastion of organized crime.
The union, the Hotel Employees and Restaurant Employees International, which has 350,000 members in the United States and Canada, agreed to settle a civil racketeering complaint by accepting the appointment of a Federal monitor with broad disciplinary and oversight powers.


Events: Harvest Celebrations
Gardeners' Fair  Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue, off Eastern Parkway, Prospect Heights; (718) 622-4433.
The garden and Green Thumb, part of the Parks and Recreation Department, are sponsoring a harvest fair on Saturday from 10:30 A.M. to 3 P.M.


INSIDE
A New School, an Old Battle
As New York schools opened, immigrant students began an experiment and the Mayor and Chancellor continued a feud.
Pages B1 and B4.
Melee at Women's Forum
Women crushing in to hear Hillary Rodham Clinton speak on human rights at a forum in Huairou, China, clashed with police.
Page A12.


Calendar: Open House, A Tour and Exhibitions
An Urban Education  Cooper Union Foundation Building, Seventh Street and Third Avenue; (212) 353-4195.
The extended studies program will hold an open house tonight from 6 to 9 to introduce its fall classes and walking and bus tours.
These will include the architecture of the Incas, early Dutch homes in New York and a look at "those buildings we love to hate," like the Equitable Building, Madison Square Garden and the World Trade Center.
Tuition ranges from $15 to $165.
A brochure is available by calling.
Roosevelt Island Tour  Tram platform on the Roosevelt Island side of the East River (59th Street); (212) 223-0157.
On Wednesday, from 5:30 to 7:30 P.M., Eugenie Martin, an urban historian, will lead a walking and bus tour to explore the island's history and landmarks.
Fee is $10.
Reservations are required.
Military Style  Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82d Street; (212) 879-5500.
"Swords into Ploughshares: Military Dress and the Civilian Wardrobe," an exhibition exploring the influence of uniforms on fashion, starts today and continues through Nov. 26.
The more than 100 costumes and accessories in the exhibition demonstrate the everyday wearing of braids, camouflage designs, aviator glasses and epaulets.
Open Tuesday through Sunday, 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M. (open on Friday and Saturday until 8:45 P.M.).
Suggested admission is $7; students and those 65 and older, $3.50.
Conservancy Celebration  Staten Island Greenbelt Conservancy; (718) 667-2165.
The Conservancy is sponsoring a party on Sept. 17, from 3 to 7 P.M., to celebrate the 11th anniversary of the Staten Island Greenbelt, a 2,500-acre preserve.
There will be walks, jazz and a buffet dinner.
Tickets, $40.
Reservations are required.
Surface Looks  Isabel O'Neil Studio Workshop, 177 East 87th Street; (212) 348-4464.
The studio will hold its 35th annual exhibition of furniture and objects with a faux finish, on Wednesday, from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., and Thursday and Friday, from 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.
No charge.
Orchid Show  Union Presbyterian Church Community Center, 44 Balmville Road (near Beech Street), Newburgh, N.Y.; (914) 561-8558.
The Mid-Hudson Orchid Society is sponsoring a show and plant sale on Saturday, from 1 to 5 P.M., and Sunday, from 1 to 4 P.M.
No charge.


Russia's Young Stock Market Cleans Up Its Act
To the Editor:
Re your coverage of Russia and its developing securities market: The structural, mechanical and ethical changes that evolved over the past year in Russia have created a solid, credible foundation that will facilitate investment vehicles and opportunities.


Gerard Salton, 68, an Authority On Computer Retrieval Systems
Gerard Salton, a professor of computer science at Cornell University and a leading authority on information retrieval systems, died on Aug. 28 at Tompkins Community Hospital in Ithaca, N.Y.
He was 68 and lived in Ithaca.
The cause was cancer, the university said.


Jewish Lawyer to Stay on Bomb Trial
An irate Federal judge said yesterday that he would allow a defense lawyer to remain on the World Trade Center bombing case, a day after the lawyer asserted in court papers that the judge had tried to remove him from the case because he was Jewish.
The judge, Kevin Thomas Duffy, angrily denounced the lawyer, David Gordon, for revealing their private talks in court papers and said the conversations had been misrepresented in the court papers.


Corrections
The Media column in Business Day on Monday, about news magazine programs and their coverage of entertainers who appear on their own networks, misstated the number of years one ABC news magazine program, "20/20," has been broadcast.
It is 17 years, not 20.


Indians Clinch Spot in Post-Season
Indians 4, Mariners 1
The Cleveland Indians, symbols of baseball futility for four decades, clinched at least a tie for the American League Central title last night, beating the visiting Seattle Mariners, 4-1.


Finance Panel Losing a Master of Intricacies
The Senate Finance Committee has jurisdiction over the most important items on the Republicans' docket this fall: welfare, Medicare, Medicaid and taxes.
Among Republican senators, Bob Packwood has an unparalleled mastery of the mysteries of the tax code and of the frightfully complicated components of health and welfare policy.


Getting Rich Off Farm Subsidies
A few New Jersey farmers are getting rich off Federal farm subsidies, a Washington research organization contended yesterday.
In a state-by-state report, the Environmental Working Group said 3,263 New Jersey farmers received $99 million in Federal farm subsidies over the past 10 years, but 22.5 percent of those payments, or $22 million, went to just 2 percent of recipients.
One farmer in Somerset reaped $1.25 million from 1985 to 1994.
But most of the state's farmers collected much less.
The average recipient collected $8,439 a year, the report said.


Book Is Closed on the Knicks-Riley Saga
On New Year's Eve, with the All-Star Game still more than a month away, Pat Riley chartered a jet to Aspen, Colo.
He left behind a Knick team struggling around .500 and took with him the distinct feeling he could not remain in New York much longer.
"I don't know if this is going to work out," he told friends over a round-table discussion in Aspen.
"I can't take this anymore, the not knowing."


Art in Review
'Women in Art'  Wildenstein &amp; Company 19 East 64th Street Manhattan Through Oct. 27
The theme of "Women in Art" serves as a thread on which to hang a miscellany of 20 canvases (and one sculpture) ranging from an early 17th-century "St. Cecilia" by Bernardo Strozzi to a portrait by Toulouse-Lautrec of his cousin, Beatrice Tapiede Celeyran.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  SERBS EVOKE PAST MARTYRDOM
News analysis: The Bosnian Serbs' commander accused NATO of attacking in a more brutal way than Hitler.
The allusion underscores the Serbs' conviction that the world is against them.
A1  NATO EXPANDS BOSNIA CAMPAIGN
On the eve of crucial American-led talks among the warring parties in Bosnia, NATO expanded its air campaign against Serb-held positions in Bosnia.
A14  Serbs under attack say they have no choice but to defy the world.
A14  Yeltsin warned the West against the NATO bombing in Bosnia.
A15  AFTERMATH OF A HURRICANE
Widespread looting seems to be the least of the problems facing people on the Caribbean island of St.
Martin in the wake of a hurricane.
A3  PROTESTERS RAMPAGE IN TAHITI
Hundreds of antinuclear demonstrators rampaged through Papeete, the capital of French Polynesia, setting parts of the city on fire after gutting the main passenger terminal at Tahiti's main airport.
A8  ANOTHER BOMB HITS FRANCE
A car bomb exploded outside a Jewish school in a suburb of Lyons, injuring 14 people and stirring fears of an escalation of terrorist tactics by Algerian Islamic militants.
A8  Unlike China, Mongolia gave Hillary Clinton a warm welcome.
A7  Moscow Journal: Vodka, but never without a toast.
A4  National A16-24, D16-18  PACKWOOD SAYS HE'LL RESIGN
Senator Bob Packwood, Republican of Oregon, announced his resignation after the Senate ethics panel called for his expulsion after studying accusations that he made unwanted sexual advances, tried to obtain a job for his wife from people with legislative interests, and interferred with evidence.
A1  DETAILS IN PANEL REPORT
The Senate Ethics Committee's report on Bob Packwood tells a bizarre story of sex in the office.
A1  FUHRMAN WON'T RETURN
Judge Lance A. Ito ruled that Detective Mark Fuhrman need not invoke his Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination once again, this time before jurors in the O.J.
Simpson case.
A1  A NEW WAR ON HEARTBURN
A $200 million-plus marketing battle has started as pharmaceutical giants try to carve out shares of what could become a multibillion-dollar market for nonprescription stomach remedies.
A1  JUVENILE CRIME CLIMBS
If trends continue, the number of arrests of juveniles for violent crimes will double by 2010, the Justice Department said.
A16  SHADOWS OVER SANTA FE
For years, Santa Fe reveled in the good times, but now, high real estate costs, urban growth and crime are taking their toll.
A16  MOVE TO CURB SPECIES LAW
House Republicans proposed to scale back the Endangered Species Act by making it voluntary for landowners to conserve the habitat of threatened creatures.
A20  MONEY FOR B-2 BOMBERS
The House approved financing to expand the fleet of B-2 bombers, a step the Pentagon opposes.
A21  STROKE DRUG IS UNDERUSED
A Government-backed study said that many doctors were underusing a proven drug therapy that could prevent 40,000 strokes a year.
A24  DEFENDING AN IDAHO SIEGE
Federal firearms officials defended their use of an informer to lure a white separatist into a weapons violation that led to a deadly confrontation in rural Idaho.
D18  The space shuttle Endeavour lifted off on an 11-day mission.
A16  The White House refused to turn over papers Congress sought.
A19  Metro Digest B1  REV.
MOON VISITS HIS CAMPUS
Three years after the Rev.
Sun Myung Moon and his Unification Church gained control of the University of Bridgeport in Connecticut, Mr.
Moon made his first public appearance there yesterday.
A1  Business Digest D1  Weekend C1-27  Edward Hopper's Nyack.
C1  A country idyll in Brooklyn.
C1  Salman Rushdie's first publicly scheduled appearance.
C3  The Joffrey moves to Chicago.C3  For Children C21  Theater: On Stage, and Off C2  Film: "Last of the Dogmen." C4  "The Promise." C8  "Theremin: An Electronic Odyssey." C8  "1-900." C10  "To Wong Foo, Thanks for Everything, Julie Newmar." C18  Music: Don Braden.
C3  Restaurants C22  Art: Face lift at the Met.
C1  Inside Art C23  Art in Review C26  "Recent Acquisitions." C24  A Diane Itter retrospective.
C26  Books: "Mrs. Ted Bliss," by Stanley Elkin.
C27  Television: TV Weekend D19  Home Video D20  Obituaries B9  Buster Mathis, heavyweight fighter.
Sports B10-17  Baseball: Ripken shares his day off.
B11  Pulsipher not blasted for rookie mistakes.
B13  Columns: Vecsey on Seles B11  Tennis: Courier joins Sampras in U.S.
Open semifinals.
B11  Football: Jets' Lewis is unsure at new position.
B15  Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27  Editorials  The Packwood resignation.
Dole's bogus welfare safeguards.
The detective takes the Fifth.
Peace in Liberia.
Letters  A. M. Rosenthal: Bomb, kill, bomb.
Bob Herbert: Cops off the pedestal.
Anthony Lewis: How serious are we?
Tony Travers: New York is, or was, a model for London.
Chronicle A24  Crossword C27


Joe Boxer Sign In Times Square
The Joe Boxer Corporation is joining other underwear marketers that advertise in Times Square by signing a two-year lease for an interactive billboard.
"What's an underwear company without a Times Square presence?" asked Nicholas Graham, chief executive of Joe Boxer in San Francisco, referring to rivals like Calvin Klein Inc. and Jockey International.
He declined to discuss the terms of the lease.


Gay Republican Stands by Dole Candidacy
Representative Steve Gunderson, a Wisconsin Republican who had criticized Senator Bob Dole for returning a contribution from a gay Republican group, said today that after speaking with the Senator he still intended to back Mr.
Dole's Presidential campaign.
Mr.
Gunderson, the only openly gay Republican in Congress, delivered a stinging letter to Mr.
Dole on Wednesday, expressing his disappointment that the Senator had returned the $1,000 donation from the gay group, the Log Cabin Republicans.


Sears Presents Bruno (in Denim)
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company will introduce its own brand of denim apparel using the notion of an incognito celebrity.
The actor Bruce Willis will be featured in a promotion for the new Canyon River Blues clothing line as Bruno, the name he uses when performing as a singer.
"Bruno epitomizes someone who is very successful but also does it his way," John H. Costello, senior executive vice president for marketing at Sears in Hoffman Estates, Ill., said yesterday.
He declined to discuss how much Sears is paying Mr.
Willis, who has not appeared in American ads since endorsing Seagram wine coolers in the late 1980's.
As for the introductory budget, Mr.
Costello described it as "a multimillion-dollar part" of the Sears account at the Young &amp; Rubicam New York unit of Young &amp; Rubicam Inc., where Sears spends $40 million annually to promote "the softer side of Sears."


U.S. Farms Out Compiling of Leading Indicators
In what is thought to be the first privatization of a Government statistical series, the Conference Board will assume custody of the Leading Economic Index and two companion business-cycle gauges, the Commerce Department announced today.
The Conference Board, a business-sponsored research organization based in New York, will begin its compilation of the widely followed monthly figures with data for October for publication on Dec. 6.
It beat five other competitors for stewardship of the indicators, which the department has published since 1968.


A Sudden Race to Succeed Packwood
On one of the most stunning days in Oregon history, few political leaders even took the time today to give Senator Bob Packwood a political obituary.
The talk, instead, was of the opportunities presented by a sudden election.
It has been more than a quarter century since Oregon sent a new face to the United States Senate.
But with the announced resignation of Mr.
Packwood, this state will not only have a new senator, but will also choose one in an election that will amount to a sprint.


Japan Reduces A Key Interest Rate to 0.5%
Japan's central bank reduced the key discount rate by one-half of a percentage point today, to an unprecedentedly low 0.5 percent, in an effort to keep the nation's fragile economy from slipping further into recession.
The action meant that the discount rate, the rate at which the Bank of Japan lends money to commercial banks, is approaching zero.
It is the lowest official interest rate in Japanese history and represents an extraordinarily low level for an industrial nation.
The bank last cut the rate by three-quarters of percentage point on April 14, to 1 percent from 1.75 percent.


Moscow Journal; Glassy-Eyed Etiquette: A Guide to Russian Toasts
Maksim Bykovsky, a graduate student and businessman, rose slowly to his feet, a full glass of vodka in his hand.
It was time for the third toast -- to the dead, he thought, but wasn't sure.
He'd had a bit too much to drink already, and the party in his apartment here was just getting under way.
Confusion is common on the complicated etiquette of how to drink and toast in Russia.
In the military, it is traditional to drink the third toast to those who've died in war -- unless it's the second toast.


George Didn't Look Like This in 1789
"Ladies and gentleman, meet George!" said John F. Kennedy Jr., speaking from a podium in Federal Hall, the hallowed site in downtown Manhattan where the original George was inaugurated in 1789.
And there it was at last -- a huge blowup of the first cover of his new magazine, George.
It features the model Cindy Crawford resplendent as George Washington, sporting a powdered wig, a Revolutionary uniform -- and a bare midriff.


Giants' Sherrard Listed as Doubtful
The Giants' main fear is that injuries will end their season even before it really gets started.
First, they had to contend with a battered offensive line.
Now, it is the receiving corps that will make the next several weeks very interesting.
It is possible that the starting receivers, Chris Calloway and Mike Sherrard, will either be playing hurt or not playing at all for a while.
Sherrard is the biggest concern of the two.
After missing three exhibition games with a pulled hamstring, he injured his ribs in the loss to Dallas on Monday night.


Excerpts From Senator Packwood's Diaries and Depositions by Accusers
Following are excerpts from Senator Bob Packwood's original diary entries and from depositions by women who said he made unwanted sexual advances.
The material was released today by the Senate Ethics Committee.
Mr.
Packwood's diaries were transcribed by an aide from recordings he dictated for virtually every day since 1969.


Rushdie Appears, and With Notice
The panel discussion tonight was called "Writers and the State," and it could easily have been one of any number of literary events held in London each week.
But it was remarkable in a particular way: One of the panelists was Salman Rushdie, making his first publicly scheduled appearance since Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini of Iran put a price on his head more than six years ago.
"The term 'coming out' has gone through some unusual metamorphoses," said Mr.
Rushdie, beaming and relaxed as he addressed a mostly enthusiastic crowd at Westminster Central Hall near the Houses of Parliament.
"Thank you for attending this little coming-out party."


Drug Therapy Could Prevent 40,000 Strokes, a Study Says
Many doctors are underusing a proven drug therapy that could prevent 40,000 strokes a year, a Government-backed study said today.
Researchers who are part of a nationwide study of stroke prevention and treatment said wider use of warfarin, a prescription drug that counteracts blood clots, could prevent more than half of the strokes caused by a condition called atrial fibrillation, which produces erratic heartbeats.


Beijing Meeting Signals Women's Solidarity
To the Editor:
Contrary to the headline over Camille Paglia's Sept. 1 Op-Ed article, the United Nations Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing is not "A White Liberal Women's Conference."


The Wild Life and Times of a Miami Widow
MRS. TED BLISS  By Stanley Elkin  292 pages. Hyperion. $22.95.
Most Bildungsromans are first novels, debut efforts that trace a youthful hero's journey toward independence and self-knowledge, while ratifying the author's own coming of age.
"Mrs. Ted Bliss," the late Stanley Elkin's elegiac new novel, is something of an exception.
Not only is it the author's 17th and final book, but it also features an elderly heroine who has only begun to come into her own in her 70's.
By turns hilarious and heartbreaking, "Mrs. Ted Bliss" stands as both Mr.
Elkin's most affecting novel and as a wonderful capstone to a distinguished and eloquent career.


Inside Art
Bank Art Holdings
When details of the mega-merger of Chemical Bank and Chase Manhattan Bank were announced 10 days ago, there was no mention of what would happen to the Chase Art Program.
Instead, the news concentrated on the 12,000 jobs that would be eliminated, the 100 branches that would be closed and the $1.5 billion in costs that would be saved every year.
But what about the 13,000 works of art worth many millions of dollars that Chase has been collecting ever since the 1950's, when David Rockefeller was its president?
With news of job cuts and belt-tightening, art experts are wondering whether the bank will follow the course set by the International Business Machines Corporation last year when it sold most its holdings of American, Latin American and contemporary art at Sotheby's in New York.
The $31 million that I.B.M. raised from the auctions may have generated a lot of attention, but for a company that spends in excess of $500 million a year on advertising alone, selling the art was little more than a gesture toward its new leaner image.


As Santa Fe's Allure Slips, Boom Times Fade
On Friday night, as at this time every year, thousands will gather here to watch the burning of Zozobra, a 40-foot-high puppet popularly known as Old Man Gloom.
As the flames rise to engulf the monster, it will groan in agony, flailing its giant arms.
And the audience will cheer as the year's accumulation of fears and anxieties is carried away, or so the legend goes, in a billowing plume of smoke.
Fiesta, Santa Fe's weekend bacchanalia, will officially begin.


For Cortines, A Last Time For a 1st Day
By 1 P.M. yesterday, on the first day of school for elementary and junior high students, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines had looked over the shoulder of several children as they wrote first-day essays, calmed down a father who said school officials had called his son a "psycho" and tested the security system at a high school in Washington Heights by dropping in unannounced.
Such visits have been Mr.
Cortines's custom since he arrived to take charge of the system in 1993.
And this was his last first day of school in New York City.
Mr.
Cortines announced in June that he would retire next month.


1 Dead in Shooting Spree
Seven people were shot in what appeared to be a drug-related shooting in Brooklyn last night that left one person dead and a 14-year-old critically injured, the police said.
The shooting occurred just after 11 P.M. on East 94th Street between Kings Highway and Clarkson Avenue, in Brownsville, said Detective Mark Patterson, a police spokesman.


In America; Cops Off the Pedestal
One night in February 1979 a factory worker named Manuel Martinez, who was 40 years old, and his nephew, a 25-year-old jewelry polisher named Domingo Morales Jr., were having drinks in Mr.
G's Bar and Grill on East 181st Street in the Bronx.
The bar was a hangout for police officers from the 46th Precinct station house, which was across the street.
Mr.
Martinez and Mr.
Morales were police buffs.
Both felt that the proper place for a police officer was on a pedestal.


Behind the Theremin
"Theremin: An Electronic Odyssey" was shown as part of last year's New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 1.
The film opens today at the Cinema Village, 22 East 12th Street, Greenwich Village.
Surely the theremin is the weirdest of all musical instruments.
It looks like a podium with a horizontal loop and a vertical antenna.
It is played by musicians who don't touch it, creating sounds simply by moving hands in the air.
The noise it emits, described by newspapers of the 1920's as "ether music" and "music like none other ever played," can suggest a violin or a soprano or a Martian making a landing.


The Joffrey Reorganizes As a Chicago Company
Three months after closing its New York headquarters, the financially hard-pressed Joffrey Ballet announced yesterday that it had reorganized as a new company, the Joffrey Ballet of Chicago.
The long-expected announcement that the Joffrey would be re-established in that city was made by Gerald Arpino, the Joffrey's cofounder and its artistic director, at the company's new downtown headquarters on North Wabash Avenue.
The Joffrey-affiliated school will continue to operate in Manhattan.


Port Authority Announces Plan to Avert Rise in Tolls
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey announced yesterday that it would not raise its bridge and tunnel tolls and commuter railway fare until at least the end of 1996, saying that it would instead close a budget deficit with the largest layoffs in the authority's 74-year history.
Under attack from the two Republican governors who oversee it, the authority said it would cut 300 jobs next week from its 8,800-member staff, as part of its drive to trim its $2.7 billion budget by $100 million for 1996.
Kathleen A. Donovan, the authority's chairwoman, said at a news conference that there would be more layoffs, but probably not before the end of the year.


2 Rabbis to Address Conference of Christian Conservatives
When the Christian Coalition opens its annual "Road to Victory" conference in Washington today, its schedule will include Republican Presidential candidates and nationally known conservatives -- and two Orthodox Jewish rabbis.
The rabbis' presence is notable, if only for the fact that last year, the Christian Coalition was accused of religious intolerance in a report by the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith, a contention that the conservative political organization strongly denied, touching off a verbal battle that lasted months.


Recalling a Public Life, Not a Private Scandal
At the end, Senator Bob Packwood clung to his memories of public life, not the mounting evidence of private scandal, as he suddenly appeared on the floor of the Senate to announce his resignation, fighting tears and rambling through the better days, when his reputation was unsullied.
"Friendships beyond count; the camaraderie is unbelievable," he declared, standing in the chamber as if on a mission of mercy to announce his love for the Senate and to spare it a nasty debate about the charges of sexual and official misconduct that were driving him from it.


Improvising Between the Extremes
Don Braden is one of the least visible jazz musicians to have come along in the last decade, a time in which any sign of talent has been amplified by record companies and promoters.
Though he's had a handful of recordings under his own name, including the new "Organic" (Epicure), a long stint as one of the more impressive soloists in the Mingus Big Band and jobs with Betty Carter and Freddie Hubbard, he's virtually unknown among jazz fans.
He still occasionally programs computers.
Despite his low profile, Mr.
Braden is near the top of the heap of young saxophonists to have arrived during the jazz renaissance.
His is the art of moderation, of rational, eyes-open improvising, the sort, in other words, that doesn't always get the attention it deserves.
Extremity, in its obviousness, nearly always tops the polls.
On Tuesday, Mr.
Braden opened his stand at the Iridium, where he'll be through Sunday, with a charged but even set that showed that he has already arrived at his own mature style.
He even offered a group conception.


Grim Forecast Is Offered On Rising Juvenile Crime
If current trends continue, the number of arrests of juveniles for violent crimes will double by the year 2010, the Justice Department said today in the most comprehensive report ever assembled on crimes committed by young people.
The report based its projection on a finding that arrest rates among juveniles ages 10 to 17 for violent crimes jumped 100 percent between 1983 and 1992, and the number of teen-agers in the population was expected to increase 20 percent over the next decade.


School District Still Under State
The State Board of Education has voted unanimously to extend state control of the Jersey City School District for at least one year, and that's just fine with Mariano Vega, the local school board president.
"This is something that we had expected. In fact, it was something we had supported," Mr.
Vega said yesterday, referring to Wednesday's vote by the state board.
Mr.
Vega said he is counting on the state to build a new elementary school and a high school for academically gifted students.
The board president said he hoped the school district would be able to function on its own two years from now.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in Manhattan that are to close soon:  Closing This Weekend "SEVEN CONTEMPORARY NORWEGIAN ARTISTS IN NEW YORK," Thomas Nordanstad Gallery, 289 Hudson Street, at Spring Street, West Village.
Through tomorrow.
Free.
Hours: Today, noon to 6 P.M.; tomorrow, 1 to 6 P.M.
Information: (212) 627-6628.
"GERMAN STAGE DESIGN PRESENT AND FUTURE," New York Public Library for the Performing Arts, 40 Lincoln Center Plaza, at Amsterdam Avenue and 65th Street.
Works by Achim Freyer, Dieter Hacker, Johannes Shutz and Erich Wonder.
Through tomorrow.
Free.
Hours: Today and tomorrow, noon to 6 P.M.
Information: (212) 870-1630.


On Stage, and Off
More Keyboard Dancing
In recent years, the money to produce Broadway musicals has come from an increasingly diverse array of sources, from rock promoters to owners of theme parks.
Now, to that unlikely list, add another: a toy store.
Executives of F. A. O. Schwarz, the renowned Fifth Avenue toy emporium, say the company has completed negotiations to sign on as a major investor in and co-producer of "Big," a $9 million musical with music by David Shire and lyrics by Richard Maltby Jr. that is scheduled to open at the Shubert Theater in late April.


This One's a Real Knuckler Of a Yankees-Red Sox Series
The Yankees will be playing the Red Sox, but they will be staring at the scoreboard every inning to monitor how the Royals, Mariners, Brewers and Rangers are performing in other American League cities.
Will that feel like a Yankees-Red Sox series?
The Yankees will not come close to attracting the 125,333 spectators who attended a three-game series between the fierce rivals at Yankee Stadium in late July of last season if the fans' apathy continues.
Will that feel like a Yankees-Red Sox series?


Court Rules on Former UMass Player
MIKE WILLIAMS, who was thrown off the Massachusetts basketball team last season, was ordered yesterday to serve a year of probation and pay back stolen money in a bad-check case.
Williams, who earlier called the case a misunderstanding, admitted in Northampton (Mass.) District Court that the facts were sufficient to convict him.
Without a formal guilty finding, he was ordered to serve the probation and pay back money to settle charges of theft and forgery. (AP)


International Briefs; Olivetti Revises Its PC Business
The troubled Italian technology giant Ing C. Olivetti &amp; Company revamped its money-losing personal computer business yesterday, introducing 26 new models, including a home PC system that plugs into a television set.
The company also announced price cuts of as much as 26 percent for its PC's and an overhaul of its management structure.


Sabatini and Martinez Have a Few Plans, Too
Only Gabriela Sabatini and Conchita Martinez stand in the way of Saturday's dream final between Steffi Graf and Monica Seles in the United States Open.
Today, in the first semifinal, the top-seeded Graf will face Sabatini, seeded ninth, for the 40th time.
Immediately following the match, the second-seeded Seles and the No. 4 Martinez square off on Stadium Court for the ninth time, and with Martinez trying to win her first-ever set off of Seles.


The Detective Takes the Fifth
Judge Lance Ito dealt reasonably with the latest legal mess in the O. J. Simpson trial yesterday, even though his ruling withheld important information from the jury.
In fairness, he was faced with an unusual tangle of issues raised when former Detective Mark Fuhrman, the prosecution's star police witness, invoked the Fifth Amendment's privilege against compelled self-incrimination and refused to undergo further cross-examination by the defense.
Citing California law, Judge Ito said he would not tell the jury that the detective had taken the Fifth.
But the judge will tell jurors the detective is "unavailable" for further questioning.
He will also instruct them that Mr.
Fuhrman's unavailability is a factor they may consider in evaluating his credibility.


Majority Support for Uninsured
Under state law, hospitals are required to provide care for people who are unable to pay their bills, but the current financing source will dry up at the end of the year, the New Jersey Hospital Association says.
A survey released yesterday shows that a solid majority of New Jerseyans strongly believe the state needs a permanent means of financing hospital care of uninsured patients, and most want the money to come from an increase in the cigarette tax.


International Briefs; A British Utility Says It Has Suitors
The stock of Norweb P.L.C., the British electricity utility, rose 6 percent yesterday after the company said North West Water P.L.C. and others had indicated they wanted to buy the company.
A bid by North West, the second-biggest water company in Britain, could lead to the first merger between water and electricity industries sold by the Government in the early 1990's.
The companies have overlapping service territories in northern England.


Chrysler Tries To Appease Kerkorian
The Chrysler Corporation took a small step today toward appeasing Kirk Kerkorian, its largest shareholder, by doubling a previously announced stock repurchase program, to $2 billion.
The move demonstrated how sharply positions have shifted in the wrestling match for control of the company, and how secure a lock Mr.
Kerkorian has placed on Chrysler with one swift move: hiring Jerome B. York, a former chief financial officer at Chrysler and most recently at I.B.M.


MTV Awards Show Rocks Midtown
In keeping with its reputation for youthful brashness, the MTV Video Music Awards show expanded its presence in midtown Manhattan last night, its second straight year in New York.
The 12th annual awards show drew curious crowds and at times disrupted traffic around its broadcast site in Radio City Music Hall and near Times Square, where thousands of squealing teen-agers came to listen to Bon Jovi -- joined by tourists, phalanxes of police officers and some of the Times Square area's usual colorful characters.


CHRONICLE
The battle between PATRICIA BRENTRUP and CHRISTOPHER CULKIN, the parents of the "Home Alone" star MACAULAY CULKIN, continues.
Yesterday, Justice DAVID B. SAXE of the New York State Supreme Court set Dec. 4 as a tentative trial date in the suit filed by Ms.
Brentrup in June over whose home the couple's children will live in.
The couple, who never married, have five sons (Shane, 19; Macaulay, 15; Kieran, 12; Christian, 8, and Rory, 6) and two daughters (Dakota, 17, and Quinn, 10).
At issue is not only the custody of the children but also the control of the multimillion-dollar careers of Macaulay and Kieran.
Kieran just completed filming "Amanda."


Former Student Wills College $35 Million
E.
Claiborne Robins, a pharmaceutical executive who worked his way through the University of Richmond on a scholarship, left $35 million to his alma mater when he died this summer, bringing to $160 million his family's contributions during the past 25 years.
The private college of 3,200 full-time students, founded by Baptists, had an endowment of $4 million when Mr.
Robins began giving in 1969.
His bequest, announced by the college this week, brings the endowment to more than $450 million.


No Accord in Turner-Time Warner Talks
Executives of the Turner Broadcasting System and Time Warner Inc. continued negotiations yesterday on a proposed $8 billion buyout of Turner.
There was no indication as to when, if at all, a final, sufficiently complete agreement might be reached to show to the boards of Turner and Time Warner.


Car Bomb Explodes Near Jewish School in France
A car bomb exploded outside a Jewish school in the Villeurbanne suburb of Lyons today, wounding 14 people and stirring fears of an increase in terrorist attacks by Algerian Islamic militants who are believed to have planted five other bombs in France over the past six weeks.
The latest bomb blast, the first in the current series to use a car loaded with explosives, occurred at 4:55 P.M. local time, just minutes before some 700 children were to leave school for the day.
"It's a miracle that absolute carnage was averted," said the Chief Rabbi of Lyons, Richard Wertenschlag.


Numb and Numbers: 2,131 and Counting
For all his endurance, grit, humility, modesty, charity, patience, and indoor gym, Cal Ripken Jr.'s achievement comes down to a number: 2,131-plus.
And ESPN's telecast of the Steely Eyed Shortstop's record-setting game against the California Angels Wednesday night produced some interesting numbers. (All statistics were calculated from the start of the telecast to game's end.)
TOTAL RIPKEN ON-AIR SIGHTINGS: 214


Y.&amp; R. Lands A Keycorp Account
Keycorp, the banking and financial services company, said yesterday that it had selected Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. in New York to handle its national branding account, which was previously handled by various agencies on a project basis.
The billings, for advertising, direct marketing, design and other services, were estimated at more than $50 million.


Leaping to the Lectern
Harvey Mackay, businessman, author and motivational speaker, is a one-man band of self-promotion.
At $50,000 a pop, he gives 50 or so speeches a year, raking in $2.5 million.
His speeches help sell his books and vice versa -- he's a walking, talking version of the success principles he lists in "Swim With the Sharks Without Being Eaten Alive."
At the moment, Mr.
Mackay is swimming in a very profitable tide.
Even in this day of electronic connections, the old-fashioned business of business speaking is booming.
The number of business and trade conferences is growing, more people are becoming speakers, and fees are rising.
While few industrywide numbers are available, most speakers bureaus -- companies that provide speakers to banquets, conferences and other corporate events -- report revenue growth of around 20 percent a year.


When Dad Wants to Be More Than Just a Check; Child-Support System Hurts Many Fathers Who Say They Pay Faithfully and Get Little
For Bob Stien, what is hardest is not sharing the little moments of everyday family life, the details so routine that he never suspected he would miss them so much.
He thinks back to those evenings when his daughter, curled up in his lap, her spaceship pajamas freshly laundered, laughed out loud as he told her the same funny fishing story for the millionth time.
He pictures their morning bicycle trips through Central Park on the way to school, just the two of them, stopping off once in a while for an impromptu 10-minute picnic on the giant rock near the boat pond.


METRO DIGEST
MOON SPEAKS AT UNIVERSITY HE SAVED
The Rev.
Sun Myung Moon received an honorary degree from the University of Bridgeport, which he effectively took over three years ago.
In his first public appearance on campus since an affiliate of his Unification Church rescued the school from bankruptcy and near-certain closure, Mr.
Moon took credit for the collapse of Communism and promised to resolve conflicts in the Middle East and between North and South Korea.  [ Page A1. ] NEW YORK CITY  DEFENSE SAYS CLERIC WAS FRAMED
Calling her client an "innocent man wrongly accused," the lawyer for Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman said in a Manhattan courtroom that the militant Muslim cleric had not led a terrorist conspiracy in the United States, but had been framed by a man secretly working for the Egyptian Government.  [ B3. ] GUNFIRE AND SIEGE ON UPPER EAST SIDE
An unemployed Romanian immigrant, who the police said threatened President Clinton early last month because he was angry at the Social Security Administration, shot at two Secret Service agents.  [ B6. ] SPIRITED HEARING ON FARE INCREASE
A parade of speakers pilloried Gov.
George E. Pataki and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani at a public hearing, saying that they would be to blame if the price of a subway token rose to $1.50.  [ B3. ] YOUTHFUL BRASHNESS AT THE MTV AWARDS
This was his last first day in New York.  [ B6. ] REGION  PORT AUTHORITY TO LAY OFF 300
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey announced that it would not raise its bridge and tunnel tolls and commuter railway fare until at least the end of 1996, saying it would instead close a budget deficit with the largest layoffs in the authority's 74-year history.  [ B8. ] FORGERY CLAIMED AT CASINO COMMISSION
Officials of the New Jersey Casino Control Commission were accused of making improper payments totaling more than $66,000 to three employees the commission wanted to get rid of -- by forging payroll records to make it appear that they were still working.  [ B8. ] RAPIST RECEIVES MAXIMUM SENTENCE
With his victim telling him, "You can go to hell," Reginald McFadden received the maximum sentence of 37 1/2 to 75 years in prison for kidnapping and rape.  [ B2. ] Our Towns by Evelyn Nieves B8


Intel Wins Contract to Develop World's Fastest Supercomputer
The Intel Corporation said today that it had won a a contract from the Department of Energy to develop what it called the world's fastest supercomputer.
The machine, to be built at an estimated cost of $45 million, would use 9,000 of Intel's forthcoming P6 microprocessors linked in a configuration known as massively parallel.
In recent years, massively parallel computers using thousands of relatively inexpensive off-the-shelf chips have stolen the performance lead from traditional supercomputers, like those made famous by Cray Research Inc., which use far fewer, but far more powerful processors.


Tahiti's Antinuclear Protests Turn Violent
Hundreds of anti-French Tahitian demonstrators rampaged overnight through the streets of Papeete, the capital of French Polynesia, setting parts of the city on fire after gutting the main passenger terminal at Tahiti's international airport.
The melee ended years of peaceful protests by French Polynesians against nuclear testing.
The riots began on Wednesday, a day after France conducted the first of a planned series of nuclear tests at Mururoa, a Polynesian atoll 750 miles southeast of Tahiti.


Muslim Cleric Was Framed By Top Informer, Defense Says
Calling her client an "innocent man wrongly accused," the lawyer for Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman declared in a Manhattan courtroom yesterday that the militant Muslim cleric had not led a terrorist conspiracy in the United States but had been framed by a man secretly working for the Egyptian Government.
The lawyer, Lynne F. Stewart, said in her closing argument that Emad Salem, the United States Government's chief informer in the case, was acting as an intelligence agent for Egypt and that he had manipulated the Federal Bureau of Investigation into pursuing Mr.
Abdel Rahman.
The cleric had long advocated the overthrow of the Egyptian Government.


All Dressed Up With Nowhere to Go
Transvestism is now Hollywood's favorite form of safe sex, since its naughtiness is so toothless and lends itself to such happy platitudes.
A man can walk proud, inspire others and dare to be different, and all he has to do is put on a baby-doll nightie, preferably one with ostrich trim.
The latest such squeaky-clean sex comedy, with a plot that's a lot sillier than its title, is "To Wong Foo, Thanks for Everything, Julie Newmar." All of its ingenuity has gone into squeezing three masculine actors into giddy outfits and letting clothes unmake the man.


After China, Hillary Clinton Finds Mongolia a Gentler Place
Flying from China into this grassy, sparsely populated country, Hillary Rodham Clinton might be forgiven today for feeling as though she had passed through a looking glass.
In contrast with China, Mrs.
Clinton found a functioning democracy here.
The crowds that clog every Chinese city were nowhere to be found, and Mrs.
Clinton's 10-car motorcade seemed to disrupt few Mongolians.
In a big change, the security agents seemed friendly.


B Plus for Business Help
The State Chamber of Commerce has awarded the Legislature a B-plus grade for its record on business-related bills, the organization announced yesterday.
Twenty-one of the 120 legislators, all but 2 of them Republicans, voted with the chamber 100 percent of the time in the session that began in January of last year, said James F. Leonard, a lobbyist for the chamber.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  It's Cochran Weather
Cold, blustery weather was just what Russ Cochran needed yesterday to tame Glen Abbey, a course where he had never before broken par.
Cochran birdied the final hole from the back bunker for a six-under-par 66 and a one-shot lead over New Zealand's Grant Waite in the first round of the $1.3 million Canadian Open at Oakville, Ontario.


Corrections
An article in Science Times on Aug. 29 about the expected effects of Congressional budget reductions on research misstated the role of the Defense Department in the development of nuclear weapons at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.
The Defense Department benefits from the programs, but they are directed and paid for by the defense programs division of the Energy Department.


Ripken Shares Day Off With City
Cal Ripken took the day off today. Well, sort of.
The Orioles' shortstop was given a one-day breather, a day after he played in his 2,131st straight game and surpassed the consecutive-game record that had stood for 56 years.


After Ex-Spouse's Arrest, Strangers Cheer
On a jet to Chicago, an admiring flight attendant told Marilyn Nichols Kane she had seen her on television.
Later, the attendant gave her a chilled bottle of champagne.
"This is from the crew," the attendant said, according to Mrs.
Kane's husband, David.
"We wanted to show our support."


Corrections
The New York Stock Exchange tables in Business Day from Aug. 29 through this Wednesday mislabeled the annual dividend paid by the Westvaco Corporation.
The dividend, $1.32, represented a 20 percent increase, not a decrease, from the previous dividend.


Peace in Liberia
A senseless war in Africa seems finally to have ended.
In Liberia, where teen-age soldiers have been slaughtering each other and innocent civilians for six years, leaders of the three main factions have agreed to end the fighting.
In a recent ceremony in Monrovia, the capital, they were formally seated on a six-member council that is to govern the country until elections can be held next year.
An estimated 150,000 people, mostly civilians, perished in the conflict, out of a total population of around two million.
As eventually happens in unchecked civil wars, all sides tired of the killing.


Second Day of Teachers' Strike
About 200 striking teachers, joined by union representatives from other districts, demonstrated outside Williamstown High School yesterday as classes were canceled for a second day yesterday for 4,600 students.
Judge Robert E. Francis of Gloucester County Superior Court had ordered the strikers to report to work yesterday, but the school board said it could not meet his requirement that all 300 teachers be personally served with his order.
Negotiations were scheduled to resume tonight.


International Briefs; Glaxo Profit Dips But Shares Rise
Glaxo Wellcome P.L.C.'s 1995 pretax profit dropped 15 percent on charges related to its purchase of Wellcome P.L.C., while estimates of savings from the merger sent shares higher.
Glaxo said pretax profit dropped to $:1.56 billion, or about $2.41 billion, for the year ended June 30 from $:1.83 billion a year earlier.
It took a $:700 million charge to integrate Wellcome P.L.C.


INSIDE
Juvenile Crime Climbs
If current trends continue, the number of arrests of juveniles for violent crimes will double by 2010, the Justice Department said.
Page A16.
Christian Coalition on '96
An internal poll found Christian Coalition members divided among Senators Bob Dole and Phil Gramm and Patrick J. Buchanan.
Page D18.
Destruction in Caribbean
The island of St.
Martin was among the hardest hit by a hurricane that ravaged the Caribbean.
Page A3.
Another Bomb Hits France
A car bomb exploded outside a Jewish School in Lyons, wounding 14 and raising fears of terrorism.
Page A8.


On My Mind; Bomb, Kill, Bomb
American bombs fall every day on a group of human beings who never raised a finger or a gun against Americans and offer not the faintest threat to American security or national interests.
Most Americans do not care.
Compared with the murder trial in Los Angeles or the breaking of a baseball endurance record, the bombing barely exists in the American mind.


Critic's Choice/Film; Metaphor Meets Allegory on Pampas
Hector Olivera's intriguing allegorical film, "Una Sombra Ya Pronto Seras" ("A Shadow You Soon Will Be"), begins with an eerie metaphorical image.
A nameless computer programmer steps out of an empty train that has broken down in the Argentine pampas and heads for parts unknown.
As he makes his way through a desolate modern wilderness of abandoned factories, cheap motels and nearly deserted highways, various oddball characters latch on to him.
Many of them dream of going to Bolivia, where they imagine a better life awaits them.


Libraries Mustn't Foster Information Elite
To the Editor:
"The Information 'Have Nots' " (editorial, Sept. 5) confines its discussion to telecommunications rates.
A related and more serious problem is the solution sometimes proposed for the increasing cost of information: for libraries to charge a fee for certain services beyond what are considered "normal" library services.
Usually that proposal is to provide more assistance to those library patrons who are willing and able to pay for it.


A School Diversity Program Fights for Survival
SHEENA HARMON is new at Canton Junior-Senior High School.
It's like first grade all over again, only harder.
Just about everyone entering the seventh grade knew each other already, from Canton Elementary.
Sheena is bused in from Hartford, about 15 miles away.
Blending in, as the code of the schoolyard dictates, could be tough, maybe impossible.
Virtually 99 percent of the 560 students at Canton are white; Sheena is black.


On School's First Day, Eternal Verities


Art in Review
'Modern Glass in the Metropolitan Museum of Art'  Metropolitan Museum of Art Fifth Avenue at 82d Street Through Oct. 29
This compact little exhibition of more than 100 often stunning objects sketches a brief, far from complete history of one of the world's most common, extraordinarily malleable materials, as used over the past 90 years by artists and designers from the United States and Western Europe.
The show concentrates on high-end luxury items in which form relates only marginally to function, but generally the esthetic chronology of the century is recapitulated, from turn-of-the-century organicity through Cubism to modern streamlining.


For Children
Japanese Noh and Kyogen Performances  The American Museum of Natural History Central Park West at 79th Street (212) 769-5800 Recommended ages: 8 and up Tomorrow
Noh is probably unlike any theater your children have ever seen.
Steeped in formality and ritual, Noh is slow moving, which for Westerners can be a difficult concept.
Who has the time to take one's time?


About Real Estate; Some Agents Plan Alternative to the One-Fee System
The practice of unbundling fees -- in which a real estate company breaks down its fee into a menu of service choices for both buyer and seller -- is coming to the New York metropolitan region, probably by next spring, according to the owner of one company.
With unbundling, sellers pick which services they need to sell a house or apartment and pay only for the selected services.
For example, a seller may pay the broker just to advertise the house.
Or just to hold open house.
Or to do a market analysis.
Or to close the deal.


Judge Faults Lawyer
An irate Federal judge said yesterday that a defense lawyer in the World Trade Center bombing trial had misrepresented private conversations when he claimed the judge tried to replace him because he is Jewish.
The judge, Kevin Thomas Duffy, angrily denounced the lawyer, David Gordon, but then said he could continue to represent Eyad Ismoil, accused of helping bomb the World Trade Center.
Article, page B3.


Harry S. Truman, Late Bloomer
HBO's docudrama "Truman" opens with a close-up of feet, clad in a rather jaunty pair of black-and-white shoes, striding decisively forward.
There is no hint of hesitation or turning back.
Used several times throughout the film, the image is particularly apt for Harry S. Truman, 33d President of the United States.
When he left office in 1952, Truman had a measly public approval rating of 32 percent.
His only guaranteed income back in Independence, Mo., was an Army pension of $112.56 a month.
Truman and his wife, Bess, would get no Secret Service protection.
Those, as they say, were the days.
In the years since, things have changed radically, not least Truman's reputation, which has surged upward in a good many history books.
This film, adapted by Tom Rickman from David McCullough's Pulitzer Prize-winning biography, catalogues the reasons for the turnabout.


What to drink while pondering the mysteries of the universe. Grand Marnier has an answer.
AH, sweet mystery of life, at last I found thee -- inside a bottle.
Fans of Victor Herbert would wince at such a reinterpretation of his lyrics.
But that floridly spirited declaration forms the centerpiece of efforts to recast the image of Grand Marnier, the orange-flavored, Cognac-based liqueur.
In advertisements now beginning to appear in almost 40 publications, the new importer and marketer of the venerable brand and their new agency declare it to be "slightly less mysterious" than the weighty subjects that have puzzled people for centuries.


Search for New Chancellor Lists 15, Including Ravitch
The Board of Education has narrowed its search for a new Chancellor for New York City's schools to 15 candidates, including several educators, a lawyer who most recently served as labor negotiator for the Major League Baseball owners and a Catholic brother who is the president of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's college alma mater, officials said yesterday.
For Mr.
Giuliani, who has insisted that he be given an important role in the selection, the shorter list suggests that the board has been willing -- at least so far -- to consider candidates who apparently have the Mayor's blessing to lead the nation's largest school system.


Giuliani Says Board Hid $100 Million
The tug of war over the school budget continued on opening day for the New York City schools yesterday as Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani announced that his staff had discovered $100 million that he said the Board of Education had been hiding in a reserve fund.
He said it was an "absolute tragedy" that the money had not been spent on the classroom.
Furious school officials, however, said the $100 million was never hidden, but it was put in a reserve fund to avert possible teacher layoffs in the middle of the school year.
Such layoffs, said John H. Beckman, the board spokesman, may well occur if the Mayor makes a mid-year budget cut.


Officials of Casino Commission Accused of Forging Payroll Data
Officials of the State Casino Control Commission were accused today of making improper payments totaling more than $66,000 to three employees the commission wanted to get rid of -- by forging payroll records to make it appear that they were still working.
In a report issued today, the State Commission of Investigation also said some officials, including the casino panel's chief of staff and executive secretary, Joseph N. Papp, had abused the use of state cars, telephones and meal allowances.


Gunfire and Siege on East Side Lead to an Arrest
An unemployed man who the police said threatened President Clinton early last month because he was angry at the Social Security Administration, shot at two Secret Service agents yesterday afternoon.
The police said the suspect then barricaded himself in his basement studio apartment on the Upper East Side for more than three hours before surrendering.
No one was injured, though the heavy emergency response to the gunfire at 243 East 81st Street and the tense standoff closed off the block between Third and Second Avenues.
While under siege, the suspect managed to get on the telephone with the White House and various radio and television stations, complaining that he was misunderstood and a victim of a cruel system that was denying him Social Security checks.


Abroad at Home; How Serious Are We?
At long last we have come to our senses.
That was the feeling when NATO moved against the Bosnian Serbs to make them stop slaughtering civilians.
Why did it take so long for the West to act?
That was the other immediate feeling: how many lives could have been saved -- 10,000 in Sarajevo alone -- if George Bush had been a leader when the Serbs began their aggression in 1991, or Bill Clinton had kept his campaign promises.


Kunstler's Good Fight
To the Editor:
A certified hero has passed on.
Bill Kunstler was always there when people were in deep trouble with a Government hellbent to get them.
He will be sorely missed because of his great loyalty to people and principle but mostly because of his style: bold, brassy and joyful.
It was fun to be with him fighting the good fight.
There are just no replacements on the scene today.
We have all lost a great deal.
ED KOREN  Washington, Sept. 5, 1995 The writer is a staff attorney, American Civil Liberties Union.


PACKWOOD SAYS HE IS QUITTING AS ETHICS PANEL GIVES EVIDENCE
As his colleagues watched grimly, Senator Bob Packwood announced his resignation today, hours after the Ethics Committee released a 10-volume indictment, much of it in his own hand, of his personal and official conduct.
But Senator Bob Dole raised the possibility tonight that Senator Packwood would not leave immediately.
Mr.
Packwood, an Oregon Republican, did not set an effective date for his resignation.


Avoiding the Hip, the Trendy and the Political
If its "Recent Acquisitions" exhibition is any indication, the Metropolitan Museum of Art hasn't got a clue about current art and none too clear a notion about the recent past either.
Despite a few exceptions, the Department of 20th-Century Art's purchases and gifts from the last two years form a potpourri of the marginal, the derivative, the forgotten and the inflated.
The result is a kind of blind ecumenism that veers here and then there, from underdogs to top dogs, without direction, settling at nearly every turn on weak works that represent their makers poorly.
Certainly there's nothing wrong with the evident determination to be democratic, at least on paper.
Collecting artists from Brazil, Mexico, Australia, Europe and the United States, the Met's latest additions remind us that the art world is very large and spread out, with outposts all over the globe, that a stylistic pluralism prevails at almost any given moment, that history has an endless supply of little-known and forgotten artists and that contrary to the prevailing accounts, much of the art of the last century has been figurative.


Bus Lines Denied $1 Rise
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that he has decided not to seek a $1 fare increase on city-subsidized express bus lines in the Bronx, Queens and Brooklyn.
In June, the Mayor had announced that the Department of Transportation would allow the seven private companies that contract with the city to provide commuter express bus service to increase fares from $4 to $5.
The increase would have allowed the city to cut its annual $52 million subsidy by $3 million.


The Spoken Word
CHARLTON HESTON, 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue.
A conversation with the actor and Charlie Rose, the television interviewer.
Sunday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $18.
Information: (212) 996-1100.
LECTURE ON HEALTH, Mrs.
Green's Natural Market, 780 White Plains Road, Route 22, Yonkers.
A lecture by Dr.
Andrew Weil, author of "Spontaneous Healing: How to Discover and Enhance Your Body's Natural Ability to Heal Itself." Tomorrow at 1 P.M.
Information: (914) 472-0111.
ART AT THE MET, Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82d Street.
TODAY: "An Ancient Egyptian Bestiary: Material and Manufacture," by Deborah Schorsch, 11 A.M.; "A Closer Look: Georges de la Tour's 'Fortune Teller,' " by Tomlyn Barns, 12:30 P.M.; "Swords Into Plowshares: Military Dress and the Civilian Wardrobe," by Richard Martin, 3 P.M.; "Rubens and Van Dyck, Master and Pupil," by Frederick Ilchman, 7 P.M.


CHRONICLE
Could chivalry be dead as long as WILLIAM F. BUCKLEY JR. has a word or two to say about women of a certain age -- or more?
Consider what Mr.
Buckley, the conservative editor, writer and television commentator, had to say yesterday.


The Packwood Resignation
In resigning yesterday from the Senate, Bob Packwood invoked Douglas MacArthur's famous words about duty, honor and country, and the Senator actually had the gall to argue that he had decided to do "the honorable thing." The Senate and the nation should not let relief at being rid of an unworthy legislator override a decent regard for the facts.
What really happened, of course, is that Senator Bob Dole and the Republican leadership withdrew their political protection, leaving Senator Packwood a well-deserved choice between walking out and being kicked out.
Far from an "outrageous" departure from fairness, as Mr.
Packwood has charged, the decision by the unanimous Senate Ethics Committee to recommend expulsion from the Senate for sexual and official misconduct flowed from a close study of the evidence by a committee that began deliberations with its Republican members inclined toward protecting Mr.
Packwood.
Finally they were revolted by the unworthiness of the man they sought to protect.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  National League  NL -- Upheld the four-game suspension of Chicago Cubs Shawon Dunston.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  INDIANA PACERS -- Named Herb Brown assistant coach.
Hockey  National Hockey League  ANAHEIM MIGHTY DUCKS -- Signed Todd Ewen, right wing, to a one-year contract.
COLORADO AVALANCHE -- Signed Curtis Leschyshyn, defenseman, and Andrei Kovalenko, right wing.
Named Michel Goulet player development coordinator.
DALLAS STARS -- Signed Dave Gagner, center, to a two-year contract.
DETROIT RED WINGS -- Signed Vyacheslav Fetisov, defenseman, to a one-year contract.
NEW JERSEY DEVILS -- Named Michael Gilbert director of public relations and Mike Levine director of information and publications.
NEW YORK ISLANDERS -- Agreed to terms with Scott Lachance, defenseman.
Named Marshall Johnston scouting consultant.
TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS -- Signed Tie Domi, right wing, to a two-year contract.


International Briefs; Bank Stake Up for Sale
The Austrian Government said yesterday that it was seeking bids for its entire 69.45 percent voting stake in Creditanstalt-Bankverein, valuing the bank at between 17.5 billion and 18.7 billion schillings, or about $1.7 billion to $1.8 billion.
The Government said it would consider bids only from "suitable" parties that would buy the entire stake for cash.
It is not precluding a bid by a group of buyers.
The price represents a premium of as much as 55 percent more than the shares' current market price. (Bloomberg Business News)


6 Reputed Mob Figures Arrested
Six men identified by the authorities as members and associates of the Genovese crime family's New Jersey faction -- its so-called Gerardo Crew -- were arrested yesterday after being indicted by a Federal grand jury on charges of running illegal gambling and loan sharking operations in the North Newark-Belleville area and in New York City.


Home Video
Videophiles hungry for news of the great DVD war will be interested to learn that a fragile truce is at hand.
Some analysts say that if it leads to an agreement, a major shift in the way people watch videos could begin by late next year.
The digital video disk, or DVD, is a compact five-inch offspring of the audio CD.
Some people in the electronics industry think it has the potential to challenge, and perhaps eventually replace, the videocassette.


Warriors' Sprewell Enters Not Guilty Plea
Golden State Warriors guard LATRELL SPREWELL pleaded not guilty to traffic charges stemming from a weekend stop for alleged speeding.
Sprewell, 24, was not required to appear at yesterday's arraignment in Oakland (Calif.) Municipal Court because the charges were misdemeanors.
His lawyer, KURT ROBINSON, entered the pleas.
An Oakland police officer, SCOTT FAKUDA, said he stopped Sprewell early Sunday morning after allegedly spotting him speeding.
Originally, Sprewell was also charged with threatening a police officer.
Sprewell was charged with driving on a suspended license and exhibition of speed.
Exhibition of speed, a more serious charge than speeding, was based on the officer's allegation that Sprewell was gunning his engine. (AP)


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
4.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.34
5.75
4.72
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.34
5.31
4.52
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.33
5.29
4.85
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.22
6.17
7.27
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.60
6.58
7.56
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.55
7.48
8.39
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.03
6.04
6.38
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Islanders Re-sign LaChance, Defenseman
Islanders General Manager DON MALONEY said yesterday that the National Hockey League team had agreed to terms with defenseman SCOTT LaCHANCE.
LaChance, 23, was the team's top-scoring defenseman last season, finishing with 13 points, despite missing 22 games with an ankle injury.
LaChance, who was a first-round draft pick in 1991, joined the Islanders after playing for the United States team in the 1992 Winter Olympics in Albertville, France.


Two Ill-Fated Lovers With a Wall in Between
Just when "The Promise," a story of lovers separated by the Berlin wall for nearly three decades, threatens to turn into a teary-eyed descendant of "Dr. Zhivago," the movie thinks twice about painting the relationship as an epic, star-crossed romance.
Instead of assuming the stature of Zhivago and Lara, that film's lovers, Konrad and Sophie are shown to be ordinary mortals whose thorny personality quirks make them a questionable match.
When the wall finally comes down and the pair, now in their 40's, exchange soulful gazes, one is reminded of the adage that absence makes the heart grow fonder.
Margarethe von Trotta, who directed "The Promise," seems to want to have it both ways.
The film's double vision of characters who seem like heroic constructs one minute and complicated, fallible humans the next makes "The Promise" something more than a classy historical tear-jerker.
At the same time, the movie never becomes the incisive exploration of the relationship between politics and personal psychology it sometimes aspires to be.


R. F. Daubenmire, 85, Botanist Whose Books Inspired Ecologists
Rexford F. Daubenmire, a botanist who was decades ahead of his time in looking at forest and field and figuring out what would have grown there if people had not intruded with logging and grazing, died on Aug. 26 at his home in Mount Ply mouth, Fla.
He was 85.
Dr.
Daubenmire taught for 29 years at Washington State University in Pullman and was professor emeritus of botany after his retirement in 1975.


The Tiepolos Bloom Again In Face Lift At the Met
FOR a year, the Metropolitan Museum of Art did a good imitation of one of its Italian counterparts with a big "in restauro" sign at the top of the grand staircase: the entrance to the Met's European paintings galleries was boarded up and visitors who climbed the stairs to see Old Masters had to detour around the first gallery, where large pictures by the great 18th-century Venetian painter Giovanni Battista Tiepolo were hung.
That prominent gallery had been a sorry culmination of the vista conceived by the architect Richard Morris Hunt in the 1890's when he designed the museum's Great Hall.
The gallery's entryway, a towering limestone arch by Hunt, was blocked off at the top, like a Dutch door half-closed, to accommodate a dropped ceiling installed in the early 1950's, and the Tiepolos were crammed into the room like basketball players in an elevator.


I.B.M. Shakes Up Software Division With Number of Changes
I.B.M. is shaking up the ranks of its software division.
The International Business Machines Corporation said yesterday that it was bringing in a marketing executive from the rival Compaq Computer Corporation and appointing a new manager to oversee OS/2, the personal computer operating software long overshadowed by the Microsoft Corporation's Windows program.


Hello? How Gorgeous Did You Say You Were?
In the Netherlands, where it originated as a play, "1-900" was called "06," the exchange for phone-sex numbers in that country.
Surprisingly little has been lost in translation, considering that the movie consists entirely of phone conversations, in Dutch with English subtitles, between a man and a woman.
In fact, "1-900" is all too familiar.
Like Nicholson Baker's phone-sex novel, "Vox," the film wants to be respectable, titillating and psychologically weighty.
Like "Vox," it succeeds only in being a respectable and titillating stunt.
The film, directed by Theo van Gogh (known as a provocateur among film makers in his own country, and the great-nephew of Vincent), has two characters, Thomas and Sara, both middle-aged and middle class.
Despite the English title, neither is employed by a phone-sex company; they find each other when Thomas answers the telephone equivalent of Sarah's personal ad.


Contrary to Senate, House Approves Adding to Stealth Bombers
The House today narrowly approved financing to begin expanding the nation's fleet of B-2 Stealth bombers, a step the Pentagon says it neither needs nor can afford.
The House vote set the stage for a battle with the Senate over whether to add, at a cost of billions, to a program that is now capped at 20 planes.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  Bank of America, San Francisco, a unit of BankAmerica Corp., is selling $200 million of subordinated notes due in 2005 through Smith Barney.
The notes are priced at 99.297 to yield 6.848 percent.
The issue is noncallable and rated A3 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and A- by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.
Enron Corp., Houston, is selling $50 million of notes due in 2004 through Salomon Brothers.
The notes are priced at 99.49 to yield 6.834 percent.
The issue is noncallable and rated Baa2 by Moody's, BBB by S.&amp; P. and BBB+ by Duff &amp; Phelps.
Harris Trust and Savings Bank, Chicago, a unit of Bank of Montreal, is selling $200 million of bank notes due in 1996 through Nationsbanc Capital Markets.
The notes are priced at par to yield 6 percent.
Callable quarterly beginning on Dec. 12, the issue is rated Aa2 by Moody's and AA- by S.&amp; P.
Sears, Roebuck Acceptance Corp, Greenville, Del., a unit of Sears, Roebuck &amp; Co., is selling $250 million of notes due in 2005 through Goldman, Sachs.
The notes are priced at 99.927 to yield 6.76 percent.
The issue is noncallable and rated A2 by Moody's, BBB by S.&amp; P. and A- by Duff &amp; Phelps.


Navy's Arsenal Ship Is a Sop to Congress
To the Editor:
Re "Aircraft Carrier May Give Way to Missile Ship" (front page, Sept. 3):


White House Spurns Plea for Travel Office Data
In response to a new request from a Congressional investigative committee, the White House has refused to turn over more than 900 pages of internal documents and memorandums concerning its dismissal of seven employees in its travel office early in the Clinton Administration.
In a letter this week to the House Committee on Government Reform and Oversight, the White House counsel's office said that the documents were "subject to" claims of executive privilege, but that the White House would be willing to consider "particularized requests" from the committee to review specific documents.


Slaying Of Student May Be Solved
Six months after the charred remains of a young college student were found in an abandoned house in Woodhaven, Queens, the police said they had solved the mystery of her death: she was killed by kidnappers angry when their attempts to call her father for ransom failed.
The way the police tell it, Kimberly Antonakos, a student working part time to support herself, made a mistake when she opened her apartment to one of the men, Joshua Torres.
But she regarded him as a friend, and ultimately let his family stay with her last winter as their apartment underwent repairs.


Don't Blame Nafta for U.S. Job Losses
To the Editor:
Pat Buchanan (Op-Ed, Aug. 25) offers no new reasons to conclude that the North American Free Trade Agreement was a mistake.


5 Held in Death of Queens Man, Gunned Down in His Garage
A 34-year-old father of two children was gunned down in the garage of a 12-floor apartment building in Flushing, Queens, early yesterday by men who appeared to have followed him and his wife home, the police said.
The authorities said the killing of Salvadore Sanchez in the garage, at 140-16 34th Avenue, appeared to be drug related.
Five men were arrested, said a police spokesman, Detective Dwight Cunningham.


In Mixed Session, Dow Falls But Other Key Indexes Gain
The stock market was mixed yesterday, as investors shrugged off the latest economic data and concentrated on companies with strong earnings growth.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 14.09 points, to 4,669.72.
But the broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index and Nasdaq composite index again set new records.
The S.&amp; P. inched up 0.12 point, to 570.29, while the Nasdaq rose 6.80 points, to 1,051.08.


Lewis Feels Inside-Out At His New Position
What nerve, thought Mo Lewis.
Irving Fryar, a receiver for the Dolphins, was trying to bring him down with a crackback block.
"I never heard of it when I was on the outside," Lewis said of the maneuver, in which an offensive player cuts down a defensive opponent with a block to the side of his knee.
"They never tried to do it to me."


Christian Coalition Is United On Morality, but Not Politics
The typical member of the Christian Coalition, the largest organization of religious conservatives in the United States, is a married white woman, at least 55 years old, and more concerned about the moral decay of the nation than about any single issue, like abortion, according to the first extensive poll of its membership.
The poll, made available by the coalition on the eve of its annual meeting, which opens here on Friday, offered the most detailed look yet at a group that is becoming an increasingly potent force in Republican politics.
As a demonstration of its influence, almost every major Republican Presidential candidate is scheduled to address its convention.


Motorola to Build a Chip Plant in Virginia
Motorola Inc. said yesterday that it would exercise its option to buy 230 acres of land west of Richmond, as the site for a $3 billion manufacturing plant for its Power PC microprocessors.
Apple Computer Inc. has said perennial shortages of the chip, used in its Power Macintosh, have hindered its ability to meet demand.


U.S. Bonds Trade Lower On Fresh Data
Bonds traded lower yesterday, as investors reacted to both fresh economic data and comments by a Federal Reserve official.
"The market is in a sideways drift that seems destined to hold into next week," said James Hales, a fixed-income analyst with MMS International in San Francisco.
"Day traders see the risk-reward of trading this market as unappealing right now. To them, the bull market is tired and not worth chasing." He said people trying to short it lately had been burned.


First-Day-of-School Woes Are Mild, Except for Fiscal Feuding
New York City's public school students returned to their desks yesterday to find their classes larger and their principals more beleaguered, while far off at City Hall and at Board of Education headquarters in Brooklyn, the quarreling continued over how much it really should cost to run the nation's largest school system.
As school openings go, this one went relatively smoothly, although the pressure on the system was increasingly apparent as the city's more than 700,000 elementary and junior high school students showed up at 830 schools for the first day.
More than 300,000 high school students, who registered on Wednesday, reported for full classes yesterday.


Pulsipher Not Blasted for Rookie Mistakes
Bill Pulsipher looked like the rookie that he is Wednesday afternoon in San Diego, blowing a four-run lead to the Padres on consecutive home runs in the fifth inning.
The Mets, who at one time led by 5-1, wound up losing, 6-5, when the Padres scored the game-winning run in the ninth inning off reliever Jerry DiPoto.


Space Shuttle Takes Off After Month's Delay
After more than a month of delays, the space shuttle Endeavour finally got off the ground today, carrying five astronauts on an 11-day mission to study the Sun, experiment with vacuum-produced electronic materials and test new pressure suits on a six-hour space walk.
Taking advantage of a rare break in the rain clouds that have hung darkly over the area for more than a week, the shuttle lifted off on time at 11:09 A.M. and arced out over the Atlantic Ocean, climbing to an orbit 231 miles above Earth.
The mission, the fifth this year, had been set for launching on Aug. 5, but was postponed first for repairs of its booster nozzles and last week because of an electric-generator malfunction.


Judge Ito Says Simpson Detective Doesn't Have to Face Jury Again
Judge Lance A. Ito ruled today that Mark Fuhrman need not invoke his Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination once again, this time before jurors in the O. J. Simpson case.
Nor, he ruled, should jurors be told that Mr.
Fuhrman had already done so outside their presence.
But what Judge Ito proposed to let jurors infer from Mr.
Fuhrman's sudden absence from a case he has dominated for weeks so outraged prosecutors that they immediately began preparing an appeal.
Their move kept the defense, which has run out of witnesses, from resting until Friday or even Monday, when Judge Ito ordered prosecutors to begin their rebuttal case.


Temps at Motor Vehicles
The state spent about $136,000 in public funds to hire 140 temporary workers in July when Motor Vehicle agencies were turned over to private hands, the State Department of Personnel said on Wednesday.
The temporary workers were hired at the last minute when it became clear that most Department of Motor Vehicle employees were unwilling to take a cut in pay to perform the same job for a private company.
TERRY PRISTIN


Sounds Around Town
Clark Terry
Clark Terry, Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 255-4037.
The trumpeter and fluegelhornist Clark Terry is one of the great living originals in jazz; rhythmically he's distinct, and he weaves harmonic games with his improvisations.
Mr.
Terry is playful, not simply when he sings -- he's one of jazz's last links to vaudeville -- but in his whole approach to improvisation.
Shows today through Sunday are at 9:30 and 11:30 P.M. and 1 A.M.; there is no third set on Sunday.
The cover is $15 and the minimum is $10.
PETER WATROUS Cedar Walton Trio
Cedar Walton Trio, Sweet Basil, 88 Seventh Avenue South, above Bleecker Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 242-1785.
At its best, Cedar Walton's piano trio, featuring David Williams on bass and Billy Higgins on drums, is all a jazz group can be, a master class in swing and dynamics.
Sets through Sunday are at 9 and 11 P.M. and 12:30 A.M.; there is no third set on Sunday.
The cover is $15 and the minimum is $10.
P.
W.
Martino and Lovano
Pat Martino and Joe Lovano, Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 475-8592.
An exceptional double bill brings together one blues-based experimentalist -- the guitarist Pat Martino -- with the saxophonist Joe Lovano, a searching improviser who knows jazz's mainstream.
Mr.
Martino has recently been playing as well as he ever did and Mr.
Lovano continues searching for ways to present his expansive improvisational language.
Shows through Sunday are at 9 and 11:30 P.M.
There is a $30 cover and a $5 minimum at the tables or a $20 cover and one-drink minimum at the bar.
P.
W.


World News Briefs; Gonzalez Escapes Inquiry On Spain's Death Squads
The Supreme Court said today that there was not enough evidence to warrant investigating the Socialist Prime Minister, Felipe Gonzalez, in connection with death squads that killed 27 suspected Basque separatists in southern France in the early 1980's.
The announcement came on the same day that fresh accusations arose indicating that Spain's military intelligence service outlined a master plan for a "dirty war" against the separatists.


Page by Page, A Chronicle Of Misdeeds
The Senate Ethics Committee's 10,145-page compilation of evidence that led to Bob Packwood's resignation today paints a portrait of a senior Senator who altered evidence he thought might be "very incriminating," repeatedly tried to take sexual advantage of women dependent on him for jobs and pressured lobbyists to provide consulting fees for his wife.
Beyond those findings, which had already led to the committee's recommendation of expulsion, its report raises questions of campaign-law violations that were never part of the case before.
And it tells salacious stories of consensual sex in Mr.
Packwood's Senate office, even as aides were working next door.


Verne Chapman, 56, Genetics Researcher
Verne M. Chapman, a leading mammalian geneticist and chairman of the Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology at Roswell Park Cancer Institute in Buffalo, died on Aug. 30 while attending a scientific meeting in Tsukuba Science City in Japan.
He was 56.
Dr.
Chapman, who lived in East Aurora, a suburb of Buffalo, died of a stroke, a spokeswoman at Roswell Park said.


No Headline
"If you have somebody who's that much of a benefactor, you don't just shake his hand and say thank you. Without him, the university would have died." -- DR.
RICHARD L. RUBENSTEIN, explaining an honorary degree that the University of Bridgeport awarded to the Rev.
Sun Myung Moon.  [ B8:1. ]


Corrections
A Man in the News article yesterday about Senator Mitch McConnell, chairman of the Senate Ethics Committee, referred incorrectly to William Belanger, who was quoted as saying that opponents of candidates like Gov.
Pete Wilson and Senator McConnell "are always underestimating their technical skill and their will to do anything to get elected or prevail." Mr.
Belanger was an aide to Todd Hollenbach, Senator McConnell's unsuccessful Democratic opponent in a 1977 race to be a county court judge in Kentucky; he was not an aide to Senator McConnell during the Senator's days as a county judge.


U. of Bridgeport Honors Rev. Moon, Fiscal Savior
The Rev.
Sun Myung Moon received an honorary degree today from the University of Bridgeport, which he effectively took over three years ago.
In his first public appearance on campus since an affiliate of his Unification Church rescued the university from bankruptcy and near-certain closure, Mr.
Moon, 75, took credit for the collapse of Communism and promised to resolve conflicts in the Middle East and between North and South Korea.


Union's Strategy Had Dual Purpose
The strategy by pro basketball's embattled players union to make a decertification election double as a referendum on a tentative labor agreement emerged from the negotiating session with league officials that produced the agreement, according to a lawyer for one of the players.
The lawyer, David Odom, who represents Mitch Richmond of the Sacramento Kings, said members of the union's executive committee who attended the Aug. 8 meeting said "there was an agreement when the parties left the negotiating table that the vote for decertification would be tied to the vote for ratification."


Politics on His Mind, Yeltsin Warns West on Bombing in Bosnia
Russia's isolation over Bosnia deepened today as an obviously frustrated President Boris N. Yeltsin, domestic politics on his mind, warned Western leaders that Moscow would have to rethink its partnership with NATO if the alliance continued to bomb the Bosnian Serbs.
In a series of meetings with European leaders over the last week, Mr.
Yeltsin has complained that Russia's views on Bosnia and its opposition to the bombing are ignored by NATO.
With each meeting his comments have become harsher and more pointed as the West continues, in his view, to brush aside Russian reservations.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Orange County Supervisors Said to Share in Blame  The Board of Supervisors of Orange County, Calif., contributed to the county's financial disaster, a report prepared by Kroll Associates, a private consulting firm, and the Orange County grand jury said.
The losses that led to the county's bankruptcy "can be linked to a badly flawed investment strategy" of Robert L. Citron, the county's former treasurer, the report said.
But "the foundations of this financial disaster were clearly built on ineffective management of, and oversight controls over, treasury operations," it contended.  [ Page D2. ]
I.B.M.
Production should reduce the perennial chip shortages that Apple Computer has said have hindered it.  [ D2. ] Changes at Times Mirror  Times Mirror changed its management structure, announcing the departure of three senior executives and essentially eliminating a layer of management.
Nine executives, including the chief financial officer, the head of human resources and the publisher of The Los Angeles Times, will report directly to Mark H. Willes, the chief executive.  [ D4. ] Kennedy Introduces George  John F. Kennedy Jr. and his partner introduced their magazine, George.
Fat and glossy, looking like a healthy Vanity Fair with an astonishing 175 pages of ads in the first issue, it is a blend of substance and fluff with dashes of irreverence and wit.
George is published by Hachette Filipacchi Magazines, which put about $20 million into its startup.  [ D4. ] Partnership Strategy for Insurer  Western National, an issuer of annuities sold through banks, cannot point to rising sales or even much earnings growth.
But the company hopes its strategy of partnership with banks will distinguish it.
Market Place.  [ D6. ] New Campaign for Grand Marnier  In ads now beginning to appear in almost 40 publications, the new importer and marketer of Grand Marnier present abstract images meant to inspire philosophical musings.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D4. ] What Future for Chase Art?
The planned merger of Chemical Bank and Chase Manhattan has given rise to worry in the art world.
What will happen to the Chase Art Program, a collection of 13,000 valuable works begun when David Rockefeller led the bank?
Bankers are not yet ready to say.  [ C23. ]


Mine Project Design Insures No Threat to Yellowstone Park
To the Editor:
"Mr. Clinton Acts on Yellowstone" (editorial, Aug. 29) claims that the New World mine represents a threat to Yellowstone National Park.


As Thousands File Claims, Judge Revises Breast Implant Deal
In an effort to revive the failing plan for a $4.25 billion settlement of silicone breast implant lawsuits, a Federal judge is calling for new ground rules in any future pact, including one that would affect how much money women receive.
Former manufacturers of breast implants had agreed to create a single pool of money against which women claiming various illness from silicone exposure could receive awards of $200,000 to $2 million, depending on their complaint.


Times Mirror Management Is Revamped
The Times Mirror Company concluded a major shake-up today as its new chief executive, Mark H. Willes announced the departure of three senior executives and a reorganization.
Among those departing, the company said, was Curtis A. Hessler, an executive vice president in charge of Times Mirror's new media and cable operations.
Mr.
Hessler had at one time been regarded a leading contender to become Times Mirror's chief.


Thump of Bombs Doesn't Deter Serbs
A minute before NATO jets flashed in over the mountaintops today to attack an ammunition dump about two miles from his home, Milenko Petrovic, a factory worker, was explaining why the Bosnian Serbs refuse to withdraw their artillery from around Sarajevo: "It is more honorable to be bombed by a great power like America than slaughtered by the Turks." (When Serbs refer to the mainly Muslim people of Bosnia as "Turks," they intend an insult.)
Mr.
Petrovic's view that his people are in danger of being massacred by Bosnian forces was not changed when the war planes struck and a huge plume of smoke blossomed from the military complex.


House G.O.P. Leaders Propose To Ease Endangered Species Act
House Republican leaders proposed today to scale back the Endangered Species Act by overturning a recent Supreme Court decision and making it voluntary, not mandatory, for private landowners to conserve the habitat of creatures threatened with extinction.
The bill would provide new financial incentives, like tax breaks, for private landowners to conserve endangered species and their habitat voluntarily.
And the Government would have to compensate landowners if efforts to protect species resulted in any significant reduction in land values.


To Brooklyn, for a Country Weekend
YOU'RE fed up with the muggy city, the glass-and-steel jungle of Manhattan, the honk and shout and backfire of the streets, like a symphony gone bonkers.
You need a break, one of those weekend getaways you dream about.
Where there's the shady coolness of an arbor, a green-grass park without end, a broad lake for boating, a world-class museum, boutiques, antiques, a carousel.
You want to return to the quiet and romance of another time, what you imagined the Victorian Age was like.
You need a bed-and-breakfast with just such surroundings.
So you pack up your bags, hop the F train and go straight to Brooklyn. Where else?


A Mystery From an 1864 Massacre
A few weeks ago at a local cineplex, this preview popped up: Tom Berenger was riding through the woods on horseback spatting with Barbara Hershey.
Indians appeared out of the mist, which caused Ms.
Hershey's character to react with reverential wonder.
The title "Last of the Dogmen" appeared, which caused the audience to react with derisive laughter.
It's a goofy title, all right, especially if you don't know that dogmen is another term for the Indian warriors called dog soldiers.
While the preview made the movie seem silly and unwatchable, "Last of the Dogmen" turns out to be an earnest, picturesque adventure that is perfectly watchable, though not much more.
It is almost a case study of how a quirky, tantalizing idea can become a homogenized, pedestrian film.
At the center is a provocative question that reaches back more than a century and is based on the massacre of Cheyenne Indians at Sand Creek, Colo., in 1864.
Several Cheyenne escaped into the woods and were presumed to have died.
The film wonders whether that small band might have survived, leaving descendants hidden away even now.


Donald Byrnes, 69, Evenflo Executive
Donald J. Byrnes, chief executive of the Spalding and Evenflo Companies, died on Wednesday near his home in Tampa, Fla., while driving to his office.
He was 69.
The cause was a heart attack, a company spokesman said.


Market Place; Western National has high hopes for its annuities sales strategy.
THE Western National Corporation, a leading issuer of annuities sold through banks, cannot point to rising sales or even much growth in its earnings in the last year.
But despite those uninspiring results, Western has high hopes that its strategy of partnership with banks will distinguish it from other insurers to which banks are merely sales outlets.
Instead of the standard practice, where banks merely provide branch offices to sell annuities whose terms and conditions are set by the insurer, or issuer, Western's annuities are offered in an arrangement where the bank manages the investments backing the annuities.
The bank and the insurance company cooperatively determine terms and conditions of the annuities.


Diner's Journal
A couple walked into New York's newest Japanese restaurant and gasped when they met some old friends.
The friends immediately jumped to their feet and the four began a bowing ritual that seemed to last a full five minutes.
Then an American couple walked in, and the waitresses scurried to find a menu written in English (they are scarce), then struggled to explain it.
Nadaman Hakubai is so thoroughly foreign that it is easy to believe you have been magically transported to Japan.
The original Nadaman Hakubai, a 160-year-old-Japanese institution in Osaka, is so exclusive that diners must be recommended for reservations.
So it was something of a shock to find that the version in the new Kitano Hotel was bright with fluorescent lights, uncomfortable and despite the reported attentions of craftsmen imported from Japan, so raw looking that I wondered if I had wandered into the wrong restaurant.
But then the food began to appear.


In Buffalo, It's French Connection II and III
The Buffalo Sabres will retire the numbers of RICK MARTIN and RENE ROBERT, the wings who played on a line with GILBERT PERREAULT to form the French Connection in the 1970's.
Martin, who wore No. 7, and Robert, who wore No. 14, will appear at a ceremony in their honor this season, the Sabres' last at Memorial Auditorium.
Their jerseys will join Perreault's No. 11 as the only three retired by the Sabres. (AP)


Lions Will Activate Pro Bowl Tackle
The five-time Pro Bowl lineman LOMAS BROWN was back in a Detroit uniform yesterdayafter signing a one-year deal with the Lions.


Ralph Rosenblum, Film Editor, 69
Ralph Rosenblum, a film editor, director and teacher, died on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 69.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


Celtics to Wilkins: Goodbye, Good Luck
The Boston Celtics and the National Basketball Association will not stop DOMINIQUE WILKINS from playing next season in Greece, where he has reportedly signed a two-year, $8 million contract.
The team sent letters to the N.B.A. and STEVE KAUFFMAN, Wilkins's agent, detailing its position, The Boston Globe reported yesterday.
Wilkins, 35, had two years left on the contract he signed with the Celtics as a free agent before last season.
It would reportedly have paid him $8.4 million for the next two years.


Mr. Dole's Bogus Welfare Safeguards
The Senate majority leader, Bob Dole, will bring to a vote, perhaps today, an amendment to his welfare bill that would supposedly soften the blow to the poor.
The amendment is a sham.
It purports to require states to maintain current spending on programs for low-income families.
But the amendment is riddled with loopholes and will not, in fact, force any state to spend a dime.
Mr.
Dole has not rounded up enough votes to pass his welfare bill.
Conservatives like Senator Phil Gramm complain that the bill is too lenient, permitting states, for example, to put unwed mothers on the dole.
Moderates fear that the bill will drive needy families off welfare and into the streets.
Mr.
Dole's amendment was proposed to sucker moderates into dropping their opposition.


International Briefs; British Gas Shares Fall
Stock of British Gas P.L.C. skidded nearly 4 percent yesterday after it left its dividend unchanged at 6.4 pence a share and warned of deteriorating prospects for the second half of the year.
The company's chairman, Richard Giordano, warned that poor trading conditions and price uncertainties "give no grounds for optimism in the second half." American depository shares for British Gas dropped $1.625, to $41, on the New York Stock Exchange. (Dow Jones)


Restaurants
The weather may indicate otherwise.
The calendar may disagree.
But anybody who lives in New York City knows that Labor Day is the unofficial end of summer.
As your tan fades, the only sensible thing to do is celebrate the city.
In the next couple of months, dozens of restaurants will open, many of them with wonderful chefs at the helm: Anne Rosenzweig (Arcadia), David Walzog (Arizona 206), Matthew Kenney (Matthew's), Gary Robins (Aja), Antoine Bouterin (Le Perigord) and Jean-Jacques Rachou (La Cote Basque) are all planning to open new restaurants in the fall.
But while you're waiting for these new ventures, let me suggest a visit to Nobu, a remarkable restaurant that epitomizes the energy of the city at this exact moment.


Beijing Meeting Signals Women's Solidarity; Will Repression Win?
To the Editor:
"Meeting of Women Says Surveillance by China Must End" (front page, Sept. 3), although excellent, ignores the substance of the Non-Governmental Organizations Forum and of the official United Nations Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing.


Sports of The Times; As Monica Would Say, 'Like Wow!'
OH yeah, oh yeah, oh yeah.
It is going around like some mad computer virus, this thing of speaking like Monica Seles, which means you are talking in Hungarian Valley Girl accent and have trouble finishing your thought or your sentence, which has been getting worse every day and the end is not in sight.


Burnett Plans Overseas Expansion
The Leo Burnett Company in Chicago plans to more than double its presence in Eastern Europe and the Middle East in the next 12 months.
Burnett, through its Burnett Worldwide unit, will enter 11 countries in those regions; it now has offices in 9, including Egypt, Hungary, Poland and Saudi Arabia.
The new markets, to be entered through a combination of wholly owned agencies and joint ventures with local partners, include Bulgaria, Estonia, Israel, Romania, Slovakia and Syria.


Sounds Around Town
Sharp-Dressed Men
Menswear, Manhattan Center Ballroom, 311 West 34th Street, (212) 279-7740.
In decades past, aged entrepreneurs looked to winsome teen-agers to shape the next pop sensation.
These days, good-looking youths don't need such prompting.
They manufacture themselves.
Before they had even written a song, the sharp-dressed British darlings Menswear talked themselves up so much that the music scene was buzzing with tales of their prowess.
The band is to make its United States debut tomorrow night at 7:30 as an opening act for the Meat Puppets and Lou Barlow's Deluxx Folk Implosion.
Admission is $15.
NEIL STRAUSS From Tarnation
Tarnation, Mercury Lounge, 217 East Houston Street, at Ludlow Street, Lower East Side, (212) 260-4700.
Throughout Tarnation's second album, "Gentle Creatures" (4AD), one character lurks: loneliness.
She flutters silently in a night breeze, lays distracted on a vibrating motel bed, teeters teary-eyed on the brink of a deep well.
The band has perfected the country-rock art of the trudge, with Paula Frazer singing in a slow, dogged drawl and strumming sleepy-eyed minor chords.
The concert begins at 8 tonight.
Admission is $8.
N.
S.
Borbetomagus and Merzbow
Borbetomagus and Merzbow, the Alterknit Theater at the Knitting Factory, 74 Leonard Street, TriBeCa, (212) 219-3055.
These two bands don't write songs: they play textures, push envelopes and stretch sounds.
Borbetomagus has been improvising free jazz-inspired cacophony for nearly two decades, with Don Dietrich and Jim Sauter pressing together the bells of their saxophones, and Donald Miller sticking screwdrivers under his guitar strings to insure that feedback will be the most soothing noise in the room.
Merzbow, from Japan, has been working as a one-man electronic noise terrorist for nearly as long.
The concert is tonight at 11.
Admission is $8.
Don't forget your earplugs.
N.
S.


Devils and Isles Pursue Center
The Devils and Islanders are in the hunt to acquire Aleksei Yashin, the Ottawa Senators' talented, high-scoring 21-year-old center.
According to reports in several Canadian newspapers, Lou Lamoriello, president and general manager of the Devils, has discussed trading Claude Lemieux and Stephane Richer as part of a package.
Lemieux is considering a holdout in a contract dispute.


Senators Skeptical as Officials Defend Actions in Idaho Siege
Testifying before a Senate panel investigating a deadly standoff in 1992 between Government agents and a white separatist, Federal firearms officials today defended their use of an informer to lure the separatist into a weapons violation that led to the confrontation.
But several senators on the Judiciary subcommittee investigating the the Government's role in the standoff expressed deep skepticism about the actions of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.
They suggested that agents had applied heavy-handed tactics in an insignificant case and had entrapped the separatist, Randall C. Weaver, through the informer, who paid Mr.
Weaver $700 for two illegal sawed-off shotguns.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALL CORP., Muncie, Ind., said it would build a $50 million plastic-container plant in Lysander, N.Y.
CARE GROUP INC., Lake Success, L.I., which provides home health care services, agreed to acquire Peachtree Medical Inc., Marietta, Ga., a supplier of home medical equipment, in a stock and cash transaction.
Terms of the agreement were not disclosed.


Art in Review
Marsha Pels 'Terranova'  Sculpture Center 167 East 69th Street Manhattan Through Sept. 30
Marsha Pels's installation greets the visitor with an indelible image: a neon lightning bolt streaking across the gallery floor beneath a darkening sky of translucent Fiberglas umbrellas tethered by steel cables.
Nothing in Ms.
Pels's earlier work, built up from vegetal and avian forms cast in bronze, prepares one for the clarity and luminosity of "Terranova," which was apparently inspired by the floods that deluged Iowa during Ms.
Pels's 1993 sojourn there.


CHRONICLE
MAXENE ANDREWS may be 79, but that is no impediment to her continuing to sing.
On Tuesday, she joins the cast of "Swingtime Canteen," a 1940's-style musical playing at the Blue Angel.
The production stars Charles Busch, the drag performer.
Ms.
Andrews, one of the famed Andrews Sisters, is now a solo act (Laverne died in 1967, and Maxene does not work with Patty).





Tiny Knots of Thread Transformed Into Design
Many years ago, at a garage sale, my sister-in-law stumbled across a copy of Picasso's 1921 "Three Musicians," reproduced in needlepoint.
She bought it for me, and it now hangs on my office wall.
The large, blocky shapes of Picasso's composition translate remarkably well into the new medium, although the colors are a little off.
If anything, the copy looks more abstract -- more "modern" -- than the original.
Going through the retrospective of Diane Itter's work at the American Craft Museum, I couldn't help thinking of my needlepoint Picasso.
The difference is that Itter's brightly colored, geometric textile designs are not reproductions but original compositions, rendered with extraordinary skill in tiny knots of linen thread.


NATO Raids Against Serbs Are Increased
On the eve of crucial American-led talks among the three warring parties in Bosnia, NATO expanded its air campaign against Serb-held positions in Bosnia today, bombing bridges, ammunition dumps, communications centers and air defense radars.
The bombings came as President Clinton met with his senior advisers to discuss how to convince the warring parties to accept the United Nations-brokered partition of the country and enforce an eventual settlement.
But President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia warned that Moscow would have to rethink its partnership with NATO if the alliance continued its bombings.


Buster Mathis, Heavyweight Fighter, Dies at 51
Buster Mathis, an oversized heavyweight boxer who lost a championship bout to Joe Frazier in 1968 and a comeback fight to Muhammad Ali in 1971, died Wednesday.
He was 51.
His wife, Joan, found him unconscious at home and he was pronounced dead at Butterworth Hospital in Grand Rapids, Mich., where he lived since boyhood.
Hospital officials said he died of heart failure.


Calling History to Arms: Serbs Invoke Their Past
This week Gen.
Rakto Mladic, the commander of the Bosnian Serbs, accused NATO of attacking the Serbs in a more brutal way than Hitler did.
In a letter to Lieut.
Gen.
Bernard Janvier, the commander of United Nations forces in the former Yugoslavia, he wrote: "Taking into account the duration, this air strike is more brutal than the one ordered by Hitler on April 6, 1941, against Belgrade, since he stopped the bombing on April 7 and 8 to allow the burial of victims after the Christian customs."


Lukas Is Flying His Two Superstars to Kentucky
D.
Wayne Lukas insisted yesterday that he was not "ducking" a confrontation with the formidable Cigar, but he nonetheless planned to fly Thunder Gulch to Kentucky tomorrow to prepare for the Kentucky Cup Classic a week later.
And he included his filly Serena's Song on the flight for an appearance the same day in Kentucky, thereby removing his two superstars from New York racing until the Breeders' Cup at Belmont Park on Oct. 28.
"Does it seem like Lukas is pulling some of his horses out of New York for now?" said Terry Meyocks, director of racing for New York's tracks.
"Could be, could be. It may be strategic, but it's still disappointing. It's always disappointing when you lose stars, but there are so many options and purses available these days that you can almost follow Wayne's reasoning."


Executive Changes
AMOCO CORP., Chicago, said its vice chairman, Lawrason D. Thomas, would retire on Jan. 1, after more than 37 years with the company.
AMERICA WEST AIRLINES INC., Phoenix, said A. Maurice Myers, its president and chief operating officer, would take early retirement at the end of the year.
William A. Franke, the chairman and chief executive, will assume Mr.
Myers's responsibilities until a successor is selected.


St. Maarten Is Left Smashed and Looted After Luis
Jose Perez strolled casually down the winding hillside road from Philipsburg to Simpson Bay today, pushing a grocery cart loaded with a Hitachi television, a Canon electric typewriter and a roll of Bounty paper towels.
Like hundreds of other residents of this devastated island, Mr.
Perez had helped himself to the goods after Hurricane Luis demolished dozens of stores.
"Yeah, I took it," he said matter of factly as he gestured at the television set.
"And I don't know if it's going to work."


Motorola Names Manager of Unit
Motorola Inc. said yesterday that Joseph M. Guglielmi had been named corporate vice president and general manager of the Motorola Computer Group, which makes computers that use the Power PC chip.
Mr.
Guglielmi, who is 53, most recently was chairman and chief executive of Taligent Inc., a joint venture between I.B.M. and Apple Computer Inc.
Taligent was originally set up to create a computer operating system, but it is now a producer of software development tools.
Previously, Mr.
Guglielmi had been at I.B.M. for 30 years.


Pataki and Giuliani Denounced for Proposed Fare Increase
A parade of speakers pilloried Gov.
George E. Pataki and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani at a public hearing last night, saying that they would be to blame if the price of a subway token rises to $1.50.
It was a sometimes raucous revival of one of the city's traditional acts of political theater, the fare increase hearing, the first of seven scheduled sessions.
In contrast to hearings in years past, yesterday's at the New York Hilton in mid-Manhattan saw relatively little abuse aimed at members of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority board, who sat grim-faced late into the night, listening to comments by more than 100 speakers.


Sampras And Courier Chart Course Into Semis
When Pete Sampras served an ace at match point yesterday, Byron Black flinched.
When Michael Chang served a double fault at match point last night, Jim Courier didn't bother to flinch.
Sampras had a whirlwind day at his windswept office on the Stadium Court, and his swift serving rewarded him with a trip to the United States Open semifinals against the 14th-seeded Courier, who advanced in straight sets courtesy of his own tenacity and an unusually flawed performance from the fifth-seeded Chang.


War on Heartburn Heats Up With Over-the-Counter Blitz
Forget spicy meatballs, "excess stomach acid," and how to spell relief.
The campaign to calm your insides is beginning in earnest.
A $200 million-plus marketing battle has started for the nation's minds and hearts -- or, more precisely, for its heartburn.
And the giants of the drug industry will miss no chance to assault the public, each with assertions of its product's vast superiority, as they carve out shares of what could become a multibillion-dollar market for nonprescription stomach remedies.


Observer; Waves Of the Future
When Cal Ripken came to work to play his 4,262d consecutive game the ball park was closed.
A piece of paper taped to the padlock said, "Streak's over, Rip. You're downsized."
It was a historic day, and not just because the famous streak was ended.
With Ripken's downsizing, American business was free at last from the burden of labor costs.


Religion Journal; A Jewish Outreach Effort Goes Largely Unnoticed
Among many Jewish organizations, the subject of marriage between Jews and non-Jews provokes an especially deep anxiety.
The oft-voiced fear is that the high rate of intermarriage will ultimately sap the strength of the Jewish community, reducing its numbers through assimilation, especially if the children of such unions are not reared as Jews.
To a degree, worry has bred creativity.
National Jewish organizations, synagogues and community centers have devised numerous educational and religious programs to coax intermarried couples into the orbit of Jewish life.


Port Authority to Lay Off 300 More Workers
A day after it said it would lay off 300 workers, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey announced a new round of staff cuts yesterday and acknowledged that with these reductions, it would have to scale back its role as a leader in analyzing trends in the region.
The authority's executive director, George J. Marlin, said in an interview that the authority would eliminate another 300 jobs early next year as part of its effort to close a budget gap and hold the line on its bridge and tunnel tolls and commuter railway fare.
That brings the number of layoffs to 600 from the authority's 8,800-person work force.


FHP International Corp.(FHPC,NNM) reports earnings for Yr to Jun 30


Gay, Jewish and Deaf: The Limits on Sharing
Communication is thwarted by more than the obvious language barrier in Drew Emery and Lewis Merkin's "Language of One," a new production from the New York Deaf Theater.
And when characters in this earnest, thoughtful work, which is performed at the Vineyard Theater in a combination of spoken English and American Sign Language, ask, "What word am I looking for?" there's no guarantee of a satisfactory answer.
The most bracing point made in this portrait of a Seattle architect trying to sort out the conflicting claims of being gay, Jewish and deaf, is that each person's vocabulary is unique, with all the limitations and potential that implies.


At U.N. Women's Meeting, An Outbreak of Harmony
It was billed as a clash of civilizations over how to define the rights of women in language that could influence how all nations act.
So when delegates and advocates from 185 nations started converging on the Chinese capital late last month for the United Nations Fourth World Conference on Women and a parallel forum of nongovernmental organizations, many people thought that conservative Muslims allied with the Vatican and the anti-abortion coalitions of North America would join forces and storm the ramparts of the meeting halls here.


Common Fund Says Firm Tied to Its Big Loss Is Closing
First Capital Strategists Inc., the investment firm whose rogue trader lost $138 million in the accounts of the Common Fund before being discovered in June, is close to shutting down, the Common Fund said yesterday.
How soon First Capital may end its business is not clear, and yesterday the firm would not elaborate on a statement issued through a lawyer, Richard J. Morvillo of Crowell &amp; Moring in Washington.
"First Capital continues in business as we speak," the statement said.
"Depending on a variety of factors, First Capital may be expected to wind down its affairs in an efficient and orderly fashion. In the interim, the firm will continue to service customer needs in a reasonable manner." Mr.
Morvillo said First Capital, of York, Pa., has "one or more existing clients," but he declined to identify them.


Packwood Is Leaving As a Pariah In His State
All states have narrative myths, the heroic images that are chiseled into granite in the Capitol building and passed on through the generations.
In the Beaver State, people worship the Oregon Trail pioneer and the political maverick.
Until recently, Senator Bob Packwood could lay claim to a bit of both traditions.
His great-grandfather, he said, was an Oregon pioneer.
And on political matters, he became known as a giant-killer, someone with extraordinary political instincts.
Long before he was Bob Packwood the political pariah, he was the man who took on Presidents from his own party and muscled through legislation considered impossible to pass.


Canadian Imperial Bank reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 31


Wood May Rot, but Tiles Are Nearly Forever


Mr. Packwood's Tardy Departure
Bob Packwood resigned from the Senate in disgrace on Thursday, just a step ahead of expulsion by his colleagues for sexual and official misconduct.
But the ever-shameless Oregon Republican was back on the floor yesterday, discussing welfare reform and voting on amendments as if a unanimous Senate Ethics Committee had never resolved to expel him, or made public its devastating 10,145-page compilation of evidence.
After an outcry by incredulous Democrats, the Senate majority leader, Bob Dole, appeared on the floor to announce that Mr.
Packwood would immediately step down as chairman of the Finance Committee, and that his resignation from the Senate would become effective Oct. 1.
That was a turnaround for Mr.
Dole.
Appearing on CNN's "Larry King Live" program only hours after Mr.
Packwood's resignation speech to the Senate, the would-be President let it drop that Mr.
Packwood probably would not depart the Senate for 30 to 60 days, or even three months.
During that time, Mr.
Dole said, he expected Mr.
Packwood would stay on as nominal chairman of the Finance Committee.


Shots Kill Man And Wound 6 In Brooklyn
One man was killed and six other people were wounded, including a 14-year-old boy left in very serious condition, when up to 30 bullets sprayed a street in East Flatbush, Brooklyn, late Thursday night, the police said.
Late yesterday, it was still unclear who started the shooting or why.
The gunfire began outside a building that the police said was a drug-dealing site, at 305 East 94th Street, along a neatly kept block of small apartment buildings across from a playground and an elementary school.


There's No Difference In Collins
He is still blunt.
He still works out like a madman.
He still eats healthy food and takes good care of his body.
About the only thing that is different about cornerback Mark Collins is that he is no longer a New York Giant.
After spending 1986-1993 with New York, Collins joined the Kansas City Chiefs and has become an integral part of their defense.
On Sunday he will go against his old team for the first time.


Corrections
An article on Aug. 14 about Japanese-Americans misstated the extent of internment during World War II.
In addition to the Japanese-Americans, the United States also interned a far smaller number of German-Americans and Italian-Americans.


Corrections
A headline in some editions on Thursday about a court hearing for Joey Buttafuoco misstated his legal situation.
A judge ruled that in pleading no contest to a charge of soliciting sex from a prostitute in Los Angeles, Mr.
Buttafuoco had violated probation, not parole.


Rex Stores Corp.(RSC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  A MOVE TOWARD BALKANS PEACE  The rivals who have warred for nearly four years over the remains of Yugoslavia took a first step toward peace negotiations, agreeing that a Serbian republic will be created within Bosnia. 1


September Beachgoers, Beware
Even if the sun shines, "it's not going to be the best weekend to go in the water, unfortunately," said Chuck Jones, a meteorologist at the National Weather Service office in Mount Holly.
Forecasters posted a heavy surf advisory yesterday for the entire New Jersey coast as Hurricane Luis drifted northward.
All along the coast, lifeguards, wary after more than 10 drownings at the Jersey Shore this year, warned bathers to stay in shallow water.


Ulster Protestant Party Names a Hard-Liner
The largest Protestant party in Northern Ireland tonight chose a new leader -- David Trimble, a hard-line member of the British Parliament who is staunchly opposed to efforts by the Roman Catholic parties to unite the province with the Irish Republic.
Mr.
Trimble, a 50-year-old lawyer, was a surprise victor in voting tonight in Belfast for the leadership of the Ulster Unionist Party.
Recent polls had established John Taylor, a moderate, as the favorite, but Mr.
Trimble won convincingly.


Informer Says Siege Figure Offered to to Sell Him Illegal Guns
A paid Government informer, whose purchase of two sawed-off shotguns from Randall C. Weaver led to a violent confrontation on an Idaho mountaintop, told a Senate panel today that Mr.
Weaver volunteered to sell him the illegal weapons.
The informer, Kenneth Fadeley, who provided information to the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms in the 1980's, testified in a theatrical setting.
His witness chair was hidden behind a fogged glass partition that blocked the public's view of his face.
And his voice was electronically altered into a near-falsetto to obscure his identification even more.


David Farrar, 87, British Actor Who Made Villains a Specialty
David Farrar, a British actor whose dark and rather sinister good looks helped to vault him to fame and then helped to diminish it, died on Aug. 31 in South Africa, where he had lived in recent years.
He was 87.
Mr.
Farrar became well known to American audiences in the 1940's, in large part because of his starring roles in two films directed and produced by Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger, "Black Narcissus," released in 1946, and "The Small Back Room," made in 1948.


If Yashin Is Available, Isles Are Interested
The Ottawa Senators held an auction for ALEKSEI YASHIN yesterday, then announced late in the day that they wouldn't trade the 21-year-old center, at least not right away.
Among the teams bidding for the third-year center were the Islanders and the Devils.
"We had a few conversations with some teams," Ottawa General Manger RANDY SEXTON said, adding that the Senators are "not going to be looking actively to trade Aleksei."


COMPANY BRIEFS
WAL-MART STORES INC., Bentonville, Ark., said it would increase its share repurchase program to $150 million from $100 million.
The shares to be bought represent less than 1 percent of the compnay's 2.3 billion shares outstanding.
ENERVEST MANAGEMENT CO., Houston, a unit of General Electric Co.'s GE Capital, has purchased 1,600 Appalachian natural gas wells for $17.3 million from Equitable Resources Energy Co.
REPUBLIC SECURITY FINANCIAL CORP., West Palm Beach, Fla., signed a definitive agreement to acquire privately held Banyan Bank Boca Raton, Fla., a commercial bank, for about $9.5 million in cash.
LABONE INC., Lenexa, Kan., a laboratory service to the life insurance industries, has reduced its work force by 7 percent through dismissals and attrition.


Mariners Call Up a Japanese Pitcher
MAC SUZUKI, a relief pitcher, became the third Japanese-born player to reach the major leagues yesterday when the Seattle Mariners called him up from Class A Riverside.
Suzuki, 20, follows pitchers HIDEO NOMO of the Los Angeles Dodgers and MASANORI MURAKAMI, a San Francisco Giant in 1964-65. (AP)


The Kids Want to Help. No Good Can Come of It.
"National Lampoon's Senior Trip," which deserves to be the last gasp of this threadbare comedy series, sends a group of high school burnouts from Ohio to Washington, where they are supposed to be helping the President enact an education reform bill and representing the flower of America's youth.
Since the kids are so predictably bad, no good can come of this plan, as the film cranks out its mix of druggy humor, frat-style partying and bedroom farce.
The biggest names in "National Lampoon's Senior Trip" are Matt Frewer, who plays the (surprise!) buffoonish principal, and Tommy Chong as the hippie relic who drives the group's school bus.
Otherwise, there seem to be no stars of the past, present or future in evidence.
But if any of the actors playing slatternly schoolgirls or nerdy schoolboys should hit it big, this is a credit to leave off the resume.


CHRONICLE
She's back.
MOLLY RINGWALD, the actress who personified true teen-age angst long before the word "clueless" entered the pop lexicon, and then zipped off to France four years ago to smoke cigarettes and act in art films, is forgetting Paris.
She is moving back to New York next week to take up the American film scene again and quit smoking.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Woods Under the Weather at Walker Cup
Tiger Woods, the 19-year-old who won his second United States Amateur championship last month, fell ill Wednesday night after an official dinner with his opponents for this weekend's Walker Cup from Great Britain and Ireland.
Another American, 36-year-old Jerry Courville Jr. of Norwalk, Conn., has been suffering similarly this week.
And Alan Bratton, a 1994 All-American from Oklahoma State, is just getting over a sudden and painful gum infection.
Matches in the amateur match-play version of the Ryder Cup begin today at Porthcawl, Wales.
If Woods is unable to start, he may be replaced by an alternate.


General Magic Decides to Split Software Operations in Two
General Magic Inc. said today that it had split its Magic Cap and Telescript software businesses into two divisions.
The revamping followed the recent departure of two senior executives and a co-founder and it comes at a time when General Magic's products have encountered a slower-than-anticipated acceptance by the market.


Government Urges Judge in Bombing to Step Aside
The Justice Department today asked the Federal district judge overseeing the Oklahoma City bombing case to step aside to reduce the possibility of appeals raised by defense lawyers.
Lawyers for the defendants, Timothy J. McVeigh and Terry L. Nichols, had asked late last month that the judge, Wayne Alley, remove himself from the case and had questioned whether he could be impartial because of his personal ties to the bombing.


ROCK BOTTOM RESTAURANTS SHARES DECLINE 28%
Stock of Rock Bottom Restaurants Inc. sank more than 28 percent yesterday on news the company expected that third-quarter revenue and profit would be below analysts' estimates and that same-store sales would be flat.
The company, a restaurant operator based in Boulder, Colo., attributed its results primarily to the delayed opening of several new restaurants.
Rock Bottom said it expected per-share earnings of 14 cents to 15 cents a share for the quarter ending Sept. 24.
Analysts had estimated earnings would be 19 cents a share.
Rock Bottom's shares fell $7, to $17.75, in Nasdaq trading.


More Rhythm Than Tune
Laika makes dance music that's difficult to dance to.
On Thursday night at Wetlands, the English quintet used techno, dub-reggae, rap, funk and progressive rock to create a thick fog of sound, dense but penetrable.
A far cry from the fragmented rock of Moonshake, the band Margaret Fiedler and Guy Fixsen of Laika used to work with, Laika's music relied on neither riffs nor melodies.
There was mostly rhythm: drums, bongos and electronics that pittered and pattered but never pounded.
And then there was atmosphere: the squeaks of synthesizers, the scrapes of guitar strings, the whispery quasi-raps of Ms.
Fiedler.
Ms.
Fiedler writes lyrics like a brash punk poet but delivers them like a shy dance vixen.
Though the vocals were so quiet that they were unintelligible on Thursday, on Laika's album, "Silver Apples of the Moon" (Too Pure), they are the fulcrum that lifts the music out of the pellucid waters of rhythm and into a dense psychological jungle.
"Can I remember my judo?" she sings in her fear-of-the-streets fantasy, "44 Robbers." "I've got my freedom, I've got my pride, all means nothing with these men outside."


Casting Jane Austen
To the Editor:
Bethel M. Steiner (letter, Sept. 1) is incorrect -- Emma Thompson plays Elinor Dashwood in the upcoming "Sense and Sensibility," not her younger sister Marianne, and Hugh Grant plays Elinor's suitor, Edward Ferrars, not Marianne's suitor, John Willoughby.


Men Should Offer Better Matches
Just as Gabriela Sabatini and Conchita Martinez were the sole remaining obstacles to a dream final between Steffi Graf and Monica Seles, so too do Boris Becker and Jim Courier provide the last line of resistance to a championship match-up between Nos. 1 and 2.
But Becker and Courier should provide more of a challenge for Andre Agassi and Pete Sampras today than Sabatini and Martinez provided Graf and Seles in their United States Open semifinal matches yesterday.


Forum on Shrinking Government
Those with ideas on how to shrink government can put their proverbial two cents in today when the House Committee on Government Reform and Oversight holds a public hearing on the issue at Montclair State University.
Prominent Republicans like Governor Whitman and James W. Treffinger, the Essex County Executive, are scheduled to testify, but Democrats and members of the public are also invited to comment.
The hearing starts at 10 A.M. and ends at 2 P.M.


Stock Market Has Big Gains, Lifting the Dow Above 4,700
The stock market staged an impressive performance yesterday, with the Dow Jones industrial average breaking through 4,700 for the first time since Aug. 3.
The other major market indexes also surged as banking and auto stocks rose and technology issues continued to climb.
And the Dow's breakthrough past 4,700 came on the same day that another psychologically important barrier was broken: the dollar surpassed 100 Japanese yen during currency market trading for the first time since January.  [ Page 32. ]


When the Stars of Pop Plug Away
When Madonna appears twice in the same costume and the wittiest acceptance speech comes from Hootie and the Blowfish, it's clearly an off year for the MTV Video Music Awards, which were telecast on Thursday night from Radio City Music Hall.
The annual event carries the format of the Academy Awards into MTV's private universe, where it becomes a simultaneous parody and power grab.
The awards recognize only those video clips shown on MTV -- that is, only a part of a year's crop of music videos -- while the event itself is an extravaganza of marketing.
Consider its opening: a full 15 minutes of Michael Jackson, dancing and mostly lip-synching through snippets of his hits, without a band.
Mr.
Jackson has a flagging album, "HIStory," to push, but he's still enough of an apparition to stop viewers from changing the channel.
His segment looked like a late-night commercial for a compilation album.
He wore a white shirt and black trousers like those in his "Black or White" video clip, and he put on a hat and moonwalked twice in case fans had forgotten "Billie Jean."


No Assault Weapons Registered
Not a single assault weapon has been registered in Union County despite a three-year-old law requiring owners of such weapons to register 47 types of automatic and semiautomatic weapons with the authorities, the office of the County Prosecutor, Andrew K. Ruotolo Jr. announced yesterday.
No reason was given for the lack of compliance.
Sgt.
Daniel Cosgrove, a spokesman for the State Police, said that 987 assault weapons had been registered statewide as of Jan. 9.
JOE SHARKEY


New Senate Push on Welfare Revives Tensions in Both Parties
After months of delay, Republican leaders in the Senate say they are finally lurching toward a vote on a comprehensive restructuring of 60 years of antipoverty policy.
But dissension still simmers in the ranks of both parties and the fate of the legislation remains unclear.
After weeks of internal negotiations, Republican leaders said today that they had made substantial progress in easing the concerns of their moderates and conservatives and hope for a vote next week on final passage of their bill.
"I don't see why we can't complete action on this bill by Wednesday, or early Thursday," said Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the majority leader.


Paterno Is Not Happy, So Opponent, Beware
These were not the words Spike Dykes, football coach at Texas Tech, needed to hear before a trip to Penn State.
"We are not very good," Joe Paterno said earlier this week.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about reaction in Oregon to Senator Bob Packwood's decision to resign misstated the party of the state's Governor in some editions.
The Governor, John Kitzhaber, is a Democrat.


Grand Jury Urges Punishment For Officers in Times Sq. Case
A Manhattan grand jury has recommended that three New York City police officers be disciplined or dismissed after they were accused of instigating an attack on another officer.
But it refused to indict them on criminal charges.
The case arose from an incident on Feb. 22 near the Port Authority Bus Terminal at 42d Steet and Eighth Avenue.
An off-duty police officer assigned to the 111th Precinct in Queens and a friend were leaving a Times Square peep show about 3:30 A.M. when they were assaulted by two ex-convicts.


China Resources reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Father, Son and West Orange, N.J.; Mayor Backs Besieged Police Chief -- a Relative, by the Way
It is one of those entangled, incestuous political disputes that can turn small-town life absolutely miserable for everyone they touch.
The man responsible for upholding the law in this suburb of 39,000 people, the police chief, Robert Spina, is involved in a messy divorce and was found by a judge in July to have physically abused his wife.
The judge was so concerned that she ordered the police chief to surrender his gun collection.


The Outline of a Bosnia Peace
Yesterday's agreement to create a separate state for Bosnian Serbs on Bosnian territory is an important step toward realizing the longstanding international partition plan for Bosnian peace.
There will be more diplomacy and, probably, more fighting before there is agreement on the precise boundaries of the new Serbian state.
But thanks to the recent negotiating efforts of Assistant Secretary of State Richard Holbrooke, an end to the slaughter of helpless civilians in besieged cities may now be in sight.
The partition plan, imperfect as it is, offers the best hope for ending a war that has done grievous damage to Bosnia's people.
It would be better if Bosnia were untouched and intact, but three years of vicious fighting have eliminated that possibility, and the Bosnians themselves are resigned to accepting a good deal less.


Citing Mob, Mayor May Shut Street Festival in Little Italy
Responding to a Federal grand jury's charge that the city's largest and best-known street fair is controlled by the Mafia, the Giuliani administration said last night that the Feast of San Gennaro will be canceled this year unless organizers allow an outside monitor to oversee the festival's finances.
At stake is an annual city ritual that brings millions of people to Little Italy's narrow Mulberry Street, where the smoky air smacks of grilled sausage, vendors lure passers-by with games of chance, and the faithful demonstrate their devotion by pinning dollars to a silver-and-bronze bust of the festival's namesake.


Israel and P.L.O. Deadlocked on How to Protect Settlers
Israeli and Palestinian negotiators acknowledged today that full agreement on Arab self-rule in the West Bank was still stymied on the emotive issue of Hebron and its 400 militant Jewish settlers, making it increasingly dubious that an accord could be reached before a string of Jewish holy days starting on Sept. 25.
Foreign Minister Shimon Peres and the leader of the Palestine Liberation Organization, Yasir Arafat, ended another two days of talks in Taba, the Egyptian resort near the southern tip of Israel, with progress on some issues but none on Hebron.


Forest City Enterprises Inc.(FCEA,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 31


A Second Arrest In a Park Shooting
A second man was arrested yesterday and charged in the killing of two people in July at a crowded basketball tournament in a Queens park, the police said.
Troy Singleton, 27, of Jamaica, Queens, was arrested and charged with two counts of second-degree murder after he was identified in a line-up at the 113th Precinct, said Det.
Mark Patterson, a police spokesman.


Davis Water &amp; Waste Industries Inc.(DWW,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 31


Doctor Is Shot During Dispute Aboard a Bus
A doctor from Bellevue Hospital Center who was riding a crowded city bus up First Avenue was shot and critically wounded last night after a dispute with another passenger, the police said.
The gunman was arrested several blocks away with a self-inflicted gunshot wound to the groin, according to Officer Robert Samuel.


Ailing Olivetti Is Expected to Seek Fresh Funds in the Market
Trading in shares of Olivetti S.p.A., Italy's hugely unprofitable computer giant, were suspended on the Milan stock exchange today in anticipation of a company announcement.
Analysts said Olivetti was expected to say that it would seek as much as $1.25 billion through an offer of stock and convertible warrants.


Governor Wants to Cut California Taxes by 15%
Facing politically damaging charges by other Republican Presidential hopefuls that he is a "big taxer," Gov.
Pete Wilson called today for a 15 percent cut in California taxes, with the issue to be decided by a ballot referendum.
"It's time to take our cause to the people," said the Governor, who in his first term supported a major tax increase but since then has been urging the State Legislature, without success, to make tax cuts.


Laurentian Bank reports earnings for 3rd qtr to Jul 31


Civil Court Choices
There are 15 New York City Civil Court seats up for election in November.
Yet only five are being contested in next week's Democratic primary -- which means that many of the others will owe their jobs to party bosses who largely control who gets on the ballot.
Unlike some elections in the past, this year's group of primary candidates is low on hacks.
But that does not justify a judge-picking system that markets candidates for the bench as though they were aldermen.
New York badly needs a system of merit selection run by accredited professional panels.
Meanwhile, these are our recommendations in the five contests.


Fleeing Bicyclist in Queens Is Tied to 7 Rape Attacks
After the rapes began seven weeks ago in Rosedale, Queens, neighborhood women were afraid to go to sleep at night.
Local hardware stores were running out of safety locks.
Yesterday, the police say, they believe they stopped the nights of terror.
Called the Night Crawler by the authorities, an 18-year-old suspect was arrested just before dawn yesterday on a bicycle the police said he used for his escapes.


LTX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jul 31


In Tense Hotel Standoff, Refrigerator Is the Only Victim
It was the stuff of high drama.
A guest complaining about his bill at an upscale Times Square hotel became threatening.
As the police tried to enter his room, he fired a shot, hitting the mini-refrigerator.
The police retreated and returned with scores of reinforcements, some in helmets and bulletproof vests.
Such was the scene at the Marriott Marquis Hotel yesterday, according to the police on the premises.


Seles and Graf Will Keep Their Date With Destiny
It is a dream finale that has emerged from a nightmare.
Steffi Graf and Monica Seles, co-ranked No. 1 and linked by one of the most scandalous acts ever to blacken the face of a sport, swept past their semifinal opponents yesterday and earned the right to a proper showdown in the United States Open final.
The protagonists pronounced themselves ready, able and eager to put the past behind them and resume a rivalry that was postponed by the now-infamous attack on Seles during a match in Hamburg, Germany.


INSIDE
Talks on Turner Deal Stall
Negotiations over a Time Warner buyout of Turner Broadcasting have been stalled by the changing demands of a big Turner shareholder, people close to the talks say.
Page 33.
Mideast Talks Stymied
Israeli and P.L.O. negotiators acknowledged that full agreement on Arab self-rule in the West Bank was still stymied over Jewish settlers in the city of Hebron.
Page 3.
Seles and Graf Win at Open
Monica Seles and Steffi Graf reached today's final, where a blind New Jersey woman who uses sound to envision points will be among the spectators.
Articles, page 27.


CHRONICLE
For more than a decade, BRUCE ROBERTS was content to write songs for others, among them Aretha Franklin, Whitney Houston and Dolly Parton.
But he wanted to sing his own songs.
So, his first solo album, "Intimacy," will be released by Atlantic on Sept. 19, complete with backup from his friends, including ELTON JOHN, K. D. LANG and LUTHER VANDROSS.
"The whole record is about intimacy," Mr.
Roberts said in a telephone interview.
"It is about falling in and out of love."


Talks to Acquire Turner Skid Into a Barrier: John Malone
Negotiations over Time Warner Inc.'s takeover bid for the Turner Broadcasting System have stalled, people close to the talks said yesterday, and several were increasingly doubtful that John C. Malone, who controls one of Turner's biggest shareholders, would clear the way for the proposed $8 billion deal.
Those people said that both Time Warner and Turner were ready to complete the deal, but that Mr.
Malone, a notoriously tough negotiator, kept changing the terms.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL REPORT
KEY GAMES OF TOP TEAMS Florida State (1-0) at Clemson (1-0) Florida State is the best team in the nation, although Coach Bobby Bowden professes to worry about a defense that has only three seniors among its top 22 players.
He did not dwell over his offense, which piled up 797 yards and 35 first downs in last Saturday's 70-26 battering of Duke.


De La Hoya Defends W.B.O. Title Tonight
OSCAR DE LA HOYA will defend his World Boxing Organization lightweight title against GENARO HERNANDEZ tonight in Las Vegas, Nev.
But he is looking toward a possible megafight with JULIO CESAR CHAVEZ.
"Hopefully, DON KING and BOB ARUM can come to an agreement," De La Hoya said of the two promoters. (AP)


CALIFORNIA COURT OVERTURNS RULING IN SIMPSON TRIAL
In an extraordinary rebuke, a state appeals court today rejected the instructions about Mark Fuhrman that Judge Lance A. Ito proposed to read to jurors in the O. J. Simpson case.
The ruling forced Judge Ito to hastily abandon plans to tell the panel about Mr.
Fuhrman's unavailability as a witness and what its members could infer from that.
Though the judge's instructions did not mention Mr.
Fuhrman's decision to invoke the Fifth Amendment's protection, the appeals court apparently concluded that acknowledging his absence, then encouraging jurors to look harshly on him for it, penalized Mr.
Fuhrman for asserting his constitutional right against self-incrimination.


Packwood to Leave in 3 Weeks As Dole Fails to Buy More Time
Senator Bob Dole tried today to win a three-month reprieve for Senator Bob Packwood, who resigned in disgrace on Thursday, but Mr.
Dole was rebuffed and had to settle for three weeks instead.
After negotiations with Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the Democratic leader, and under pressure from his fellow Republicans, Mr.
Dole agreed that Mr.
Packwood, Republican from Oregon, would leave by the end of the month.
Meanwhile, he will be allowed to vote but not to speak officially or manage bills.


Don't Call City Hall, Call the M.T.A.
Hundreds of angry straphangers got the voice mail equivalent of a passed buck yesterday when they called Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's office to complain about the proposed subway fare rise.
Yesterday morning, the Straphangers Campaign, a transit advocacy group, distributed 30,000 leaflets urging riders to call the offices of the Mayor and the Governor to protest the proposed increase, under which fares would rise 25 cents to $1.50.
Calls began flooding into the Mayor's office of operations, whose number was listed on the flyer.


Exploring Male Bonding, On the Stage and in Life
Terry Creach and Stephen Koester have been exploring the terrain of male bonding for over a decade in dances that have ranged from dramatic narrative to pure movement.
On Wednesday night, they were joined by other male choreographers and dancers at the Ohio Theater (66 Wooster Street, SoHo), where they will dance through tomorrow.
The emphasis was on meditative movement with the slightly wayward quality of improvisation.
Dancing to muted industrial and traffic sounds and gentle piano phrases, Mr.
Koester and Sean Curran built from simple motion and gestures to harder-edged, more complex encounters in "Red Sphinx Meditates."


North West Co. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Losing Count of the Compromises in Orange County
The good news is that Orange County, after long and arduous negotiations, has arrived at a plan for finally resolving the nation's largest municipal bankruptcy.
The new plan is long term and complex, but through a series of tradeoffs it would bandage the financial wound with only modest additional pain -- steep cuts in local bus service and the loss of hundreds more county jobs, but little impact on the schools.
But there is bad news, too.
This is about the fourth or fifth such plan -- it is difficult to keep track.
And like the others it will require something that has proved devilishly elusive: the political unity to push the plan over the final hurdle in the fractious California State Legislature.


I.R.A., Not Britain, Holds Up Peace Talks
To the Editor:
Re "Next Step in Ireland" (editorial, Sept. 5):


The Blues, Polyglot And Pure
When Poppa Chubby came out to finish the solo performances of the Epic Records show at S.O.B's on Wednesday, as part of the CMJ Music Marathon, he arrived as the night's authenticist.
He was a blues and rock guitar player with no pretensions to irony, or discursiveness, with no distance from what appeared to be his goal, which was to be a bar band musician, a guitar note-slinger.
He did it passably well.
But the two singers and guitarists he followed, Keb' Mo' and G. Love, were considerably more complicated, acoustic blues guitarists whose relationship to the blues was veiled and circumspect.
Since blues culture has just about vanished, those aspiring to its secrets don't have much access to cultural authenticity, just Robert Johnson box sets.
Jokes, reverie and irony, all a critical and esthetic distance from the source, have taken the place of emulation.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
4.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.69
5.74
4.68
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.34
5.34
4.55
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.33
5.33
4.93
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.21
6.22
7.42
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.57
6.60
7.70
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.55
7.55
8.56
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.03
6.03
6.46
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Negative Findings in Bank Merger Survey
A vast majority of 350 New Yorkers surveyed about the proposed merger of the Chemical Banking Corporation and the Chase Manhattan Corporation predicted the result would be worse service, higher fees and negative effects on lower-income neighborhoods.
Few saw any benefits from the merger.
The survey was sponsored by the Greater New York Savings Bank, which like many other New York area banks hopes to profit from the dislocations in the merger.


Oshawa Group reports earnings for 2d qtr to Aug 12


3 ENEMIES AGREE TO SERBIAN STATE AS PART OF BOSNIA
The rivals who have warred for nearly four years over the remains of Yugoslavia took a first step toward peace negotiations today, agreeing that a Serbian republic will be created within embattled Bosnia.
The Bosnian Government, for the first time since the war began in 1992, agreed to recognize an autonomous Serbian entity, although the question of its degree of independence was carefully avoided.


Agency Plan Seems Headed Back to Voters
New York City's top three elected officials said yesterday that voters may well have to decide whether to create an independent budget monitor for the city, a plan that the public approved in the 1989 City Charter referendum but that officials have persistently refused to implement.
Earlier this week, the city lost its fifth consecutive court decision on the subject.
A State Supreme Court justice told the city to quit stalling and create the Independent Budget Office, which is explicitly mandated in Chapter 11 of the City Charter to provide elected officials and community boards with independent assessments of the city budget.
Though Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that the city will probably appeal the ruling again, he said that it may be time to end the legal proceedings and put the measure before the voters in a referendum.


POLITICIANS WOO CHRISTIAN GROUP
The political equivalent of apple-polishing was so intense at the opening of the Christian Coalition's annual convention here today that Senator Bob Dole did not even try to hide his motives.
"I read in this morning's papers about how all these candidates were coming down here to court all of you," Mr.
Dole, the leading Republican Presidential contender, told a boisterous audience of more than 4,000.
"Well, maybe we are. What's wrong with that?"


French Troops Impose Peace in Riot-Torn Tahiti
Hundreds of French riot police and soldiers were deployed today across Papeete, the capital of French Polynesia, after anti-French riots gutted the international airport and dozens of shops and Government offices.
Although demonstrators lingered near the blackened terminal building, there was relative calm at the airport and in the business district.


Diaries' Sex Attracts Agents
How does a Senator in the 1990's spend his first day after resigning from the Senate?
In Bob Packwood's case, he took calls from book agents and publishers who were intrigued by what they read in the newspapers of his incriminating diaries.
What Senator Packwood called the high drama in his diary entries about major events and the comings and goings of important figures meant little to the agents.


Officials May Evacuate Storm-Wracked Island
Thousands of Americans stranded on the Caribbean island of St.
Martin, which was wrecked by this week's hurricane, could be evacuated this weekend, officials said today.
Between 3,000 and 5,000 Americans are thought to be stranded on the island, where the storm destroyed one airport and damaged the other, a State Department official said.
But if commercial flights resume within the next day or so, as some airlines hope, an evacuation would not be needed, he said.


Ricardo Sanchez, 54, Poet Who Voiced Chicano Anger, Dies
Ricardo Sanchez, a high school dropout and ex-convict whose raging cries for cultural justice gave poetic voice to the Chicano protest movement of the 1970's, died on Sunday at a hospital in El Paso.
He was 54.
Until a diagnosis of terminal stomach cancer forced him to take medical leave last spring, he was a tenured professor of creative writing and Chicano studies at Washington State University.


Japan's Rate Cut Provides a Windfall to Bail Out Banks
With today's cut in its official discount rate by half a percentage point, to five-tenths of a percent, the Bank of Japan is providing essentially free money to commercial banks, an action that could help them dig out from under their mountain of bad debts.
"The main point is that it helps the finance system," said Jesper Koll, economist for J. P. Morgan in Tokyo.
Banks can now borrow money at half a percent and invest the money in bonds with yields of 3 percent, bolstering their profits, he said.
Those profits can be used to offset the write-off of bad loans.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Delta Seeks to Expand European Partnerships Delta Air Lines said it had applied to the Department of Transportation for approval and antitrust immunity to expand its partnerships with Austrian Airlines, Sabena and Swissair.
While the existing partnerships allow the carriers to integrate their passengers with each other on some trans-Atlantic flights, antitrust immunity would allow them to integrate flight schedules, marketing plans and sales programs, essentially allowing the partners to function as one carrier while legally remaining separate.
Analysts said other carriers might seek similar partnerships.  [ Page 34. ] Exxon in Plan to Build Pipeline That Skirts Russia  Exxon, Mitsubishi and China's state oil company have announced a partnership to study building a $12 billion, 4,900-mile natural gas pipeline from the former Soviet republic of Turkmenistan, on the Caspian Sea, to the Pacific -- bypassing Russia and avoiding Moscow's political and economic leverage.
It would be the longest natural gas export pipeline in the world.  [ 1. ] Japan Rate Cut May Aid Banks  With the cut in its official discount rate by half a percentage point, to 0.5 percent, the Bank of Japan is providing essentially free money to commercial banks, which could help them dig out from under their mountain of bad debts and lift the economy.
The revamping followed the recent departure of two senior executives and a co-founder and comes at a time when the Sunnyvale, Calif., company's products have encountered a slower-than-expected acceptance by the market.  [ 36. ] Rise in Borrowing Slows  Consumer borrowing rose at a slower pace in July than it did in June, a sign that household finances may be coming under stress.
Consumer credit rose $8.82 billion in July at a 10.9 percent annual rate, after rising a revised $11.15 billion in June at a 13.9 percent annual rate.
The July increase was the 26th consecutive monthly rise in borrowing.  [ 34. ] Trading in Olivetti Halted  Trading in shares of Olivetti was suspended on the Milan stock exchange for a company announcement.
On the Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange in New York, coffee for December delivery fell 2.90 cents, to $1.369 a pound, the lowest in seven and a half weeks.  [ 32. ] Captured Workers Remembered  In December 1941, Morrison Knudsen had 1,100 men on Wake Island in the South Pacific building a naval air base.
But six hours after attacking Pearl Harbor, the Japanese bombed Wake and took over the island after a two-week battle.
In the fall of 1945, only 700 of those men came home.
Next week, about 150 of the survivors from around the nation are to gather in Twin Falls, Idaho, for ceremonies.  [ 6. ]


Schools Say It With Flowers
Hoping to brighten Monday's opening day for city schools newly under state control, volunteers from the Greater Newark Conservancy will plant chrysanthemums today in wooden barrels in front of all 82 of Newark's public schools, said Becky Doggett, an assistant to the state-appointed Superintendent, Dr.
Beverly Hall.
Banners with each school's name and colors will be hung on school entrances.
"It's to give kids, as well as the community, a sense of pride," said Ms.
Doggett.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a brief article yesterday about a Spanish investigation of death-squad activity against suspected Basque terrorists misattributed the finding that there was not enough evidence to investigate Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez in connection with the campaign.
It was made by Government prosecutors, not the Supreme Court.


Sisters, Sisters, There Were Never. . . .
It's almost a rule of thumb in show business that when two sisters perform together there must be at least a joking allusion to sibling rivalry.
So it is that in their first major show together, at Rainbow and Stars (30 Rockefeller Plaza), the cabaret singer Ann Hampton Callaway and her Broadway-oriented sibling, Liz Callaway, amusingly send up the notion that they are brutal competitors.
The songs in "Sibling Revelry," an act so polished it could easily be expanded into an Off Broadway show, are linked by comically catty dialogue as the two compare credits and pretend to upstage each other.
As hackneyed as the dueling divas conceit may be, the Callaway sisters carry it off with an engaging good humor.
And when their strikingly different but equally splendid voices harmonize, "Sibling Revelry" becomes a thrilling display of vocal prowess.


Smoky Blaze Forces 3,000 From Building
An electrical explosion and fire that knocked out power for elevators and an internal alarm system sent a tower of smoke billowing from a basement through a 40-story office building in midtown Manhattan yesterday morning, forcing some 3,000 workers into the controlled chaos of a stairwell evacuation.
At least 45 people were felled by intense smoke and heat and an electrician was seriously burned by flames that erupted in his face shortly after 9 A.M. at 605 Third Avenue, a glass-and-steel building between 39th and 40th Streets that houses publishers, brokers, law offices and scores of other tenants.


Sports of The Times; There Is No 'I' In Team
THE more I watch the cat-and-mouse game between Deion Sanders and Jerry Jones, the more I like tennis, a dramatic departure for someone whose athletic sensibilities were formed by the notion that victory rests on a delicate balance of individual performance, personal sacrifice and collective cooperation.
As professional football becomes more like a carnival, the game of tennis has assumed the sort of hard-core, competitive cutting edge that used to be pro football's calling card.


Dispute Over Panel Adds To Newark School Strife
The strife surrounding the state takeover of the Newark schools intensified today when the City Council named two former members of the school board to the 15-member panel appointed to advise the officials who assumed control of the system.
The State Department of Education, which also released a list of the 13 members it appointed, said previously that it did not want any opponents of the takeover connected to the new administration and announced that it would seek to block the move.


Jets' New Receivers: Over the Middle and Going Deep
Rich Kotite officially anointed his starting receiving tandem today, and they still cannot believe it.
Charles Wilson, who was with Tampa Bay until last week, was named to join the rookie Wayne Chrebet, who did not dress for the Jets' first preseason game and only now is figuring out he is here for real.


In a New Attack Against NATO, Yeltsin Talks of a 'Conflagration of War'
Calling for NATO to be transformed from a military into a purely political organization, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia said today that the expansion of NATO "will mean a conflagration of war throughout Europe, for sure."
In an 85-minute news conference in the Kremlin, Mr.
Yeltsin gave fervent expression to his "conviction," as he called it, that NATO's bombing of the Bosnian Serbs was a first sign of how an expanded NATO, under American control, would behave on Russia's borders.


New Vietnam Plaque
To the Editor:
A solution to the problem of "face-saving" in the promised removal of a plaque commemorating a Vietnam War battle that hangs on a wall outside the old United States Embassy in Ho Chi Minh City (news article, Sept. 7):


An Appeal to Conserve Water
Hoping to avoid having to issue emergency restrictions on water use, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman broadcast an urgent plea yesterday to "conserve water any way you can," as the state's major reservoirs languish well below the average level for early September.


Intense Negotiations Over Rockefeller Center Plan
The owners of Rockefeller Center are trying to negotiate a reorganization plan for the property, which has been operating under bankruptcy protection, so that they can retain ownership of the center for five years and then turn over a majority interest to their largest creditor and an investment group led by Sam Zell, the Chicago financier.
Representatives of the Mitsubishi Estate Company, which has an 80 percent stake in the center, have been in intense negotiations with Rockefeller Center Properties Inc., the real estate investment trust, or REIT, that holds the $1.3 billion mortgage on the property and is virtually its only creditor.


Tennis Open Has Lost That Close-Up Feeling
To the Editor:
I am an average, middle-aged tennis player who has attended the United States Open in Queens for two decades.
My favorite part has always been early-round play, when the courts outside of the Stadium and Grandstand Courts are filled with world-class athletes.


After 41 Years, Indians Are Champions Again
Indians 3, Orioles 2
The Cleveland Indians clinched the first American League Central title -- and their first championship of any kind since 1954 -- when they beat the Baltimore Orioles, 3-2, last night at Jacobs Field.
They will be post-season participants for the first time since the 1954 Indians were swept by the New York Giants in the World Series.


In Drought, Landscape Watering Conserves Precious Resource
To the Editor:
Charles Elliott's "It's Not Raining in England, Either" (Op-Ed, Sept. 2) describes a scenario in Britain that is painfully close to what we are experiencing in the New York area.


No Headline
"No one has missed having her on the tour in quite the same way as I have. And no one has had the same kind of feelings about why what happened to her happened. All that ever mattered to me was that she came back to play tennis if that was what she wanted to do." -- STEFFI GRAF, on Monica Seles.  [ 27:2. ]


Port-au-Prince Journal; Haiti Task Force, Battling for Women's Rights
The elegant white building just across the square from the National Palace has long been a center of power here, and that is just fine with the women who have displaced the fearsome soldiers who once swaggered through its halls.
In an act laden with symbolism, President Jean-Bertrand Aristide has turned over the two-story French colonial-style house to the 50 or so women who now serve as the Ministry of Women's Affairs.


Delta Seeks to Expand Its Tie With Three Airlines in Europe
Delta Air Lines said yesterday that it had applied to the Transportation Department for approval and antitrust immunity to expand its partnerships with Austrian Airlines, Sabena and Swissair.
Delta and the three European airlines currently have a combined market share of almost 17 percent on the highly competitive Atlantic routes.
While the existing pact allows the carriers to integrate their passengers with one another on a limited number of trans-Atlantic flights -- a process known as code-sharing -- antitrust immunity would allow them to integrate flight schedules, marketing plans and sales programs.
In short, it would allow the partners to function as one carrier while remaining separate companies.


Devils Face Deadline for Lease Agreement
With a deadline of next Friday for the Devils to sign a 12-year lease to keep playing at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, the team's owner, JOHN McMULLEN, said yesterday that "we're trying to get it done" but "clearly, it's not done yet.
The Devils and the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority must sign by Friday or get a delay from Superior Court Judge PETER CIOLINO in Hackensack, N.J., who suspended a lawsuit filed by the authority to keep the team from moving.


A Career Recalled
The battered Bob Packwood who announced his resignation from the Senate on Thursday bore little resemblance to the strong, independent-minded politician who once took on Presidents from his own party and muscled through legislation.
Article, page 8.


Civilian Prisoners of War Recall Their Ordeals
Once a month, cars parked outside the Sizzler Restaurant here do not carry license plates printed with the standard Idaho slogan, "Famous Potatoes."
Instead, across the familiar Rocky Mountain outline, the special plates are stamped "World War II" and "Prisoner of War."


Tennis Open Has Lost That Close-Up Feeling; Advantage, Queens
To the Editor:
I must take exception to the conclusions drawn in "Queens? It Seems Worlds Away at U.S. Open" (news article, Sept. 3).
While it may be true that "hordes" of visitors do not seek information about attractions in Queens, it does not follow that "Queens seems unable to get a big bang from one of its biggest events."


Shuttle Crew Releases a Satellite


Tenants in Limbo as New York Stops Foreclosing
At the end of each workday, as Jyreain Privette crosses the threshold of her apartment building in Harlem, she wonders if the lobby will be filled with drug dealers who come and go at will because the front door has neither a lock nor an intercom.
She considers riding an elevator to her third-floor apartment, but the elevator often leaves her stranded between floors.
If she chooses the stairway, it will probably smell of urine, and the lights will probably be out.
Her building is one that no one wants.
The landlord is in bankruptcy and for all intents has abandoned it.
And New York City, which over the last two decades has rescued thousands of buildings in similar distress, no longer considers the process worth the expense.


CHRONICLE
Richard Gere, travel photographer Molly Ringwald, New Yorker-to-be Bruce Roberts, recording artist at long last.
RICHARD GERE has been many things: sexy leading man, impromptu spokesman for troubled Asian nations, Buddhist.
Now he is combining those roles in "Tibet: The Pure Realm," an exhibit of photographs he took there.


Mom! Dad! Stop Killing And Play With Me
Imagine Keith Carradine as Will Rogers gone berserk with vengeance and Daryl Hannah as a mermaid hypnotized by Charles Manson, and you'll begin to get a picture of how the normally appealing images of these two attractive actors are turned inside out in "The Tie That Binds."
In this efficient little horror film, which opened yesterday, Mr.
Carradine and Ms.
Hannah play John and Leann Netherwood, homicidal white-trash loonies who will stop at nothing to reclaim their 6-year-old daughter, Janie (Julia Devin).
The little girl, whom the police took from them at the scene of a robbery, has been placed in the home of Russell Clifton (Vincent Spano), a building contractor, and his wife, Dana (Moira Kelly), a professional food photographer.
Even though Janie does disturbing things like slicing the palms of her hands with a bread knife and blaming the tooth fairy, the Cliftons are still determined to adopt the child.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  DETROIT TIGERS -- Traded Juan Samuel, infielder, to the Kansas City Royals for a player to be named.
Claimed Steve Rodriguez, infielder, off waivers from the Boston Red Sox.


METRO DIGEST
LIVING WITHOUT LANDLORD OF LAST RESORT
As Jyreain Privette crosses the threshold of her apartment building in Harlem, she wonders if the lobby will be filled with drug dealers who come and go at will because the front door has neither a lock nor an intercom.
The landlord is in bankruptcy and for all intents has abandoned it.
And New York City, which over the last two decades has rescued thousands of buildings in distress, no longer considers the process worth the expense.  [ Page 1. ] A THREAT TO CANCEL SAN GENNARO FEAST
Responding to a Federal grand jury's charge that the city's best-known street fair is controlled by the Mafia, the Giuliani administration said that the Feast of San Gennaro will be canceled unless organizers allow an outside monitor to oversee the festival's finances.  [ 1. ] NEW YORK CITY  NO INDICTMENT FOR 3 POLICE OFFICERS
A Manhattan grand jury has recommended that three police officers be disciplined or dismissed after they were accused of instigating an attack on another officer.
But it refused to indict them on criminal charges.  [ 25. ] STAND-OFF AT A TIMES SQUARE HOTEL
A guest complaining about his bill at a Times Square hotel became threatening, and as the police tried to enter his room, he fired a shot, hitting a refrigerator.
For five hours, the police tried to talk him into surrendering.  [ 23. ] SPRAY OF BULLETS KILLS 1, INJURES 6
One man was killed and six other people were wounded when up to 30 bullets sprayed a street in East Flatbush, Brooklyn.  [ 23. ] BACK TO VOTERS ON FISCAL MONITOR
The city's top three elected officials said that voters may well have to decide whether to create an independent budget monitor, a plan that the public approved in the 1989 City Charter referendum but that officials have persistently refused to implement.  [ 25. ] SUSPECT IN RAPES IS ARRESTED
An 18-year-old suspect who was charged in seven rapes in Queens was arrested on a bicycle the police said he used for his escapes.  [ 23. ] REGION  PORT AUTHORITY CUTS STILL MORE
A day after it said it would lay off 300 workers, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey announced a new round of staff cuts and acknowledged that it would have to scale back on analyzing trends in the region.  [ 24. ] TEAMSTERS HEAD CHARGED IN FRAUD
A president of a teamsters local and three men linked to the Mafia were charged with conspiring to defraud a Long Island union of more than $1.5 million.  [ 24. ] LINES DRAWN IN SCHOOLS TAKEOVER
The strife surrounding New Jersey's takeover of the Newark schools intensified when the City Council named two former members of the school board to a panel appointed to advise the officials who assumed control of the system.
The State Department of Education announced that it would seek to block the move.  [ 24. ] JERSEY CITY OFFICER INDICTED IN KILLING
A Jersey City police officer accused of beating a man to death in May was indicted on manslaughter charges.
The officer, John Chiusolo, was also charged with falsifying reports and illegal weapons possession in the death of 22-year-old Julio Tarquino.  [ 24. ] About New York by Michael T. Kaufman 23


Math Test Scores Are a Positive Sign
To the Editor:
Re "Shaky 9th-Grade Test Results as Math and Science Toughen" (news article, Aug. 31), on how New York City students in college-level mathematics and science courses fared on statewide standardized tests:


City Opera Gamely Flirts With Danger
In a season's opener touching for its painful honesty, the New York City Opera on Thursday night showed its patrons precisely what it is and what it is not.
No gala celebration here, for how does one create festive beginnings from an opera like "Mathis der Maler"?
Paul Hindemith's historical essay on art and ethics -- earnest, dour, little seen in opera houses and better known for its symphonic representation -- makes an altogether plainer cousin to the glamorous "Otello" that will open the Metropolitan Opera in three weeks' time.
Yet here it was at the New York State Theater, playing before a less than full house and struggling to overcome cut-rate production values and a lot of bad luck.


Neiman Marcus Group Inc.(NMG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jul 29


At Executions, Doctors May Not Certify Death
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 2 news article on carrying out the death penalty in New York State reports that the script a security officer must read to witnesses of an execution includes the statement that "the physician in attendance has pronounced the inmate dead."


Bridge
If you are an 82-year-old director of a bridge club, a first trip to a national championship is likely to be memorable.
And if you reach life master rank with the help of a deal on which you enter the auction at the five-level with a hand totally lacking in high-card points, there will be much to tell when you return home.
All this happened to Bill Becker of Rutland, Vt., who directs the Marble Valley Club in Rutland and went to the Spring Nationals in Phoenix in April.
Playing in a pick-up partnership with Michael Miron of Teaneck, N.J., he held the South cards shown in the diagram.
His partner doubled at the one-level, showing length in the black suits, but Becker held his peace until the opponents climbed to five diamonds.
That contract, as it happens, would have been defeated by a spade lead, but Becker, with the courage of the young in spirit, emerged with five spades and was doubled.


Cott Corp.(COTTF,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Cone Helps Yanks Create Pennant-Race Atmosphere
The hysteria and the hype were supposed to be about Tim Wakefield and his amazing knuckleball, but last night it was David Cone, not the knuckleball, that was amazing.
On a dark and dreary evening at Yankee Stadium, the Yankees ignored the fact that the first-place Red Sox have a supremely superior record and treated their wild-card chase like a pennant race.
Cone, the pitching assassin who was acquired for nights like these, held the Red Sox without a hit for five and two-thirds innings before stalling in the eighth, when an eight-run lead was chipped to four, and the Yankees hobbled to an 8-4 victory.


Mets Get What They Need From Jones
A little less than two hours before the Mets were to take to the turf at Olympic Stadium and open a four-game series with the Expos, Mets Manager Dallas Green offered an unsolicited analysis of tonight's game.
"We need a good game out of Jonesy," Green said, running his fingers through his silver hair.
"Yep. That's what we need."


Move Over, Cal Ripken: Arabesque In Progress
MEANING no disrespect to Cal Ripken Jr., but at this moment of his triumph we would like to call attention to Antonina Tumkovsky, who is back teaching at the School of American Ballet at Lincoln Center.
She turned 90 on Aug. 21.
She had gall bladder surgery over the summer so she did not teach in the summer session, but she's fine now, and she is back at the school teaching serious dancers for her 46th year.
Some days she teaches as many as three classes.
She does not teach sitting down.
She does not teach theory.
She moves, demonstrating steps, stressing grace and movement and bearing, but also setting standards of stamina, endurance and commitment that few mortals other than Mr.
Ripken could reach.


Terrorism Leaves French Undaunted
It was the sixth terrorist action in France in just six weeks, but the car bomb that wounded 14 people outside a Jewish school in Lyons on Thursday was somehow different.
Suddenly, the French are realizing they must once again learn to live in the shadow of terrorism.
Eager to reassure a nervous public, the Government ordered a maximum security alert today, stepping up protection of the country's 75,000 schools, tightening vigilance at borders, airports and railroad stations and placing the Eiffel Tower and the Arc de Triomphe under military guard.


JLG Industries Inc.(JLGI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jul 31


Raymond Koontz, Diebold's Chief, 83
Raymond Koontz, who orchestrated Diebold Inc.'s transformation from a manufacturer of bank vaults and safes into a leading maker of automated teller machines, died on Thursday at his home in Canton, Ohio, a Diebold spokesman said.
He was 83.
A native of North Carolina, Mr.
Koontz left the University of Virginia after two years during the Depression to work as a $25-a-week salesman in a department store.
"That doesn't appear to be much of a salary today," he said in an interview in 1959.
"But in 1931 it was a princely sum, and I was happy to be far above the bread lines."


What Price Peace?
The self-congratulation surrounding today's statement of basic principles for peace in Bosnia obscures the fact that the Serbs will keep most of their territorial gains won during 41 months of war and will get what amounts to a separate state inside Bosnia.
But today's 12-paragraph agreement may provide the basis for an eventual peace settlement.
It would give back to the Bosnians some of the territory they lost in the war and, not incidentally, be easier for NATO troops (including Americans) to enforce.


Cowboys Move to Front In the Race for Sanders
Deion Sanders, the highly sought free-agent cornerback, had everyone in a holding pattern last night as he and his agent mulled offers from Dallas, San Francisco and Denver.
The Cowboys are said to be the front-runners in the Sanders sweepstakes, but the Dallas owner, Jerry Jones, wasn't quite sure his latest offer would clinch the deal.


Ethics Panel Queries Gramm Over Packwood Diary Entry
Prompted by an entry in Senator Bob Packwood's diaries, the Senate Ethics Committee is examining whether Senator Phil Gramm illegally diverted $100,000 to Mr.
Packwood's 1992 re-election campaign.
The committee asked Mr.
Gramm late Thursday for an explanation for the entry, which describes a meeting between the two men and concludes that they may have been skirting a law that limits the amount of general campaign money that a political party spends on a particular candidate's race.


Employees Are Out of the Game
Three casino employees charged with participating in a loansharking ring that officials said took advantage of desperate gamblers have had their licenses suspended pending the outcome of a criminal case.
Named in the decision by the Casino Control Commission were Jung Suck Choi, a marketing executive at the Sands casino; Janet Hwang Sigtermans, an executive host at Merv Griffin's Resorts, and Seung Kim, a host at the Grand.
They were among 11 people charged in a loan shark racket directed primarily to customers of Korean ancestry who paid interest of 20 percent a week -- at which rate a $2,500 loan would balloon to $32 million if unpaid for a year.


Police Officer Is Indicted In a Death In Jersey City
A Jersey City police officer accused of beating a man to death in May was indicted today on manslaughter charges.
The officer, John Chiusolo, was also charged with falsifying reports and illegal weapons possession in the death of 22-year-old Julio Tarquino.
Mr.
Tarquino died after an encounter with Mr.
Chiusolo, who was off duty, at a Jersey City gasoline station on May 7.


Public Defender Raises Rate
For criminal defendants too poor to hire a private lawyer, the cost to be represented by a public defender is going up next month to a flat $30 an hour.
Since 1972, the state's Office of the Public Defender has been charging $22.50 an hour for courtroom work and $15 an hour for out-of-court work to indigent clients, about 140,000 of whom get bills each year.
During the last fiscal year, the office collected $1 million, some of it through property liens and tax refunds, a spokesman said.


The Thorn in Donnelley's Side; He's a Rival and a Shareholder. And He's Persistent.
John A. Phillips likes to leave the beaten path.
As an undergraduate at Princeton in 1976, he designed an atomic bomb from information in public documents, shocking both the university and the Federal Government.
These days, Mr.
Phillips, whose small Washington-based company supplies campaign software and voter data to politicians, is on a crusade against R. R. Donnelley &amp; Sons, the world's largest commercial printer with $4.89 billion in revenue last year.
He has escalated what started in 1990 as a run-of-the-mill contract dispute between a Donnelley data-marketing unit, Metromail, and his tiny Aristotle Industries into a frontal assault on Donnelley's integrity and management skills.


Drought: Where Help Is Needed, Where Not
GARDENERS in the Northeast will not soon forget the summer of '95 -- no rain, prolonged heat spells and high humidity.
Everything turned droopy, then brittle under the onslaught, even the weeds.
The most obvious evidence of the season's severity is the suburban lawn.
It turned to straw.
But this is the least of the homeowner's worries.
The grass is simply dormant.
Deep rooted, to depths of six feet and more, these plants should easily survive.


The Red Ink Is Drying, and the Schools Are Back. And Struggling.
After Mayor Giuliani cut the Board of Education's projected spending for the new fiscal year by $750 million, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines told the city's 32 community school districts, which operate elementary, intermediate and junior high schools, that they were responsible for a total of $72 million in cuts.
But the amount of each district's sacrifice -- and its options -- shifted all summer as projections of how many teachers would take early retirement changed and state officials refused to shorten the school day for elementary pupils.
Days before school opened last week, many superintendents had to identify other cost-cutting measures, including enlarging classes, cutting after-school programs and sending excess guidance counselors, teachers and assistant principals to the district office or the Board of Education for reassignment.
The Extras Are Gone, Like Aerospace Class
In District 30, no money means no frills.
And that means the end of three special programs -- an aerospace class at an elementary school near La Guardia Airport; a visual and performing arts class at an intermediate school not far from the Kaufman Astoria Studios and a technology class at an junior high school in the heart of industrial Long Island City.


The Phoenix Tries a Classy French Sex Farce
IT ought to be all too clear by now that the Phoenix Theater Company, which is winding up its eighth season, represents a kind of theater that Broadway hardly bothers about, like the classy 19th-century French sex farce by Feydeau, a genre that has never found a popular place in New York, though not for want of illustrious talents trying.
After the failure of such starry commercial productions as "Hotel Paradiso," with Angela Lansbury in her 1957 Broadway debut opposite Bert Lahr, and "Look After Lulu," an adaptation by Noel Coward in 1959 for another debutante, Tammy Grimes, it was apparent that Feydeau was not getting to be a habit with New York theatergoers.
A misbegotten version of "Hotel Paradiso" by Tony Randall's National Actors Theater, "A Little Hotel on the Side," in 1992 may have set back the cause of Feydeau another 40 years.


Pucks About to Drop Again
As National Hockey League players return to training camp this week, the New York area's three teams bring three distinct themes to their practice rinks.
Two of the franchises have been the best in their business in the last two seasons; the third is rebuilding again with yet another coach amid dimming memories of a distant dynasty.
For the Rangers, Stanley Cup champions of 1994, the drama is in the casting, with an influx of a half-dozen talented veterans.
Their arrival will dramatically alter the personality of the team while raising its level of competitiveness.


Nancy M. Juda, Michael Kaufman
Nancy Meredith Juda, a daughter of Susan Woods of New Hampton, N.Y., and the late Steven F. Juda, is to be married today to Michael Bruce Kaufman, a son of Arleen and Gerald Kaufman of Plainview, L.I.
Rabbi Ezra Finkelstein is to officiate at the Woodbury (L.I.) Country Club.
The bride, 28, is a lawyer for the United Mine Workers of America Health and Retirement Funds in Washington.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University and received her law degree from the American University.
Her father was a freelance motion picture photographer in New York.
Her mother is a social worker in New Hampton.


'Mistake by the Lake' Wakes Up, Roaring
Champions at last, after so many years.
No more yukking about the Mistake on the Lake, if ya don't mind, Clevelanders are saying these days.
No more likening Cleveland to the Titanic, only with a better orchestra.
To be sure, the crowds that streamed out of Jacobs Field and onto Ontario and East Ninth Streets on Friday night were cheering and honking their horns for their beloved Tribe, the Cleveland Indians, who in beating the Baltimore Orioles had just clinched the title of their division.
It was the team's first championship since 1954, ending the longest such drought in baseball history.


Abigail G. Coe, Michael Flanagan
Abigail Griffin Coe, a daughter of Nancy Norling Coe of Rumson, N.J., and Bruce Griffin Coe of Lambertville, N.J., was married yesterday to Michael Dale Flanagan, a son of Justine and Dale Flanagan of Chappaqua, N.Y.
The Rev.
George Willis performed the ceremony at St.
George's-by-the-River Episcopal Church in Rumson.
The couple graduated from St. Lawrence University.


Conserve Water and Keep Weeding
Practice good water conservation in the garden, and pay most attention to precious shrubs and trees.
Follow water restrictions, if implemented in your neighborhood.
Keep weeding, as these tough plants steal water from less aggressive plants.


Look, Cars! Rare Species Sighted in Laos
The road into this remote Laotian village of thatched huts and wooden shacks cuts through mountains that are home to many of Southeast Asia's tigers and elephants.
This is a region where few people move on wheels, bicycles included, where it is not uncommon to see elephants transporting people or goods, even in the one-street provincial capital.
Luang Namtha Province is one of the poorest in a country classified by the United Nations as one of the world's least developed.
Electricity is available only in the capital, also named Luang Namtha, for two hours a day on good days.


Work: The Sequel
Skeet shooting?
Writing haiku?
Dancing the fandango?
If you have an offbeat way of relaxing after work, send your story to On the Job, Money and Business, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York 10036.
Or E-mail in care of onthejob@nytimes.com.
Include your phone number.
All submissions become the property of The Times and may be republished in any medium.


There She Is, Miss America! (But Where Will You Be?)
For most, the Miss America Scholarship Pageant is among a number of television shows next Saturday night.
In Atlantic City (where the beauty contest was originated largely to fill hotel rooms on the weekend after Labor Day), the Pageant, as it is known locally, means different things to different people.
Here are some voices:
JAMES L. USRY -- Public-school teacher, former Mayor of Atlantic City.
"I've had a knee operation, so I can't say for sure if I can get out. But I'll probably be there. I've gone every year. My wife and I enjoy it, my daughter, Soundra, is on the Pageant board, she'll be there. It's a family thing."


Remembering the Humor And Hoping It's Catching
UPTOWN -- On Sept. 7, amid the carefully orchestrated, corporate hoopla over the MTV Music Video Awards; John F. Kennedy Jr.'s new magazine, George, and "To Wong Foo, Thanks for Everything, Julie Newmar," the Hollywood drag queen movie, the Algonquin Hotel held a quiet reception commemorating the quietly humorous James Thurber.
The hotel was opening its Thurber Suite.


POP MUSIC
Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the months ahead.
As usual, programs change, some events are sold out, and some have not yet scheduled locations or exact opening dates.
Unless indicated, all dates listed are for openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone numbers have a 212 area code.
Addresses for locations in New York City cited more than once appear at the bottom of page 68.
September
PAUL SIMON, ANNIE LENNOX, WYNTON MARSALIS AND PETE TOWNSHEND -- A summit of three mature songwriters and the jazz trumpet virtuoso, in a premium-priced benefit for the Children's Health Fund.
Tonight.
The Paramount.


POSTINGS: Convent, School and Rectory Sold; Sloan-Kettering Buys 3 Properties
The two-story red brick school and three-story convent of St.
Catherine of Siena Church, vacant for about four years, now belong to Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
So does the church's four-story priory, still home to a dozen priests.
The hospital bought the school and the convent, at 410-20 East 69th Street, between York and First Avenues, for about $11.7 million from the New York Archdiocese in July; it bought the priory, at 411 East 68th Street, for about $3.7 million from the Dominican Fathers at the same time.


In Monmouth County, Abandoned Rails Become a Trail
The Henry Hudson Trail opened this summer as Monmouth County's first linear park.
It was once a litter-strewn, overgrown rail corridor abandoned by the Central Railroad Company of New Jersey in 1960.
But five years ago the county bought it and smartened it up into a nine-mile public alley that runs from a hole in the woods in Aberdeen through the salt marshes, small downtowns and private backyards of Keyport, Union Beach, Keansburg and Middletown, stopping at Atlantic Highlands.
Thrilled are the visitors who have flocked to enjoy it on bike, on foot and in wheelchairs.
Not so thrilled are some residents, who never counted on a busy park cutting under their bedroom windows.
The other day, on a jaunt in a toy-sized car along the narrow trail, Lee Homyock, county parks supervisor, was saluted by a dozen giddy cyclists.
He was also assailed by a furious woman who said the path had become a welcome mat for the homeless and a getaway route for thieves.
He told us about the headaches and rewards of turning a dormant rail bed into a bustling playground.
Q. What did the route look like when the county took in over in 1990?
A.
Not much.
There was trestles, but no boards to cross the stream.
The surface was poor; it was all overgrown.
So it was pretty much impassable.
And there was garbage.
It was used as a dump for 20, 30 years -- for everything from your everyday litter to refrigerators, stoves, cars.
Q. Was it still intact?
A.
There were approximately 73 encroachments.
That could be a fence, a shed, a quarter of a condominium, a lumberyard.
It took a long time to straighten out.
People were saying, "Why are you doing this to me?" But we had to say we work for the public.
Q. Is there a problem with crime?
A.
I would not attribute it to the trail.
The area was clear for years.
The whole thing now is that people have someone to complain to, whereas before they didn't.
Discussions like we had back there with that woman were pretty frequent when I first took over because people needed to vent their frustrations after 20 years of people dumping and stealing things.
The first year and a half was a venting process.
We used to get 5 to 10 complaints every day.
Now people are taking it on as if it is "our trail" in our backyard, and when is it going to be done.
Q. What needs to be done?
A.
Right now we have what we call a stone screening surface over parts of it, and we put it down to make it a little harder so the bicyclists can ride on it.
We're looking to have it eventually completely paved.
We have an additional $90,000 left over from a Federal grant that put the bridges in that we can use.
Hopefully, it will be done by next fall.
Q. Is there a big future for recycled rail trails?
A.
I like to see something go from nothing, to something that is a viable means of recreation.
Maybe a time will come where people's values will change back to where they are not using it to rob a house and run away, or dumping all their garbage.
It would really be for the social good of all people, if you could get them away from their television or their Nintendo, and get them in physical shape.
You can count me as one.
I ride my bike up the trail to my parents' for dinner.
I also ride at Sandy Hook.
I actually started off as 200 pounds.
I'm down to 180 now.
CHRISTINA JOHNSON
Information on the Henry Hudson Trail is available from the park system at (908) 842-4000.
For information about other rail trails in New Jersey, write New Jersey Rail-Trails, P.O.
Box 23, Pluckemin, N.J. 07978.


Sept. 3-9; A Dance-Lion
Fie to the cynics.
First, a fundamentalist group claims to spot the word sex in the skies of Disney's "Lion King." Now, scientists say that where there should be brave-hearted African lions defending their home to the death, they instead see visions of Bert Lahr in fuzzy pajamas, circa 1939.
To paraphrase the Cowardly Lion, "The noive of them!"
Reporting last week in the journal Science, researchers from the University of Minnesota said that while studying eight prides of lions in Tanzania, they identified a substantial number of frank poltroons -- animals that refuse to do their share in defending the pride against presumed competitors.
When tested with recorded roars and stuffed lions, gallant members of the pride attacked the mock invaders, while the cowards hung back, seemingly overcome by an urge to lick themselves or get a thorn out of a paw.


CRITIC'S CHOICES


New York Has Long Been a Capital of Psychotherapy. How Have the Options Changed?
IT was always a one-way love affair.
New York City adored Sigmund Freud.
Freud hated New York City.
He was here just once, in 1909, and he took in the usual sights: the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Coney Island, Central Park and Chinatown.
But as he left the States, he wrote to his sister: "I am very glad I am away from it, and even more that I don't have to live there."


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate 1.
Missile Defense:Vote on an amendment to a defense authorization bill for the 1996 fiscal year that calls for the development of a multisite missile defense system.
Approved 85 to 13, Sept. 7. 2.
Defense: Vote on a $265 billion bill to authorize defense spending in the 1996 fiscal year.
Appproved 64 to 34, Sept. 7.
Connecticut Dodd (D) . . .
Y N  Lieberman (D) . . .
Y Y  New Jersey  Bradley (D) . . .
N N  Lautenberg (D) . . .
N N  New York  D'Amato (R) . . .
Y Y  Moynihan (D) . . .
N N  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.
House 1.
Stealth Bombers: Vote on an amendment to a $244 billion defense appropriation bill for the 1996 fiscal year that would eliminate $493 million for components for two more B-2 stealth bombers.
Rejected 213 to 210, Sept. 7.
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . .  Y
2. Gejdenson (D) . . .  Y
3. DeLauro (D) . . .  Y
4. Shays (R) . . .  Y
5. Franks (R) . . .  N
6. Johnson (R) . . .  N  New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . .  Y
2. LoBiondo (R) . . .  Y
3. Saxton (R) . . .  N
4. Smith (R) . . .  N
5. Roukema (R) . . .  Y
6. Pallone (D) . . .  Y
7. Franks (R) . . .  Y
8. Martini (R) . . .  Y
9.
Torricelli (D) . . .
N  10.
Payne (D) . . .
Y  11.
Frelinghuysen (R) . . .
N  12.
Zimmer (R) . . .
Y  13.
Menendez (D) . . .
Y  New York
1. Forbes (R) . . .  N
2. Lazio (R) . . .  Y
3. King (R) . . .  N
4. Frisa (R) . . .  N
5. Ackerman (D) . . .  N
6. Flake (D) . . .  Y
7. Manton (D) . . .  N
8. Nadler (D) . . .  Y
9.
Schumer (D) . . .
Y  10.
Towns (D) . . .
Y  11.
Owens (D) . . .
Y  12.
Velazquez (D) . . .
Y  13.
Molinari (R) . . .
Y  14.
Maloney (D) . . .
A  15.
Rangel (D) . . .
Y  16.
Serrano (D) . . .
Y  17.
Engel (D) . . .
Y  18.
Lowey (D) . . .
Y  19.
Kelly (R) . . .
N  20.
Gilman (R) . . .
N  21.
McNulty (D) . . .Y  22.
Solomon (R) . . .
N  23.
Boehlert (R) . . .
N  24.
McHugh (R) . . .
N  25.
Walsh (R) . . .
N  26.
Hinchey (D) . . .
N  27.
Paxon (R) . . .
N  28.
Slaughter (D) . . .
Y  29.
LaFalce (D) . . .
Y  30.
Quinn (R) . . .
Y  31.
Houghton (R) . . .
Y  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


The Red Ink Is Drying, and the Schools Are Back. And Struggling.
After Mayor Giuliani cut the Board of Education's projected spending for the new fiscal year by $750 million, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines told the city's 32 community school districts, which operate elementary, intermediate and junior high schools, that they were responsible for a total of $72 million in cuts.
But the amount of each district's sacrifice -- and its options -- shifted all summer as projections of how many teachers would take early retirement changed and state officials refused to shorten the school day for elementary pupils.
Days before school opened last week, many superintendents had to identify other cost-cutting measures, including enlarging classes, cutting after-school programs and sending excess guidance counselors, teachers and assistant principals to the district office or the Board of Education for reassignment.
Already Over Capacity, Growing Day by Day
The 27 students in Ellie Chung's second-grade class at Public School 22 in Flushing sat quietly on the second day of school, some writing diaries, others drawing with crayons.


ARCHITECTURE
Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the months ahead.
As usual, programs change, some events are sold out, and some have not yet scheduled locations or exact opening dates.
Unless indicated, all dates listed are for openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone numbers have a 212 area code.
Addresses for locations in New York City cited more than once appear at the bottom of page 68.
EXHIBITIONS  September
"LIGHT CONSTRUCTION" -- Designs by Jean Nouvel, Steven Holl and the Swiss team of Jacques Herzog and Pierre de Meuron are among the more than 30 subjects that illustrate what the curator Terence Riley describes as "an emerging sensibility in contemporary architecture," structures that shed their weight and emphasize transparency and translucency.
Sept. 21-Jan. 2.
Museum of Modern Art.
October
"MONOLITHIC ARCHITECTURE" -- Organized by the Boston-based architects Rodolfo Machado and Rodolphe el-Khoury, this show features drawings, photographs and models of nine recent projects that share the qualities of simplicity and economy of form.
Oct. 1-Feb. 11.
Heinz Architectural Center, Carnegie Museum of Art, Pittsburgh. (412-622-3131)
"HUDSON RIVER PARK" -- Five hundred acres of parkland and water, 13 recreation piers and an esplanade are featured in a new plan for a five-mile stretch of Manhattan's West Side waterfront.
Prepared by Quennell Rothschild/Signe Nielsenn Associates and the Hudson River Conservancy, the plan is based on meetings and workshops with residents.
Oct. 3-Dec. 2.
Sponsored by the Municipal Art Society at the Urban Center.
"BEYOND THE BOX" -- Is New York ready for superstores?
Can they help the city regenerate rusting industrial zones, or will they wreck local economies that are built on small shops and businesses?
These issues will be raised by an exhibition of building designs and neighborhood plans.
Oct. 11-Nov. 17.
Urban Center.
"ARCHITECTS OF THE IMAGE: PHOTOGRAPHY IN THE HEROIC AGE OF CONSTRUCTION" -- The photographer as architect: that's the premise of this show of 75 photographs of buildings under construction.
While the finished buildings may not reveal the dynamic force of their engineering, photographs can capture and preserve the power of a structure going up.
The exhibition includes work by Alfred Stieglitz, Berenice Abbott and Walker Evans.
Oct. 11-Jan. 14.
Canadian Center for Architecture, Montreal. (514-939-7026)
"THE PRAIRIE SCHOOL: DESIGN VISION FOR THE MIDWEST" -- Once you get past the dreary name and the oppressive, reform-school air of wholesome living, the work of the Prairie School offers a rich experience in the making of a distinctly American architectural space: horizontal, open, organic.
Designs by Louis Sullivan and Frank Lloyd Wright are featured.
Oct. 14-Jan. 7.
Art Institute of Chicago. (312-443-3600) November
"THE ARTS OF REFORM AND PERSUASION, 1885-1945" -- This show about the impact of modernity on architecture and design will inaugurate the new Wolfsonian Museum in Miami.
Created by the Wolfson Foundation, publishers of the country's smartest design review, The Journal of Decorative and Propaganda Arts, the museum is housed in a converted warehouse in the Art Deco District.
Opens Nov. 11. (305-531-1001)
"CITY SPECULATIONS" -- The New York City Panorama, built by Robert Moses as a feature attraction at the 1964-65 New York World's Fair, is the point of departure for projects by six architectural teams exploring new or alternative visions of urban planning and design.
Nov. 16-March 10.
Queens Museum of Art, New York City Bldg., Flushing Meadows Corona Park. (718-592-9700)
"WE WILL BE BACK: OKLAHOMA CITY REBUILDS" -- These days, demolished buildings seem to resonate with greater force than many new ones.
In recent seasons, architecture shows have focused on vandalized inner-city buildings and the shelled buildings of Sarajevo.
This exhibition examines the impact of the Oklahoma City bombing on residents and on the city's redevelopment plans.
Nov. 17-March 17.
National Building Museum, Washington. (202-272-2448)
"JEAN NOUVEL" -- The first United States show devoted to this leading French architect will feature a new site-specific project along with videos, models, drawings and photographs of his work.
Nov. 18-Dec. 30.
Storefront for Art and Architecture, 97 Kenmare St., SoHo. (431-5795) December
"ART, DESIGN, AND BARBIE: THE EVOLUTION OF A CULTURAL ICON" -- Zaha Hadid and Robert A. M. Stern are among the 50-plus architects, artists and designers who will contribute interpretations of America's most famous doll.
Barbie dolls, which were introduced 36 years ago and are said to be inspired by the risque German 'Lilli' doll, now outnumber the population of Canada.
Dec. 1-Feb. 10.
Liberty Street Gallery, World Financial Center. (945-0505)
"WILD DESIGN: DESIGN FOR THE WILD" AND "LEBBEUS WOODS: THE SAN FRANCISCO PROJECT" -- The first show is a display of camping equipment and outdoor gear that explores of recent technology's adaptation to the challenge of surviving in nature.
The second, gently related, is a series of drawings that explore the esthetic potentional of architecture designed to work with, rather than against, the seismic activity in the San Francisco Bay area.
Dec. 16-Apr. 16.
San Francisco Museum of Modern Art. (415-357-4000) February
"FRANKLIN D. ISRAEL" -- This show, a survey of work by the 50-year-old Los Angeles architect, promises to include "aroma" as one of the features of a special installation designed by Mr.
Israel for the Museum of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles.
Feb. 4-May 26. (213-626-6222)
"LILY REICH: DESIGNER" -- Lily Reich was the professional collaborator and personal companion of Mies van der Rohe from the mid-1920's until the architect's immigration to the United States in 1938.
Best known for her exhibition designs, Reich has been credited with influencing Mies's sense of color, materials and space.
A small selection of her drawings, all from the Mies van der Rohe Archives, will form the nucleus of this show.
Feb. 7-May 7.
Museum of Modern Art.
BUILDINGS  September
GEHRY COMMUNICATION AND TECHNOLOGY CENTER -- Yesterday, Los Angeles.
Today, the world.
With major projects under way in Spain, South Korea, Germany and the former Czechoslovakia, Frank Gehry is a leading shaper of the global city.
This building, for EMR, a German electric company, includes public exhibition spaces for the display of new energy technologies, along with a control center for regional power distribution.
Opens in Bad Oeynhausen, Germany, on Friday.
October
ARONOFF CENTER FOR ARTS -- If you took away the plazas at Lincoln Center and scrunched all the buildings together, the effect might be something like Cincinnati's new Aronoff Center for Arts, designed by Cesar Pelli &amp; Associates.
It will feature a 2,700-seat auditorium for dance and musical theater, along with smaller halls and galleries.
Oct. 21.
SKIRBALL CULTURAL CENTER -- Designed by Moshe Safdie, this building will sponsor exhibitions, conferences and other programs that explore the American Jewish experience.
Situated in Santa Monica Hills, Calif., the 125,000-square-foot building has been designed to accommodate the challenging terrain.
The center's outdoor amphitheater has been designed as an earth buttress, while the museum wing forms a dam.
Oct. 21.
THE NEUROSCIENCES BUILDING OF THE SCRIPPS INSTITUTE OF OCEANOGRAPHY This building, designed by the New York architects Tod Williams and Billie Tsien, should compensate somewhat for the controversial new addition to the best-known landmark in La Jolla, Calif., Louis Kahn's Salk Institute.
The new Scripps building has been described as "a scientific monastery."  December
SOUTHERN REGIONAL LIBRARY, U.C.L.A.
Books go for heavy ground cover at the Southern Regional Library at U.C.L.A.
A new addition by Frank Israel, in association with Leiden, Frost &amp; Horowitz, the design of the Los Angeles library continues the architect's experiments in integrating architecture with landscape design.
April
BUILDING FOR ART, ARCHITECTURE AND PLANNING, UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI -- The heartland's love affair with the architectural agitator Peter Eisenman continues, with the opening of Mr.
Eisenman's new building for the University of Cincinnati's department of art, architecture and planning.
An auditorium, a library and a gallery are among the features of this sinous pastel reptile of an academic building.


Derailing the Train of Thought
CRACKING UP  The Work of Unconscious Experience.
By Christopher Bollas. 264 pp.
New York: Hill &amp; Wang.
BEING A CHARACTER  Psychoanalysis and Self Experience.
By Christopher Bollas. 294 pp.
New York: Hill &amp; Wang.
Cloth, $30.
Paper, $11.


The Second Sex in the Third World
DOWN a dusty back lane on the ragged edge of the old Pakistani city of Rawalpindi, some women met a few years ago to plan a feminist revolution.
It involved lipsticks and bras -- but not to jettison the former or burn the latter.
On the contrary.
The women hoped to stock cosmetics and lingerie to be sold door to door in conservative Islamic neighborhoods where only the men could go out to shop, and their wives and daughters could not choose even their most intimate attire.
The marketing plan promised two freedoms: some independent income for poor women, and a little choice in life for others.
Fruit Stalls
In Asia, Africa and Latin America, such small initiatives in economic development -- a milk-producing goat for a village woman in Bangladesh, a wooden stall for a fruit grower in South India, farm tools for an African, a sewing machine in Trinidad -- have become hallmarks of a new women's movement that differs markedly in scale, style and substance from the traditional feminism of the industrial West.


Drought: Where Help Is Needed, Where Not
GARDENERS in the Northeast will not soon forget the summer of '95 -- no rain, prolonged heat spells and high humidity.
Everything turned droopy, then brittle under the onslaught, even the weeds.
The most obvious evidence of the season's severity is the suburban lawn.
It turned to straw.
But this is the least of the homeowner's worries.
The grass is simply dormant.
Deep rooted, to depths of six feet and more, these plants should easily survive.


2,131 Reasons Why . . . Ah, Forget It
Are you happy?
I certainly am.
Now we can begin the inexorable process of forgetting about Cal Ripken Jr. as surely as we have forgotten such other splendid ballplayers and record breakers as Roger Maris, Hank Aaron and Pete Rose.
Ripken won't disappear immediately; there will be commercials for big, durable trucks and non-chic wristwatches that take a licking and keep on ticking, for breakfast foods that keep you swinging all day, and for batteries that die harder.


BOOKS IN BRIEF: NONFICTION
AGE AND GUILT BEAT YOUTH, INNOCENCE, AND A BAD HAIRCUT  Twenty-five Years of P. J. O'Rourke.
By P. J. O'Rourke.
Atlantic Monthly, $23.
P.
J.
O'Rourke owes his place in the world of letters to his ability to make fun of politics.
One is tempted to honor his bete noire, Karl Marx, and say he mocks "the immiserated," or buy into his ugly persona and call his targets "wogs," but the secret of his success is his avoidance of both indiscretions.
Mr.
O'Rourke's basic rhetorical ploy is never to deny the existence of suffering or -- more remarkably in such a loud and proud conservative -- economic exploitation.
What gets him over is his self-interested cynicism about the impossibility of mitigating such nuisances.
While little of this hodgepodge of left-wing juvenilia, right-wing propaganda and men's-magazine humor is exactly vintage, it isn't quite swill, either.
From the fictionalized accounts of his career as a hard-drinking hippie to the Benchley-in-the-age-of macho lampoon of fly fishing, Mr.
O'Rourke shows an incorrigible comic gift and an eye for detail that keeps the wild stuff grounded.
And only a stick-in-the-mud could deny a pearl like: "The thing I like about Republicans is that they're no damn good at all. I know, I'm one of them. A Republican just wants to get rich, buy oceanfront property, dump the old wife and get a new blond one who'll listen attentively while the Republican talks about unfunded mandates over the arugula salad." Has Rush Limbaugh ever said it so well?
ROBERT CHRISTGAU


Q AND A
A Narita Layover
Q.
My husband and I will have a five-hour layover at the Narita Airport, serving Tokyo.
Is there an excursion we could take to make some worthwhile use of our time? -- S. E. Carratura, Satellite Beach, Fla.


How the Beat Esthetic Marked Its Time
A LONG TIME AGO, NEW YORK was home to future hipster icons who lived, wrote and painted in cheapo lofts, then congregated after dark in smoky clubs and coffeehouses.
Eventually, those writers and artists scattered and their lofts became uninhabitably expensive, but the works they produced have lasted.
Literary milestones like Jack Kerouac's "On the Road" and Allen Ginsberg's "Howl" have stayed in print, and Willem de Kooning and Robert Rauschenberg are heroic figures in the history of American art.
Some of this can be attributed to the amber of nostalgia in which the passions of youth are preserved.
But the overarching significance of the Beat Generation is certainly more complicated than this explanation, a fact that will be confirmed starting Nov. 9 when the exhibition "Beat Culture and the New America: 1950-65" opens at the Whitney Museum of American Art.


Philharmonia Virtuosi in Peekskill
MUCH of the musical activity in Westchester takes place in the middle and southern sections of the county, but there is a rich vein of listening pleasure to be tapped in the north as well.
The Philharmonia Virtuosi, for instance, which tends to center its activities on Purchase College, also presents a four-concert series at the Paramount Center for the Arts in Peekskill; the 8 P.M.
Saturday recital there, in fact, anticipates by almost a month the Philharmonia Virtuosi down-county season opener.
The program has a novel literary connection, because all of the pieces, by Locatelli, Pergolesi and other 18th-century composers, are specifically mentioned in the Royal Navy books of Patrick O'Brian.
The music director, Richard Kapp, recently conducted an entire CD of these and other works referred to in the O'Brian novels, "allowing fans to read while listening to the characters' favorite music." Saturday's performances are by the violinists Mela and Alexander Tenenbaum, the cellist Dorothy Lawson and Mr.
Kapp, on this occasion on harpsichord.


Long After '65, Still Fighting to Overcome
THERE were two Tom Levins on that day, maybe more; I could feel that.
The room was low-ceilinged and old-fashioned.
If you opened the door of this house that was built by a sailor two centuries ago, you were barely three yards away from the modern-day traffic of Greenport.


Poetry for Children
To the Editor:
I was amazed to discover in Sean Kelly's review (Children's Books, Aug. 13) that because the best way to introduce children to poetry is by reading it aloud and we therefore look for poetry that can be read aloud well, "all 'poetry for children' falls into the category of light verse." Does he mean to say that any poetry that can be read aloud effectively is light verse?
Has he never heard "Paradise Lost," Milton's little trifle, read aloud?


The Curse of Hyde Park
BROTHERS NO MORE  By William F. Buckley Jr. 294 pp. New York: Doubleday. $23.95.


Love's Bodies
WHERE LOVE GOES  By Joyce Maynard. 338 pp.
New York: Crown Publishers. $23.
HOME FIRES  By Luanne Rice. 312 pp.
New York: Bantam Books. $21.95.


Pamela Bloch, M. A. Mendelson
Pamela Anne Bloch, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry F. Bloch of New York, is to be married today to Michael Aaron Mendelson, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Sander Mendelson of Bethesda, Md.
Rabbi Raphael Arzt is to officiate at the bride's parents' summer house in Shandaken, N.Y.
The couple received master's degrees in natural resource policy from the University of Michigan.


THE MAN INSIDE BILL CLINTON'S FOREIGN POLICY
In "The Man Inside Bill Clinton's Foreign Policy" (Aug. 20), Jason DeParle ought to have mentioned the Clinton initiative that best illustrates Anthony Lake's supposed struggle as national security adviser to reconcile morality and Realpolitik -- President Clinton's decision to grant Gerry Adams of Sinn Fein a visa and access to the American public.
That opening has yielded a cease-fire, an Adams visit to the White House and, most precious of all, the fulfillment of a Clinton campaign pledge to Irish-American voters, many of them socially conservative Reagan Democrats.


Syracuse Encounters Other Side Of Upset
East Carolina and Syracuse played what amounted to two football games today.
Syracuse won the first one, 21-0, with a stunning offensive explosion in the first 21 minutes.
Then East Carolina, never blinking, settled down and passed, scrambled and clawed its way to a 27-24 victory, and that one counted.
Syracuse had climbed to No. 22 in the Associated Press poll this week after an opening-game upset of North Carolina, but quarterback Donovan McNabb, a redshirt freshman, was still learning.
East Carolina had lost its opener to Tennessee, ranked eighth in the nation, but it had a quarterback in Marcus Crandell who could make things happen.
He did.
He threw four touchdown passes and won the game.


Beth Ann Carine, Steven G. Metro
Beth Ann Carine, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur G. Carine Jr. of Cliffside Park, N.J., was married yesterday evening to Steven Greenwood Metro, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard A. Metro of Florham Park, N.J.
The Rev.
William Bergen performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York.
The bride, 26, and the bridegroom, 27, work at Lehman Brothers in New York, she as an assistant vice president of human resources and he as a sales assistant in fixed-income derivatives.
The bride graduated from Rosemont College.
The bridegroom graduated from Colgate University.


TRAVELOGUE: What We Did on Our Summer Vacation
Orlando is the No. 1 destination.
Nevada is the most visitor-dependent state (39 percent of all workers are involved in tourism).
California takes in the most tourist dollars; Rhode Island the least.
The number of sightseers at national parks has grown by 50 percent since 1980.


Sept. 3-9: Storm Warning; A Hurricane Blows Away The Charms of Paradise
Part of what makes the Caribbean islands so idyllic is the simplicity of life there.
But last week, that element of the charm proved a great vulnerability.
Hurricane Luis blew through a chain of resort islands like the legendary wolf through a straw house.
The tin-roofed shacks, sailing vessels and shallow-rooted palms proved no match for 130 mile-an-hour winds.


Fidelity Tinkers With Charity Fund
LAST year was disappointing for investors, and the Charitable Gift Fund from Fidelity Investments did not escape the fallout.
The fund, which invests in Fidelity mutual funds, is an alternative to establishing a private foundation.
Its investments in the equity-income and interest-income categories fell behind the mutual fund averages for their categories, while the portfolio's growth investments came out only slightly ahead.
Robert A. Beckwitt, who runs Fidelity Asset Manager and is a member of the gift fund's investment review committee, suggested some changes when he described performance to the fund trustees last winter.


ARTS &amp; ARTIFACTS
Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the months ahead.
As usual, programs change, some events are sold out, and some have not yet scheduled locations or exact opening dates.
Unless indicated, all dates listed are for openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone numbers have a 212 area code.
Addresses for locations in New York City cited more than once appear at the bottom of page 68.
September
"ART FROM THE FORGE: TUAREG METALWORK" -- The status of the Tuareg people, nomads of the Sahara, has long been defined by the size and refinement of their metalwork.
This exhibition offers 22 silver, brass and copper objects -- jewelry, boxes and ceremonial armor -- most of them boldly shaped and embossed with scrolls, crosses and stylized flowers.
Through Jan. 2.
National Museum of African Art, Washington. (202-357-1300)


Correction
A short article accompanying a Choice Tables column on Aug. 6 about Quebec misstated the address and telephone number of Chez Temporel.
It is at 25 Rue Couillard, and the number is unlisted.
The address and number published were for a restaurant not mentioned in the article.


Secret Shame
THE COMFORT WOMEN  Japan's Brutal Regime of Enforced Prostitution in the Second World War.
By George Hicks.
Illustrated. 303 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company.


Son Held in Killing
A 30-year-old Brooklyn man with a history of emotional problems stabbed his mother to death early yesterday morning while searching her Flatbush apartment for money, the police and neighbors said.
Residents of the building at 1421 Brooklyn Avenue said they were awakened by screams shortly after 4 A.M. but did not know, at first, where the screams were coming from.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Sarah Thomas; R. T. Maldonado
Sarah Whitall Thomas, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Henry M. Thomas 3d of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Robert Thomas Maldonado, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Tomas Maldonado of Farmingdale, L.I.
The Rev.
P.
Okke Postma officiated at the First Reformed Church.
The Rev.
Francis Keenan, a Roman Catholic priest, participated in the ceremony.
The bride, 27, is an assistant district counsel at the Immigration and Naturalization Service in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from Amherst College and received her law degree from the University of Virginia.
Her father is a pulmonary physician at the Will Rogers Institute and Burke Rehabilitation Hospital in White Plains.
Her mother, Karen P. Thomas, is a risk manager at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx.


Appeals Court Backs Vassar In Scientist's Tenure Dispute
Overturning a lower court ruling that became a rallying point for women in academia, a Federal appeals court in Manhattan has held that Vassar College did not discriminate in denying tenure to an assistant professor of biology who took an eight-year break from the laboratory to care for her family.
A three-judge panel of the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit ruled unanimously on Thursday that the lower court misinterpreted statistics and other evidence that the teacher, Dr.
Cynthia J. Fisher, had presented to show that Vassar had kept married women out of the ranks of its tenured scientists for 30 years.


Schools Learn to Live with Less
Average class sizes will remain the same as last year in District 2, except in grades 1 through 3, which are expected to have an average of 27 pupils.
The payroll stands at about 1,600, reduced in part because 93 employees took early-retirement.
Officials offset $580,000 of the budget shortage by winning new grants.
But like most districts, it is still worse off financially than last year because of a $700,000 cut by the Board of Education and $2.4 million in higher costs for increased enrollment and mandated wage increases.
Superintendent Anthony J. Alvarado said: "In spite of budget cuts, our students will receive quality education, because our principals and teachers are committed to doing more with less." BRUCE LAMBERT


BOOKS IN BRIEF: NONFICTION
CEREALIZING AMERICA  The Unsweetened Story  of American Breakfast Cereal.
By Scott Bruce and Bill Crawford.
Faber &amp; Faber, $24.95.
Can a book called "Cerealizing America" with chapters like "Spoon In Tomorrow" stay crisp till the end?
Other countries have croissants or crumpets; we have Froot Loops -- and we have them because of dyspepsia.
As Scott Bruce, the publisher of Flake, a magazine about cereal nostalgia, and Bill Crawford, a chronicler of popular culture, tell us, in the late 1800's almost everybody was preoccupied by his digestive tract -- and nobody more than John Harvey Kellogg.
The inventor of cornflakes fought the evils of meat and sex in his Battle Creek, Mich., sanitarium, to which flocked thousands, including C. W. Post, whose own cereal, Grape-Nuts, began as a coffee substitute.
Pouring out of these pages are decoder rings, Tony the Tiger, Tom Mix, Freakies and crunchy granola.
Here, too, are end-aisle displays, test markets and accounts of copywriters conceiving immortal lines.
Although the authors quote and declaim freely, there are no footnotes, leaving one to wonder about statements like the observation that in the 1870's "even the Harvard Medical School did not give exams because so few members of its student body could read and write." Like pre-sweetened cereals in splashy packages, "Cerealizing America" isn't as nourishing as it promises to be.
CAROL PEACE ROBINS


Dawn M. Gangi, Jeffrey Schwartz
Drs.
Dawn Marie Gangi and Jeffrey Glenn Schwartz, residents in internal medicine at Yale-New Haven Hospital, were married yesterday at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church in Demarest, N.J.
The Rev.
Hilary Milton performed the ceremony.


Who Will Take Toughest Cases?; Private Care Unlikely For Uninsurable Poor
Raphael Gonzalez of the Dominican Republic was living with relatives and working in a Bronx bodega, Grocery Polanco, 18 months ago when a robber's bullet severed his spinal cord.
Today, Mr.
Gonzalez, who has been quadriplegic and has used a wheelchair since the shooting, calls one of New York City's public long-term-care facilities, Coler Memorial Hospital, his home.
An illegal immigrant, without medical insurance, money or nearby family members capable of taking care of his medical needs, he is likely to live at Coler's sprawling brick complex on Roosevelt Island -- at public expense -- for a very long time.


The Bottom Line: A Balancing Act
Here is how 4 community school districts in Brooklyn plan to achieve some of the savings needed to cope with budget cuts as well as with increases in teacher salaries and student population.
Some districts are cutting the number of teachers, even as the number of students rises.
Others are expected to keep the same number of teachers as last year or get a few more.
But even in those districts, the number of teaching positions relative to student population may drop.
This will be reflected in larger average class sizes.
Class sizes are in flux because enrollment and transfers continue through most of September.
DISTRICT 13  Number of schools 18 elementary, 3 intermediate, 1 junior high Number of students 15,700; more than last year Number of teachers 748 teachers; unchanged.
Number of teachers 1,200; 33 fewer than last year.


New Study Rebuts Theory of a 'Brain Drain'
Reports of a "brain drain" in Connecticut are unfounded, although the state is one of only four with population losses since 1990, said a study released this week.
Because of the weak economy, fewer people are moving into Connecticut while the number leaving the state has held fairly steady since the 1970's, said the report, which was based on Census Bureau and Internal Revenue Service data.


THE NEWS FROM CAMP
I found it interesting that Michael Rubiner chose an all-boys camp as the setting of his Endpaper "The News From Camp" (Aug. 20).
I am a fourth-year journalism and politics student at New York University.
Of my limited exposure to the field thus far, I have found it to be one gigantic men's club.


Habitats: 99th Street and Third Avenue; For a Formerly Homeless Woman, a New Start
BEATRICE JENKINS is as softly spoken as a librarian, a waif of a woman who, when told she is pixielike, nods her closely cropped auburn head and smiles.
She has been told this before.
She walks around the whiter-than-white Formica-countered apartment that as yet has no curtains or posters -- only two glossy colored postcards, one of the Empire State Building and one of the World Trade Center towers, taped to the wide bedroom doors.
She disappears into her bedroom; she is rearranging the toiletries on her brand new blond wood dresser.


Kathleen Gilmore, David Brooks
Kathleen Sara Gilmore, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Clayton Gilmore of Harwichport, Mass., was married yesterday to David Kennedy Brooks, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John K. Brooks of Katonah, N.Y.
The Rev.
John Arens, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at Our Lady of Grace Church in Chatham, Mass.
The couple, both 28, own Turnstile, an art dealership in New York.
The bride graduated from the University of Vermont.
Her father owns Wychmere Associates, management consultants in Harwichport.
Her mother, Helen D. Gilmore, retired as a music teacher at the F. A. Cleveland Elementary School in Norwood, Mass.


A Contest for Senate With Real Potential
Representative Robert G. Torricelli reads a good speech, only he's not reading.
The stately paragraphs, the deliberate pacing and emphatic pauses make him one of the best arguers in the state delegation, and help explain why so many in New Jersey's Democratic leadership are scurrying to make him the man to defend the Senate seat that Bill Bradley now disdains.
So when Mr.
Torricelli announced that he was a candidate on Wednesday -- officially, it was only an announcement about an "exploratory" effort -- he offered an imposing roster of nearly 150 men and women from business, labor, politics and the black arts of fund-raising who have endorsed him.
The announcement also offered a glimpse at what a race between Mr.
Torricelli and the likely Republican nominee, Representative Dick Zimmer, would be like, and that peek should offer some heart to people who think that political debate is dead in New Jersey just because Ivy Leaguers like Mr.
Bradley and former Gov.
Thomas H. Kean won't run.


DIARY
POLITICS  Finance, After Packwood  It's one of the few flattering labels stuck on Bob Packwood lately: "master of detail." He sure is.
Just read, amid the more damning diary entries, the blow-by-blow description of a senatorial hairdo.
But where that mastery will leave the real void, now that he's resigning, is on the Senate Finance Committee, which he heads.
He somehow understands the intricacies of taxes and Medicare -- and, it is said, can explain it in English (quite a trick!).
So while one colleague said, "I don't think any senator is indispensable," others said his departure "complicates things" and leaves a "substantial void" in areas where the Republicans crave big changes.
What now?
Bob Dole is expected to run the committee, from offstage, till yearend.
STALKING CHRYSLER  This Time, Kerkorian's Serious  When Kirk Kerkorian made noises in the spring about buying Chrysler, people stopped listening after a while, and Mr.
Kerkorian seemed to fade into the upholstery.
He didn't.
He was, apparently, scouting around for an ally who'd be taken seriously, and last week he found one, luring Jerome York, former Chrysler finance chief, away from I.B.M.
The markets are taking it very seriously, with Chrysler's stock rising as relentlessly as I.B.M.'s falls.
And Chrysler took it seriously -- doubling, to $2 billion, its stock buyback.
Mr.
York, it is agreed, wants to run Chrysler -- so he probably won't be satisfied with what Chrysler may offer: a board seat.
CUBA  Island of Capitalism  The official line, still: Cuba is an evil Communist empire, a lurking threat to the very barbecues and bowling leagues of democracy.
But each day that image meanders further from reality, as Fidel Castro's once-defiant island looks more and more like a bastion of capitalism -- lacking only American capitalists.
Last week Cuba passed a law allowing foreign investment in anything but defense, health care and education.
To be sure, the door could have been opened wider -- the Government must give its nod case by case, and "anything that doesn't benefit" Cuba's development "will be excluded." Still, some American businesses -- which would love to get a foot in this fast-revolving door -- saw a golden opportunity to rethink our trade ban.
AUTOS  Trucks in Cars' Clothing  They're priced like luxury cars.
They're filled with luxury-car goodies, like CD players, phone outlets and serious leather.
But Jeeps, Explorers and Suburbans drink gas like trucks.
How do they get away with it?
Because they're "light" trucks, ruled by much looser mileage standards.
This is no small matter, for of every 10 new passenger vehicles sold, 4 are light trucks, and this surging popularity has slammed into reverse the nation's solid gains in fuel efficiency.
"Outrageous," said a Sierra Club official.
"Ridiculous," said Automotive News.
Indeed, the Administration might raise mileage standards for trucks -- fiercely opposed by auto makers, of course, and the regulation-busting House.
JAPAN  Few Jobless, but Few Jobs  In the United States, by the strange math of economists, 6 percent unemployment is often considered "full employment." So Japan, with an official jobless rate of 3.2 percent, would seem a job-seeker's paradise.
Far from it.
On Monday, as most Americans basked in a Labor Day untainted by labor, more than 12,000 Japanese college students flocked from across the nation to a Tokyo stadium for what was essentially a huge job fair.
With Japan stuck in recession, top companies were not exactly clamoring for their talents.
Top seniors competed for jobs as clerks and construction workers, others competed for any job at all -- and women were left with the scraps.
It was the dark side of lifetime employment -- don't hire in the first place.
CHARITIES  Rewarded Before Heaven  The men and women who head the nation's nonprofit organizations naturally do so out of dedication to good works, but starvation wages are not usually part of the deal.
Even after the president of United Way was sent packing after he lived it up on the charity's money -- a scandal that snapped the public to attention -- salaries are rising steadily.
And a survey out last week found that the top salaries, by far, went to the heads of big city hospitals: Mount Sinai, $900,000; Sloan-Kettering, nearly $800,000.
The Salvation Army's president, though, made just $58,000, while the president of Philip Morris made nearly $2 million.
And Newt Gingrich? $133,600 (without royalties).
EDUCATION  Mr.
Moon Goes to School  Is a university just another business?
After all, if it can't pay its bills, it'll be as bankrupt as a failed dry cleaner.
So can anyone with ready cash simply "buy" this "business" and do with it what he will?
That was the extra-credit question last week as the University of Bridgeport bestowed an honorary degree on the Rev.
Sun Myung Moon, who saved the school from bankruptcy by giving it $98 million since 1992.
Enrollment has risen from 1,100 to 1,800, but the "Moonies" have not "taken over," said the president -- a 20-year friend of Mr.
Moon's.
"This is a normal American university with a unique funding source." Critics, though, say Mr.
Moon's followers have lured foreign students with big scholarships -- with church training part of the deal.
PUBLISHING  A Magazine, by George!
Government-bashers will love this one: a model as President.
Even those irreverent souls who said Ronald Reagan was merely acting the part wouldn't have had such a wildly cynical fantasy.
But there she is: Cindy Crawford as a seductive George Washington on the cover -- unveiled last week -- of an odd new magazine called, yes, George.
This isn't just any magazine, though.
It's "post-partisan," whatever that means.
It's the MTV of politics.
It's full of Georges, of all stripes: Wallace, Stephanopoulos, Bush (well, Barbara anyway).
Oh, and by the way, a fellow named Kennedy edits it (no, not George: that's the actor; this is confusing enough!).
This one, if memory serves, is related to some former President.
Could that be what the fuss is about?


Claudia Ceniceros, H. C. Kaufmann
Claudia Jennifer Ceniceros, a vice president of Robinson Lake Sawyer Miller, a public relations firm in New York, was married on Sept. 2 to Dr.
Horacio Carlos Kaufmann, a neurologist at Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York.
Town Justice Catherine A. Cahill officiated at the East Hampton (L.I.) Town Hall.
Ms.
Ceniceros, 34, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the University of Illinois.
She is a daughter of Dina Lawrence of San Francisco and Dr.
Robert Ceniceros of Larkspur, Calif.


Sept. 3-9: Gay Republicans; Dole, With Eyes Right, Riles an Early Supporter
Senator Bob Dole's latest march to the right brought him an unexpected critic: Representative Steve Gunderson, a Wisconsin Republican who was an early backer of Mr.
Dole for President.
Mr.
Gunderson is the only openly gay House Republican, and he delivered a stinging letter to Mr.
Dole expressing his disappointment that the Senator had returned a $1,000 donation from the Log Cabin Republicans, a group of gay members of the party.
Mr.
Dole said he disagreed with the group's agenda.


BOOKS IN BRIEF: NONFICTION
THE CRUEL RADIANCE  Notes of a Prosewriter in a Visual Age.
By Ron Powers.
Middlebury College/ University Press of New England, $25.
The lectures, book excerpts and columns that Ron Powers has gathered in "The Cruel Radiance" are more a sampler of his writings over the past 25 years than any standard compilation of occasional pieces.
The five lectures, spanning the years from 1983 to 1993, form a coherent thread of commentary on the status of nonfiction writing in an electronic age.
Mr.
Powers's basic complaints about broadcasting.
DAVID WALTON


Why the Slap at New Hope In a Lambertville Review?
To The Editor:
I found it regrettable that Fran Schumer chose to include a negative reference to New Hope in her review of the Ferry House in Lambertville (Restaurants, Aug. 13).
Readers would have been better served by mention of the restaurant's special $20 three-course menu, offered Monday through Thursday evenings.


PLACES
ALICE TULLY HALL and AVERY FISHER HALL . . . 721-6500 Lincoln Center ASIA SOCIETY . . . 517-2742 725 Park Ave., at 70th St.


Sunset View Is Blocked, So Cafe Is, Too
When Andrea Reich moved into her TriBeCa loft 14 years ago, she enjoyed fiery sunsets over the Hudson from her fourth-floor window.
But for the last three years, Ms.
Reich, a 49-year-old furniture designer, has had to watch the sun dip behind a five-story billboard.
At night, the glow of its lamps casts a ghostly pall on her walls.
"My million-dollar view has become an eyesore," Ms.
Reich said, frustrated that the billboard remains even though the city says it violates zoning regulations, and even though like-minded neighbors and Councilwoman Kathryn Freed have lobbied against it.


Schools Learn to Live with Less
When several District 4 teachers accepted early retirement or left for jobs in the suburbs, it created a vacuum that forced teachers with staff development duties to return to the classroom.
M.W.


'A Mixed Blessing'
To the Editor:
Not all Montrealers view with unalloyed enthusiasm Phyllis Bronfman Lambert's power to exploit "her notable local status to influence public planning and preservation policy"  [ "Helping Great Buildings Rise, and Survive," Aug. 20 ] .
The landmarking bandwagon she has spearheaded has unfortunately included buildings of dubious architectural distinction and has left Montreal with at least two prominent blots on the downtown landscape.


40 Winks in a Firehouse
Sleeping in a Norman Rockwell painting is impossible, as homey as that sounds.
But the Red Lion Inn in Stockbridge, Mass., offers the closest thing to it.
The town's 1899 white clapboard firehouse, featured in Rockwell's "The New American LaFrance Is Here," was almost razed in 1976 when a new firehouse replaced it.
Instead, the Berkshires inn bought the old firehouse, and after putting it to a variety of uses, it recently turned the structure into a suite.


Dry, Yes, but Nature Can Cope
GARDENERS in the Northeast will not soon forget the summer of '95 -- no rain, prolonged heat spells and high humidity.
Everything turned droopy, then brittle under the onslaught, even the weeds.
The most obvious evidence of the season's severity is the suburban lawn, which turned to straw.
But this is the least of the homeowner's worries.
The grass is simply dormant.
Deep-rooted, to depths of six feet and more, these plants should easily survive.


Graf Shakes Seles Awake From a Glorious Dream
She rose like a phoenix this summer after spending 28 months in limbo as she recovered from the emotional and physical trauma of being stabbed on the tennis court by a deranged German man who felt the No. 1 ranking should belong to Steffi Graf instead of her.
It took Monica Seles two years to return to the sport she knew she loved and for a time thought she had lost.
And when she came back, she did it with such a vengeance that it seemed it was the rest of the competition and not her who had been idling in involuntary exile.


The Memories of a Comfort Woman
WEARING a skirt that covered her ankles and a Korean-style linen shirt, the old woman sat on a bamboo floor mat in her studio apartment in central Queens and told her story slowly.
At first she was calm as she methodically peeled apples, apple pears and Korean white-fleshed peaches for the visitors.
Her figure was erect, her eyes cast down, her ageless face stoic.
But as she continued, her shoulders slumped toward her knees, and she curled up like a ball.
"I'm just waiting to die," the woman, D. Kim, said.


True Entertainment
To the Editor:
Is television relaxing, enriching or entertaining enough to justify four hours a day, as the Times's poll indicates?
This is a vice, a dependency.
If people are intelligent enough to recognize a problem, don't wait for V-chips or politicians.
Take your youngsters to the park or local bookstore instead.
I have children and no television.
That's entertainment!
GENE CONNICK  Anchorage


Liberties; Giant Puppet Show
For some time now we have been puzzling over J.F.K. Jr.
Is he, as People asked, "a man with a plan or a dreamboat adrift?"


Among the Ties That Bind: Jury Duty
Three years ago, Ceil Rossi of Flushing spent a month in a small hearing room in Kew Gardens, debating the fates of suspected criminals with fellow members of a grand jury.
"We heard six or seven cases a day," she recalled.
"Rapes, assaults, stabbings, bank robberies. It was very draining. Your emotions are absolutely played upon."


Nancy Kerrigan, Jerry L. Solomon
Nancy Ann Kerrigan, the professional figure skater, and Jerry Lawrence Solomon, her manager, were married yesterday in Boston.
Charles Winchester, a justice of the peace, performed the ceremony at the Church of the Covenant.
Ms.
Kerrigan, 25, who is keeping her name, won the silver medal in women's figure skating in the 1994 Winter Olympic Games in Lillehammer, Norway, and the bronze medal at the 1992 Winter Olympic Games in Albertville, France.
She graduated from Emmanuel College in Boston.


Roth Unbound
SABBATH'S THEATER  By Philip Roth. 451 pp. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. $24.95.


And the Blue Horizon
The Grand Canyon has a great friend in Martin Litton, the 77-year-old environmentalist who paddles the singer James Taylor through its ridged walls in COLORADO RIVER ADVENTURE, on THURSDAY at 8L95 abd 11:05 P.M. on TBS.
Mr Litton ha been trying to protect this region for much of this century; he was instrumental in preventing the damming of the canyon in the 50's.
Their excursion thakes them through plenty of whitewater and rocky crags.
But at sunset, as Mr.
Taylor strums his guitar, echoed by an unseen bird, it's clear that as Mr.
Litton says, "the canyon is really full of joy." Caitlin Lovinger


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
LOWER EAST SIDE  Jewish Neighborhood As Concept and Celebration
Knishes, kosher pizza, potato soup and kosher Chinese food will be in abundance today along East Broadway between Rutgers and Montgomery Streets at the 19th Annual Jewish Festival. (Above, last year's festival.)
"It's a celebration of the concept of the Jewish Lower East Side, past present and future," said Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, a Manhattan Democrat, a sponsor.
There will be food stands, rides, games, arts, crafts and people selling yarmulkes, biblical pictures and T-shirts, and performances by musicians like Robyn Spector, the puppeteer Jonathan Geffner and Yoel Sharabi and the Malka Orchestra.
Lower East Side Jewish Festival; East Broadway between Rutgers and Montgomery Streets; today, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; free; (212) 385-6611.
CROWN HEIGHTS  Arab Culture, Without the Biases
Joe Pedoto, operations director of the Ethnic Folk Arts Center, says its mission "is to counteract negative stereotypes, like Italians associated with organized crime, Arabs with fundamentalism and terrorism."
The center, on Varick Street in Lower Manhattan, sponsors cultural festivals with music, food, dance and folklore of various ethnic groups.
Next weekend, it is sponsoring Mahrajan al-Fan, the second annual festival of Arab World Culture, at The Brooklyn Museum.
The program will include more than 60 Arab-American musicians, singers, dancers (below left, the Egyptian dancer Husni), poets and storytellers.
There will also be a fashion show of traditional garb, native foods and lectures about the museum's collections of Islamic and Egyptian art.
The Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway at Washington Avenue; Saturday, Sept. 16, noon to 7 P.M.; Sunday, Sept. 17, noon to 5 P.M.; $15 for adults, $8 for children, $25 for a two-day pass; (718) 638-5000 ext. 230.
FLUSHING  Colombian Folk Tale In Bilingual Musical
The Latin-American Cultural Center of Queens will present the musical "And the Carnival Erupted!" at Queens Theater in the Park in Flushing Meadows Corona Park.
The story, presented in Spanish with a simultaneous English translation, is that of a simple peasant who receives five wishes, which he uses to outsmart gamblers, the Devil and death.
It is "an old folk tale from Colombia," said Ruby Danta, the cultural center's acting director.
Queens Theater in the Park, Flushing Meadows Corona Park, Flushing; Saturday, Sept. 16, 8 P.M.; $12; (718) 760-0064.
ALSO AROUND TOWN MUSICAL TRIBUTE The late Jimmy Keyes, a co-writer of the song "Sh-Boom" and a member of the Chords, will be eulogized at Abyssinian Baptist Church, 138th Street and Seventh Avenue; performances by the Cadillacs, Five Discs, Velours, members of the Drifters and the Harptones; Monday, Sept. 11, 7 P.M.; free; (212) 475-8872.
CHELSEA GARDENS Guided tour begins at 4 P.M., Saturday, Sept. 16, at 345 West 22d Street, between Eighth and Ninth Avenues, proceeds to private rooftop and ground-level gardens on West 22d Street and ends with a reception from 6 P.M. to 7 P.M. at Chelsea Garden Center; tickets: $12.50 in advance, $15 day of tour.
SINGLES SWING Tavern on the Green, Central Park West and 65th Street, sets aside a section of outdoor garden tables every Wednesday night at 9 P.M. for singles to meet and dance to the music of Frank Sinatra, Tony Bennett, Nat King Cole and other singers of popular standards; $5 and no drink minimum; through September; in case of rain, 9 P.M., Thursday; (212) 576-1300.
MONIQUE P. YAZIGI


Islamic Militants Clash With Qaddafi's Forces
Armed Islamic militants battled Libyan security forces this week in a significant challenge to the Government of Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi, Arab officials and foreign diplomats said today.
At least 30 people were killed in clashes on Wednesday and Thursday in the northeastern Libyan city of Benghazi, the diplomats said, basing their reports on accounts of travelers who had gone from Libya to Egypt, Lebanon and the Sudan.
Some accounts put the death toll as high as 70, with reports that up to 50 militants and 20 security forces had been killed.


Finding Cuts That Hurt The Least
Dr.
Lester Young used to be a guidance counselor.
Now, as superintendent of Community School District 13, he watched as the Board of Education cut $1.6 million from his budget.
Instead of cutting teachers, he looked to his old profession for some of the savings he needed: this year the district's guidance staff was cut nearly in half.
The district -- which includes Brooklyn Heights, Fort Greene, Clinton Hill and parts of Bedford-Stuyvesant and Park Slope -- will lose 17 guidance counselors, bringing the total number to 20.
"I understand the need for children's support services," said Dr.
Young, who met with the remaining counselors last week.
"I think, realistically, 37 counselors for a district our size was large. Twenty counselors for 22 schools is not the best ratio, but it's not gloom and doom either."


Dean Witter May Yield On Broker Commissions
AMONG mutual fund companies, Dean Witter is not much of a standout.
Its funds rarely top the lists of best performers.
Nor do they boast the marquee names among fund managers that attract attention and huge flows of new assets.
But Dean Witter does stand apart in one way.
It is the only major brokerage firm that pays its salesmen higher commissions to push its own mutual funds than those of competitors.


The Red Ink Is Drying, and the Schools Are Back. And Struggling.
After Mayor Giuliani cut the Board of Education's projected spending for the new fiscal year by $750 million, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines told the city's 32 community school districts, which operate elementary, intermediate and junior high schools, that they were responsible for a total of $72 million in cuts.
But the amount of each district's sacrifice -- and its options -- shifted all summer as projections of how many teachers would take early retirement changed and state officials refused to shorten the school day for elementary pupils.
Days before school opened last week, many superintendents had to identify other cost-cutting measures, including enlarging classes, cutting after-school programs and sending excess guidance counselors, teachers and assistant principals to the district office or the Board of Education for reassignment.
Wealthy District Copes With Smallest Budget
With the highest reading and math scores in the city and little or no poverty in its eastern Queens neighborhoods, District 26 has the smallest budget in the school system.
Often the district hosts dinner-dances to raise extra money.
But this year, $50,000 raised for enrichment programs has been redirected back into the main budget to pay for teachers and guidance counselors.


State-of-the-Art Glitz in Times Sq.
The signs of the future are already here.
Newly installed in -- where else? -- Times Square, where an unusual 1986 zoning law preserves the neighborhood's famed glitz and glow, they are bigger, brighter and more colorful than ever, sporting the latest in lighting and computer technology.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: September 10, 1995
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
NOTHING LASTS FOREVER, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $6.99.) Three women doctors contend with lovers, betrayers and killers.
2
6
THE BODY FARM, by Patricia Cornwell. (Berkley, $6.99.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta investigates the murder of a small North Carolina girl.
3
4
INSOMNIA, by Stephen King. (Signet, $7.50.) A widower and a widow, victims of sleeplessness, behold a sinister force at work in a Maine town.
4
12
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Bantam, $6.99.) A journalist and a psychologist track down a murderer in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
5
18
THE STONE DIARIES, by Carol Shields. (Penguin, $10.95.) The journey of a woman from childhood to motherhood through old age.
6
11
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $7.50.) Jack Ryan vs. a Japanese plot.
7
3
THE LAST INNOCENT MAN, by Phillip Margolin. (Bantam, $6.50.) A lawyer defends an attorney who may have killed a vice cop.
8
24
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $7.50.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing.
9
2
PRIME TIME, by Sandra Brown. (Warner Vision, $6.50.) A television reporter finds love when she tries to interview a reclusive general.
10
3
PLAYING FOR THE ASHES, by Elizabeth George. (Bantam, $6.50.) Arson, infidelity, cricket and murder in the English countryside.
11
7
EVERYTHING TO GAIN, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) An act of violence destroys a woman's family life.
12
6
THE 13TH JUROR, by John T. Lescroart. (Island/Dell, $6.50.) A lawyer defends a woman accused of murdering two husbands and a son.
13
3
TRUST ME, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $6.50.) A canceled wedding leads to a curious romance between the groom and the caterer.
14
2
THREE WEDDINGS AND A KISS, by Kathleen E. Woodiwiss, Catherine Anderson, Loretta Chase and Lisa Kleypas. (Avon, $5.99.) Four short historical romances.
15
2
LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $7.99.) The demon Lasher pursues the witch Rowan and their child; a sequel to "The Witching Hour."
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
8
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Anchor/Doubleday, $6.99.) Fighting a deadly virus.
2
3
DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion, $5.99.) Humor.
3
11
APOLLO 13, by Jim Lovell and Jeffrey Kluger. (Pocket, $6.50.) The 1970 moon mission.
4
24
REVIVING OPHELIA, by Mary Pipher. (Ballantine, $12.50.) Dangers facing teen-age girls. (+)
5
51
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) Near-death.
6
87
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Everyday spirituality.
7
618
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (+)
8
130
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) A memoir. (+)
9
50
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Black sisters, both over 100, reflect.
10
18
MOTHERLESS DAUGHTERS, by Hope Edelman. (Delta, $12.95.) Experiencing loss.
11
1
TAO TE CHING, by Lao Tzu. (Penguin, 95.) A classic Chinese philosophical work.
12
52
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
13
39
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Love and relationships.
14
3
DANGEROUS MINDS, by LouAnne Johnson. (St. Martin's, $4.99.) Teaching in an inner city.
15
11
THE KENNEDY WOMEN, by Laurence Leamer. (Ivy, $7.99.) Five generations of a family.
16
49
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) A study of monotheism. (+)
17
27
MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Vintage, $12.) A reporter's memoir.
18
27
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $5.50.) Essays on life and death, good and evil.
19
1
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $15.) Myths, folk tales and women's psyches.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
50
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) Uplifting stories. (+)
2
19
A 2ND HELPING OF CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) One hundred more stories. (+)
3
227
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success. (+)
4
11
TEN STUPID THINGS WOMEN DO TO MESS UP THEIR LIVES, by Laura C. Schlessinger. (Harper Perennial, $10.) Counsel by a therapist. (+)
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Aug. 26, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk (*) indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
A dagger (+) indicates that some bookstores report receiving bulk orders for a book.


Their Finest Hour
As screenwriter, director and star of IN WHICH WE SERVE (1942), Noel Coward created a superb screen salute to the wartime valor of Britain and its Royal Navy.
The drama unfolds in flashback near a sinking destroyer, its crew and captain (Coward, center) clinging to life rafts.
It is the story of a ship and the stout devotion of the men who sailed on her.
Bernard Miles, John Mills, Celia Johnson and Kay Walsh are exceptional.
The highly praised import was cited by the New York Film Critics.
It's on Tuesday/Wednesday at 1 a.m. on Channel 31.
Howard Thompson


Thunder From Above, Rubble on the Ground


Culinary Overtures Near Lincoln Center
CAFE DES ARTISTES ***  (212) 877-3500; 1 West 67th Street; $$$; all major credit cards
The opulence and charm of its Old World setting, Howard Chandler Christy's famous murals of frolicking nymphs and some of the best classic French cooking around continue to make Cafe des Artistes a favorite among New Yorkers.
To begin there are steamed asparagus vinaigrette; a fragrant fricassee of wild mushrooms seasoned with fresh herbs; brandade de morue, the garlicky codfish puree gratinee, and smoked swordfish and a side of potato salad drizzled with pumpkin-seed dressing.
Beguiling main courses include the rich potted duck confit; rosemary-roasted baby chicken with bitter greens; sauteed calf's liver with sweet onions and bacon, and the enticing pot-au-feu. (Review: 4/6/90; article: 1/17/92)  CAFE LUXEMBOURG **  (212) 873-7411; 200 West 70th Street; $$$; all major credit cards
Distinguished in the Lincoln Center neighborhood for consistently providing enticing French-American fare in a lively ambiance, this Art Deco cafe is stylishly outfitted in tile, terrazzo and other brasserie-style furnishings.
The menu offers appetizers of smoked trout flavored with lemon and dill, fried baby artichokes with black olive tapenade, steamed mussels in a broth spiced with jalapeno, and a salad of watercress and endive with goat cheese and beets tossed in a honey-mustard vinaigrette.
Some of the most popular entrees are the New York strip steak with french fries; herb-roasted chicken with mashed potatoes; grilled tuna topped with a tomato, ginger, basil and oil concoction, and grilled leg of lamb with rosemary jus, steamed potatoes and string beans. (Review: 1/10/92; revisited: 9/2/95)  GABRIEL'S BAR AND RESTAURANT **  (212) 956-4600; 11 West 60th Street; $$$; all major credit cards
From the gracious greeting of Gabriel Aiello, the host and owner, to the seductive Italian cooking of a talented kitchen team, it is easy to understand why this restaurant is so popular among Lincoln Center patrons and neighborhood residents alike.
For starters there is a spicy white-wine-based mussel soup; wood-grilled portobello and shiitake mushrooms with toasted garlic vinaigrette; grilled boar sausage paired with a lima bean salad, and sea scallops marinated in olive oil, rosemary, saffron and sage, served on a bed of bibb lettuce.
The alluring dining room's well-scrubbed country-French look makes it seem simultaneously rustic and well-bred.
A tapestry in the front, fabric-covered walls in the back, and plates and decorative roosters hung in prominent places add to the charm.
The food is mostly Mediterranean.
The enticing menu has appetizers of grilled octopus with a salad of chicory, potato and fennel in lemon-pepper dressing; seared peppered foie gras with port wine sauce and ginger-and-peach coulis, and arugula, chanterelles and corn salad with pancetta and goat cheese.
Entrees include grilled hanger steak with a red-wine sauce and polenta cake; pan-roasted lobster in a lobster broth served with basil ravioli, and loin of lamb flavored with Moroccan spices paired with vegetable couscous and minted yogurt. (Review: 12/17/93)  SCALETTA * (212) 769-9191; 50 West 77th Street; $$; all major credit cards
With its peaceful gardenlike setting and satisfying northern Italian fare, this spacious and comfortable establishment caters mostly to a neighborhood clientele.
Lightly breaded baked clams, prosciutto and melon or the medley of sauteed artichokes and mushrooms in olive oil and garlic can make pleasant starters.
Among the pastas are penne Scaletta with tomatoes, peas, mushrooms and prosciutto; spaghettini Bolognese, and rigatoni tossed with garlic and broccoli.
Entrees include sauteed chicken breast in a creamy mushroom and Cognac sauce; broiled veal chop; breaded veal chop topped with tomato sauce and Parmesan cheese; broiled sirloin steak, and sauteed shrimp served with tomato sauce. (Review: 6/14/91; revisited: 3/15/94)  SFUZZI *  (212) 873-3700; 58 West 65th Street; $$$; all major credit cards
This sprawling trattoria's decor of weathered columns and arty lighting suggests ancient Rome.
The food is better than the raucous atmosphere might lead you to believe.
Current starters include grilled shrimp with a pesto of sun-dried tomatoes and white bean salad; potato-leek soup with roasted garlic and arugula pesto; fried calamari with garlic aioli or spicy marinara sauce, and crab meat and vegetable salad seasoned with a lemon-chive vinaigrette.
Among the main courses are grilled salmon with basil-citrus sauce, accompanied by roasted potatoes and green beans; wild mushroom and asparagus ravioli in a thyme-flavored broth and topped with Parmesan; grilled chicken breast with a lemony rosemary sauce, served with roasted sweet peppers, onions and potatoes; and sauteed veal in a white wine sauce with fettucine and broccoli rape.  (Review: 4/16/93)  VINCE &amp; EDDIE'S *  (212) 721-0068; 70 West 68th Street; $$; all major credit cards
Done in a pastel-toned farmhouse motif and decorated with antiques, this popular spot near Lincoln Center serves pleasing, homey American fare at reasonable prices.
One might start with a plate of fried calamari and its cilantro-lime dipping sauce, salmon gravlax on a bed of arugula with a mustard-dill sauce, warm herbed goat cheese on a mound of field greens, or a hearty lamb and barley soup.
Some of the main courses include grilled hanger steak with french fries; braised lamb shank served with cherry sauce and a turnip puree; grilled salmon with broccoli and a fricassee of wild mushrooms; roast chicken with lentils and sauteed spinach; grilled quail, which has been wrapped in bacon, accompanied by sweet-potato fries, and tuna in a coriander crust with a ragout of vegetables. (Review: 12/21/90) Bistro Coziness  LA BOITE EN BOIS *  (212) 874-2705; 75 West 68th Street; $$; no credit cards
Pleasing, affordable bistro fare is offered here in a cozy brick-and-wood dining room.
The menu includes appetizers like goat cheese ravioli with tomato coulis; smoked salmon with the traditional onions, lemon and capers, and frisee and endive salad with Roquefort dressing.
Among the entrees are grilled snapper with sweet roasted peppers; seared monkfish ringed by a lobster sauce; steak with a peppercorn sauce; roast salmon coated with a honey-mustard glaze, and calf's liver topped with grilled onions. (Review: 1/13/89; revisited: 1/5/94) Summaries of reviews use the star system; others are culled from articles (indicated by +), the $25 and Under column (++) and Diner's Journal (


Frenzied Elegance, Lustful Innuendo
IT ought to be all too clear by now that the Phoenix Theater Company, which is winding up its eighth season in Purchase, N.Y., represents an extent of theater that Broadway hardly bothers about.
The classy 19th-century French sex farce by Feydeau is a genre that has never found a popular place in New York, though not for want of illustrious talents trying.
After the failure of such starry commercial productions as "Hotel Paradiso," with Angela Lansbury in her 1957 Broadway debut opposite Bert Lahr, and "Look After Lulu," an adaptation by Noel Coward in 1959 for another debutante, Tammy Grimes, it was apparent that Feydeau was not getting to be a habit with New York theatergoers.
A misbegotten version of "Hotel Paradiso" by Tony Randall's theater company, titled "A Little Hotel on the Side," in 1992 may have set back the cause of Feydeau another 40 years.


Family Watches, Helpless, As Woman Is Killed
Roseann Sorrentino had just returned home to the Grant City neighborhood of Staten Island late Friday after shopping with her husband and twin daughters when she was struck and killed by a van whose driver was drunk, the police said.
She was dragged 200 feet as her family watched.
The police said the accident occurred at 10:54 P.M. when a blue Dodge van, speeding along Father Capodanno Boulevard near Mapleton Avenue, struck Mrs.
Sorrentino, 26, who was standing outside the driver's side of the family's white sedan, and pinned her to the front bumper.
The van then mounted a curb and crashed into a parked car in a driveway about a block away, sending her flying into a telephone pole.


Marijuana Cure: Rx for Arrest
Once a week for the last two years, Johann Moore would take the subway from his home in Park Slope to lower Manhattan to give away marijuana.
He doesn't anymore.
Six months ago he had to start charging for the drug, he said, because of high demand and limited supply.
But he insists he's no dealer: His customers pay wholesale.


Trotsky's Bronx Headquarters And Other New York Arcana
New York City may never be finished, but the first encyclopedia of the city finally is.
Now, the arguing over who and what got in or was left out can begin.
Did Mario M. Cuomo (from Queens) deserve to get a larger entry than James A. Farley (the New Deal political guru and Postmaster General)?
Should John Marchi (the Staten Island State Senator) have received as much ink as Vito Marcantonio (the American Labor Party Congressman from East Harlem)?
Did Nedick's rate more space than Nathan's?


Susan L. Clough, Eric A. Brock
Susan Louise Clough, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles I. Clough of Concord, Mass., was married there yesterday to Eric Ashley Brock, the son of Lynn Bragger and the stepson of Stephen Bragger of Orlando, Fla.
The bride's father, a Roman Catholic deacon, performed the ceremony at Our Lady Help of Christians Church.
The bride, 24, and the bridegroom, 25, graduated from Boston College.
Mrs.
Brock received a master's degree in elementary education from Simmons College.
Her father is the chief investment strategist for Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.


Jon E. Stahlman, Beth E. Turetsky
Beth Elyse Turetsky, an associate at the Boston law firm of Hale &amp; Dorr, and Dr.
Jon Edward Stahlman, a pediatrics resident at Children's Hospital in Boston, are to be married today in Hopewell Junction, N.Y.
Rabbi Peter J. Rubenstein is to officiate at Le Chambord, an inn.
The bride, 28, graduated cum laude from Princeton University and received her law degree from New York University.
She is a daughter of Sandra and Gerald Turetsky of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Her father recently retired as an assistant regional administrator in New York for the General Services Administration.
He is also a founder of the Citizens Crime Commission of New York City, a law-enforcement watchdog group.
The bride's mother retired as a teacher of Spanish and French at Junior High School 141 in the Bronx.


BEHIND THE WHEEL/Toyota MR2 and Supra SE; Flat in the Tight Corners, Soaring on the Price Curve
I'M buying cigarettes by the pack now, instead of by the carton, figuring I'll quit any day.
Maybe next week, maybe the week after.
So I did my daily park job outside the tobacconist's and was trying to fold and spindle myself out of the car when I heard a voice.
"What is that?" the guy said, just a passer-by in a suit who stopped to notice.
"That's a really neat car."


Sept. 3-9; Voters, You Are the Problem
After 9 months of wallowing in the biggest municipal bankruptcy ever, two questions have persisted in Orange County, Calif.: how did the county allow itself to lose $1.7 billion from an investment fund, and how can it extricate itself from the mess as long as residents adamantly oppose a tax increase?
Both questions may have been answered last week and, perhaps more important, their connection demonstrated.


The Dancer and the Dance
Bill T. Jones can tell a mean story; he could have been a novelist or a preacher.
Instead, despite his impatience with dance technique of all kinds, he chose to be a dancer, teaming up with another unlikely candidate for the profession, an aspiring photographer named Arnie Zane.
They became an offstage couple from their first meeting in 1971, as college undergraduates, and during the next 17 years they also choreographed and ran a dance company together.
After his partner's death from AIDS in 1988, Mr.
Jones continued to choreograph and to run the company alone, as well as to perform.
His themes in his dances, and in his memoir, LAST NIGHT ON EARTH (Pantheon, $30), include racial fury, black and white; self-exposure; "transgressive" sexuality; protracted death, and communal healing.
He has drawn an international following, prizes, fame and sympathetic collaborators -- among them his co-author, Peggy Gillespie, a freelance journalist.
His onstage belligerence and posturing have also occasioned strong critical reproof.
In his book, Mr.
Jones takes himself solemnly as an artist, as the embodiment of Eros and, in his discussion of "Still/ Here," his evening-length spectacle about mortality, as an instrument of therapeutic self-knowledge for his dancers and admirers.
He treats his own much-publicized H.I.V.-positive status as an opportunity to go global -- even though his vision, as he describes it, is already both encompassing and authoritarian.
Don't plan to consult the book for his response to Arlene Croce's essay in The New Yorker that dismissed his work as "victim art." He doesn't mention it.
MINDY ALOFF


Ms. Rosenberger And Mr. Jacott
Gretchen Rosenberger and Carlos Frederick Jacott, actors in Los Angeles, are to be married today at the Church of the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary in New York.
The Rev.
Albert De Luca, a Roman Catholic priest, is to perform the ceremony.
The bride, 26, graduated from LaSalle College.
She is the daughter of Estelle Rosenberger of Belmont, Mass., and the late Charles Rosenberger.
Her father was a partner in Aristocratic Embroidery, a manufacturer in Belmont.


Ties That Bind: Jury Dut
Three years ago, Ceil Rossi of Flushing spent a month in a small hearing room in Kew Gardens as the forewoman of a grand jury.
"We heard six or seven cases a day," she recalled.
"Rapes, assaults, stabbings, bank robberies. It was very draining."


All the State's a Stage: The Season Ahead
ELYOT and Amanda are 30-something, and no one in the Petkoff house is over 40, not even the old major.
An accent on youth -- in "Private Lives" at the McCarter Theater in Princeton, in "Arms and the Man" at the George Street Playhouse in New Brunswick -- may be one theme in this fall's theater season.
A diversity of contemporary American classics ("All My Sons" at American Stage in Teaneck, "The Miracle Worker" at George Street, "The Piano Lesson" at Crossroads in New Brunswick) is a given.
So is a sampler of world classics (Ibsen and Moliere at the McCarter, Shaw at George Street and at Centenary Stage in Hack ettstown, Shakespeare at the Foundation Theater in Pemberton).


An Older, Wiser Bad Boy of Dance
Mark Morris, the bad boy of modern dance, is a boy no longer.
At age 38, preparing the New York premiere of eight new dances, he faces the questions that confront any artist who has inspired a major uproar at a minor age.
Will he last, or was he just a flirtation?
Will he evolve or keep repackaging the material that made him famous?
The new pieces, to be performed in two alternating programs from Dec. 9 through Dec. 17 at the Brooklyn Academy of Music's Next Wave Festival, include neoclassical riffs set to Mozart, Bach and Schubert; a dark rumination on genocide, and a piece set to a song by the early American quaint-meister Stephen Foster.


So Many Events, So Little Time
Every year it's the same: hundreds of potentially unforgettable plays, films, dances, concerts, operas, exhibitions, festivals, premieres and revivals.
When a new season rolls around in a cultural capital like New York, already busy people are faced with an unpleasant reality: you can't see it all, so you have to pick and choose.
But how?
Well, who better to ask than people in the arts, many of whom know New York's cultural menu practically by heart?
Here are their responses.
ANITA GATES ANNE MEARA Acress and comedian
It's total nepotism.
The things I choose to attend are the things my friends are in.
PAUL RUDNICK, Playwright and screenwriter
I am hopeless arts-and-entertainment addict, so this fall I intend to see everything, with the following provisos:
1.
I can't think of any activity, let alone an artwork, which should last eight hours and require a trip to Brooklyn.
2.
In any medium, it is best to avoid trilogies, or anything which is proclaimed a "cycle." Artists often declare that they will create a separate work for every decade of the century, every member of a fictional family or every color in a nation's flag.
These are not promises of creative depth; they are threats.
3.
Phrases to fear: dance/theater piece, performance piece and piece-in-progress.
The word piece may actually b a synonym for "no air-conditioning" or "My folding chair is missing one rubber leg-tip."
4.
I will resist any theatrical presentation which does not involve speech but claims it is not mime.
Dead giveaways:
"New Vaudeville,"
"Keatonesque,"
"balletic." It's always mime.
5.
In lyrics, let's declare a moratorium on the metaphorical use of the word "colors," as in "The Colors of My Life" or "The Colors of the Wind." The wind has no colors, unless there has been an explosion in a paint factory; your life has no color, unless you are standing near the factory.
Only a ballad entitled "The Colors of My Hair" is acceptable.
WENDY WASSERSTEIN Playwright
I see most plays.
Other than that, I tend to go to the standbys that I go to every year.
I'll always go to ABT.
I'll always see "The Nutcracker." I'll always get the City Ballet subscription for Thursday night, then call and ask to switch to Tuesday.
ERIC STOLTZ Actor
I look for the play, film, exhibit or concert that has received the least amount of publicity and has no advertising budget.
The less I know about something, the more likely I'll be open to being affected by it in some way, especially if my head isn't clouded with reviews and hype and word on the street.
Of course, sometimes there is no avoiding the buzz (the current Hopper show, the coming revival of "Company," the new David Hare, the new Scorsese film), so I try to see them the very first ay that I can.
PATTI D'ARBANVILLE-QUINN Actress
Whatever is on the cutting edge, with the scissors. MARILYN HORNE Opera singer
I try to see the new things that are in town, but I can't tell you how many times I've bought tickets and had to give them away.
Either I'm tired or I've been singing much too much or the weather's lousy, and I can't take the chance with my voice.
I wanted to go to "Call Me Madam" with Tyne Daly, and the weather was just foul that night.
I couldn't take the chance.
ESTELLE PARSONS Actress
I like things that are going to be sort of new and different and give me a new perspective, and I do that more than I do Broadway or Off Broadway.
I like Robert Wilson.
I like Pina Bausch.
I go to a lot of things from reviews; you an't help but be swayed by them.
If I had my druthers, I'd go to everything.
I think Sheldon Harnick gets to everything, actually.
SHELDON HARNICK Lyricist
My wife and I pop up a lot of places, and people say I go to everything, but I don't.
What I do see is a lot of theater.
I do go to see Broadway plays; then there are the Off Broadway things that look interesting.
And the plays that I miss I read.
But if you mean the ballet and other things, I don't get to them.
I love symphonic music, and I almost never get to go to a concert.
We miss a great deal.
There's just too much.
PHYLLIS NEWMAN Actress
I get the paper and circle things that I'm really eager to see, then I put them on a list.
And movies I go to whenever I have a minute.
I use them like Prozac.
MURRAY LOUIS Choreographer
I gore myself on all sorts of things.
I will force myself to go to Lincoln Center.
You can rest assured that you'll see quality there.
Maybe not creativity, but quality.
I go to Broadway to enjoy myslef.
I'm a terrible plebeian in that way - singing the tunes, seeing a good hoofer.
And I love Broadway at its mechanical best.
I loved "Sunset Boulevare"!
If there was something going on that I couldn't stand, there was always something else I could focus on - a wonderful chair, the staircase.
And I loved seeing Glenn Close in that white fur costume.
It was hideous, but I loved the audacity of it.
BOBBY SHORT Musician
I'd love to see everything, but there just isn't time.
This year there's an evening with Paul Bowles that I want to get to, and a big celebration at the Public Theater that I'm angling for.
But i've gwoen accustomed to missing things.
I missed Robert Wilson because I couldn't get a ticket.
KITTY CARLISLE HART Chairman, New York State Council on the Arts
I try to go to events where I feel that my being there can do the organization some good.I missed Robert Wilson this year, but he didn't need me; he had most of the glitterati of New York at his performances.
And I'll try to catch him next time.
PAUL TAYLOR Choreographer
All I see are the professionally related things that I'm obligated to see.
I don't even go see my own work in New York.
Once they go into dress rehearsals, I make a beeline to my house in the country.
PAUL BARTEL Director
I'm a subscriber to both Playwrights Horizons and the Manhattan Theater Club.
But the thing that I most look forward to is the New York Film Festival, where I get to see the things I didn't see if I didn't make it to Cannes.
JAC VENZA Executive producer, "Great Performances"
I tend to look at the talent in the production rather than the production itself.
I also tend to look at producing organizations.
And I have to have my radar out for people I've never heard of before and keep track of them.
CHARLES BUSCH Actor and drag queen
Whatever I can a free ticket to.
But when I do pay, I pay top dollar.
Usually once a season there's one play I feel I should see for educationsl purposes: Vanessa Redgrave in "Orpheus Descending," Maggie Smith in "Lettice and Lovage," Kathleen Turner in "Indescretions." The only thing I'll pay top dollar for this year is Zoe Caldwell in "Master Class." Otherwise it's comp, comp, comp.


CRITIC'S CHOICES


Army Back Rushes Out Of the Gate Quickly
There was no better way to begin a new season before a crowd of 25,631 at one of college football's great tailgating sites, the United States Military Academy: on the first play from scrimmage today, Army's left halfback, Rashad Hodge, ran 74 yards for a touchdown.
The touchdown run was the first rushing attempt in a varsity game for Hodge, who joined fullback Demetrius Perry and right halfback Steve Carpenter as first-time starters for the Cadets.


Therapy, Thy Name Is Legion
Following is a brief description of some of the more common approaches to psychotherapy.
BEHAVIOR THERAPY
This approach posits that emotional and behavioral problems develop through the laws of learning -- reinforcements, punishment, conditioning, modeling and so on.
Therefore, the theory goes, those problems can be treated using those same laws.
"This is very different from the psychodynamic or psychoanalytic approach which believes that most problems people have derive from early childhood trauma or unresolved conflict," said Dr.
Barry S. Lubetkin, clinical director of the Institute for Behavior Therapy in Manhattan.
"The behavior therapist is more focused on the here and now and assumes that many problems have broken away from the original root causes, taking on a life of their own."
The task of the behavior therapist is to direct patients toward activities and techniques that will help them overcome behavior problems, teaching communication assertiveness skills, as well as relaxation techniques.
One tool is called "systematic desensitization," which is most effective in treating phobias.
The patient is talked into deep relaxation, and then the therapist talks the patient through a few stages of an anxiety-producing event, such as flying, beginning with the drive to the airport and ending with takeoff.
There are homework assignments, too, usually after every session.
It might be to take a colleague out to lunch if the problem is social isolation, or to ask for a promotion if the problem is assertiveness.
COGNITIVE THERAPY
This approach is concerned with perceptions, judgments and thoughts that are unfounded or unnecessarily negative and that can produce depression, phobias, obsessions, social isolation and other uncomfortable states of mind or behavior.
Cognitive therapists help patients analyze and change that thinking.
More and more practitioners are calling what they do cognitive-behavioral therapy, merging the two approaches.
According to Dr.
Robert L. Leahy, director of the American Institute for Cognitive Therapy in Manhattan, people who are depressed often think of themselves as failures, predict that negative things will happen to them, blame themselves for bad events, think they must be perfect to be worthwhile and assume people don't like them.
"In cognitive therapy we help the patient identify the particular thinking errors that they have, and we have homework exercises they can do to change their thinking," Dr.
Leahy said.
A female patient of his was convinced that men didn't find her attractive.
She was asked to list all the ways in which people show an interest in each other and then to record each time a man behaved in one of those ways toward her.
The next assignment was to engage in the same behavior toward them.
"In the past two years she has been averaging two dates a week," he said.
Books are recommended, like David Burns's "Feeling Good Handbook," and questionnaires measure progress.
GROUP THERAPY
Thanks to managed care, group therapy has experienced a resurgence in recent years.
That's because it is cheaper; a therapist might charge $95 dollars for an individual session, while a group session might cost each member only $45.
"One of the main differences between group and individual therapy is that you see right in front of you live examples of your problems, coping mechanisms and strengths," said Stephen Bendich, a Manhattan psychologist who has led groups on and off for 25 years.
"It's a safe, controlled environment that lets you try out new behaviors. If you can't get close to people, you can try that out; if you can't assert yourself, you can try that out."
Groups vary enormously.
In one group the therapist might say one or two things during a session; in another, the therapist might dominate.
Some groups delve into patients' pasts as part of the therapy, while others stick to the present.
Some groups encourage confrontation that, when not handled sensitively by the therapist, can verge on abuse.
Group therapy, like individual therapy, allows patients to project the qualities of significant people in their lives -- usually a parent -- onto the therapist, an instructive phenomenon called "transference." But group therapy also provides a half dozen or so others with whom to connect.
Over months, and years, these interactions often start to mimic those with siblings, spouses and even colleagues.
As a 32-year-old management consultant on the Upper West Side put it: "It's working out family issues in a group that isn't your family. Your individual therapist is non-judgmental and careful about what she says. But in the group you get more honest feedback from your peers."  FAMILY AND MARITAL THERAPY
Entering therapy with a significant other or the whole family is like continually turning a kaleidoscope a few degrees: new perspectives naturally emerge.
The kinds of problems that family and marital therapists see range from incest or domestic violence to common communication problems in marriage or a child's suddenly failing in school.
Such therapy often seeks to clarify goals and devise new ways of relating.
Say a spouse feels neglected or, in psychology-speak, unattended to, and he or she starts to complain or yell at the partner.
The partner withdraws, the spouse yells louder.
"Before you know it, you have this repetitive cycle," said Elana Katz, a family therapist and faculty member at the Ackerman Institute for Family Therapy on the Upper East Side.
"Nobody's benefiting from that, and nothing moves forward. A lot of attention is paid in therapy to focusing on what people want and also how they're going about getting it."
Usually what propels a family into therapy is a child's behavior.
But often the problem rests in the parents' relationship, said Dr.
Neil Maron, president of the Center for Marital and Family Therapy in New York City.
"In many cases the child acts out because he prefers to be the one who is the focus of the anger -- out of fear of divorce and abandonment," he said.
"As long as the child is the scapegoat, the parents do not have to deal with their own relationship. Children are extremely revealing about what's going on. They learn to manipulate their environment in order to exist." FREUDIAN PSYCHOANALYSIS
There is no single approach to Freudian analysis.
But whether the patient goes twice a week or five times a week, lies down or sits up, the goal is to gain insight by exploring the unconscious, the reservoir of repressed memories, thoughts and impulses.
The process is that the patient says whatever comes to mind, whether a conflict at work or a memory from age four.
And the therapist listens, makes connections and occasionally, when the patient seems ready to hear it, offers an interpretation.
The process includes analyzing dreams and fantasies, as well as acts of transference and resistance, which is a patient's unwillingness to probe further.
The unconscious is a big, complex place, and, for Freudians, analysis generally lasts for years, not months.
"We don't promise happiness," said Dr.
Gerd H. Fenchel, a self-described mainstream Freudian analyst and executive director of the Washington Square Institute for Psychotherapy and Mental Health in Greenwich Village.
"We feel that if you understand yourself better, you are able to take charge of your life, and that's our goal," he said.
"Behavior therapy works very well with some conditions like phobias. But we feel we need a more basic restructuring of the personality, that this is more lasting and more promising. That doesn't mean the person is completely different, but it means they handle things differently."
Some of Freud's psychoanalytic theories may seem overly focused on sexuality or downright bizarre.
His theories include castration anxiety, penis envy and his idea that young boys and girls fall in love with the parent of the opposite sex on their way to emotional maturity.
But the topic of sex doesn't dominate psychoanalysis, Dr.
Fenchel said.
"You'll talk about sex, money, religion and whatever you want to talk about, or whatever you don't want to talk about," he said, "but sex will be just one of many areas." JUNGIAN ANALYSIS
Some of Freud's most brilliant students and adherents formed their own schools of psychoanalysis.
While all stressed the importance of the unconscious and the goal of insight, they turned away from some of Freud's basic tenets about human development and personality formation, playing down the emphasis on early sexual stages, as well as the roles of the id and libido.
Perhaps the most famous of these offshoots is Jungian analysis, also known as analytic psychology.
It was developed by Carl Gustav Jung, one of Freud's star students before the two had a falling-out in 1912.
Jung believed in a collective unconscious, in universal, timeless patterns of behavior and emotions, like the archetype of the hero and the fear of darkness.
"It is a therapy that looks to bring in the collective unconscious from myths, fairy tales and legends," said Aryeh Maidenbaum, director of the New York Center for Jungian Studies.
"For example, people tend to want to live a heroic life, even on a personal level. They are always sacrificing. One has to understand that they are gripped by these archetypes that guide their life."
There are only about 100 Jungian analysts in New York City.
Typically, the therapist sees the patient once a week for anywhere from two to seven years.
Dream analysis makes up a quarter to a third of the therapy.
Dr.
Maidenbaum said that Jungian analysis was ideally suited for people dealing with "second half of life" and "transition" issues.
"People reach midlife -- even people who are successful in the world -- and they begin to question: What am I up to in life?" he said.
"Am I happy? I may have a career, I've started building a family, but what is it now that really gives me meaning in life?"


Sarah W. Stearns, Christopher Fey
Sarah Wood Stearns, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James P. Stearns of Kent, Conn., was married yesterday to Dr.
Christopher Philip Valentine Fey, the son of Dr.
Ann Fey and Dr.
Philip Fey of Suffern, N.Y.
The Rev.
Roger White performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Washington, Conn.
The couple both graduated magna cum laude from Amherst College.


Victoria Reese, Gregory Kennedy
Victoria Stevens Reese, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Reese of Cold Spring Harbor, L.I., was married there yesterday to Gregory Davis Kennedy, a son of Associate Justice Anthony M. Kennedy of the Supreme Court and Mrs.
Kennedy.
The Rev.
Churchill Pinder officiated at St.
John's Episcopal Church.
The Rev.
Russell Roide, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
The bride, 27, is the annual fund associate for the Manhattan Theater Club in New York and a comedian.
She graduated from Vassar College.
Her father is a partner in Lazard Freres &amp; Company, the New York investment bank, and the chairman of the Tennis Hall of Fame in Newport, R.I.
Her mother, Hope Reese, is an artist in Cold Spring Harbor.


Increases In Co-op Rents
MILDRED FINKLE is incensed about the hardship rent increase she has been ordered to pay on the five-room Manhattan apartment she has lived in for the last 20 years.
And while countless other tenants living in rent-regulated apartments have undoubtedly expressed similar sentiments about rent increases, Mrs.
Finkle's situation is a bit different.
As a rent-stabilized tenant in a co-op, Mrs.
Finkle has been almost immune to hardship rent increases.
That immunity -- shared by thousands of other rent-regulated tenants living in unsold co-op apartments -- emanates from the Department of Housing and Community Renewal's steadfast refusal to grant hardship increases to owners of unsold shares in a co-op.


CRITIC'S CHOICES


Randi M. Albert, Daniel A. Halevy
Randi Michelle Albert, a daughter of Audrey and Robert B. Albert of Jupiter, Fla., was married last evening to Daniel Abraham Halevy, the son of Drs.
Hilda and Simon Halevy of Jamaica Estates, Queens.
Rabbi Alfred Landsberg performed the ceremony at the Cedar Hill Country Club in Livingston, N.J.
Ms.
Albert, 27, is keeping her name.
She is to become a lawyer for the Federal Communications Commission in Washington in October.
She graduated magna cum laude from Columbia University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received her law degree from Harvard University.
Her father retired as a director and senior group vice president of the National Starch Company, a manufacturer of chemicals, food starches and adhesives in Bridgewater, N.J.


In Book, Powell Says a 3d Party May Be Needed
Retired Gen.
Colin Powell says in his autobiography that "the time may be at hand for a third major party to emerge to represent the sensible center of the American political spectrum," but he makes no commitment to lead such a party as its Presidential candidate next year.
"To be a successful politician requires a calling that I do not yet hear," the 58-year-old general writes.
"I believe I can serve my country in other ways. Nevertheless, I do not unequivocally rule out a political future."


New York Can Regain Its Place as Transit Pioneer
To the Editor:
Fred Papert's vision of clean, fast, high-capacity surface transit, ("Be It Vision or Folly, There Is One Man Behind the Trolley," Sept. 3), is shared by many New Yorkers who have seen modern light-rail systems in other cities throughout the world.


Graf Defeats Seles to Win Open Title
There was no fairy-tale ending for Monica Seles, but a remarkable victory for Steffi Graf yesterday in the United States Open women's final.
Despite an injured foot, a bad back and her father's imprisonment in Germany on tax-evasion charges, Graf defeated Seles, 7-6 (8-6), 0-6, 6-3, in Flushing Meadows, Queens.
In the process, she ended the 11-match victory streak Seles had compiled since returning to tennis more than two years after being stabbed in the back by a fan of Graf's in April 1993.
Seles had won two consecutive Opens before being attacked.


Schools Learn to Live with Less
When several District 4 teachers accepted early retirement or left for jobs in the suburbs, it created a vacuum that forced teachers with staff development duties to return to the classroom.
M.W.


Transactions
Football  National Football League
CHICAGO BEARS -- Waived defense tackle Ervin Collier, defense tackle.
Signed Darwin Ireland, linebacker.
DALLAS COWBOYS -- Signed Deion Sanders, cornerback, to a five-year contract.
Hockey  National Hockey League
DALLAS STARS -- Signed Mark Lawrence and Nikolai Borschevsky, right wings, to one-year contracts.
International Hockey League
CINCINNATI CYCLONES -- Traded Mike Stevens, left wing, to the Cleveland Lumberjacks for DalE DeGray, defenseman, and Todd Hawkins, right wing.


Sept. 3-9; Quite Useless


Susan O'Brien, Douglas W. Lyons
Susan O'Brien, a daughter of Dr.
Catherine Lloyd O'Brien of Boston and Dr.
Eric Colgan O'Brien of Winchester, Mass., was married yesterday to Douglas Wechsler Lyons, the son of Mrs.
Serafin Garcia of Dalton, Mass., and John D. Lyons of Tucson, Ariz.
The Rev.
Thomas M. Richard performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Nantucket, Mass.
Mrs.
Lyons, 29, graduated from Barnard College and received an M.B.A from Columbia University.
She is an associate in Chicago with J. P. Morgan Securities.
Her mother is a allergist and her father is a surgeon in Chelmsford, Mass., with the Harvard Community Health Plan, a health maintenance organization.


On Raising Money and Rubbing Elbows
THE first year that they tried it the Cartier Grand Slam tennis tournament netted more than $100,000 for the Long Island division of the American Cancer Society.
That was in 1992.
Since then the two-day mixed-doubles tournament played on private courts in Southampton, Bridgehampton and East Hampton has sold out every year, reeling in players and spectators with its two almost irresistible lures, entree to elegant estates where the opening matches are played and a chance to rub elbows with tennis celebrities.
In three years the tournament has raised a little more than $335,000, enabling the Cancer Society to open an office in Southampton.


Public Had Little Chance To Comment on Heliport
To the Editor:
It is discouraging to hear how far the Guadalcanal heliport plan has progressed with virtually no public forum or community input ("Fighting for Pier 84," Aug. 27).


Clinton Prods Senate on the Welfare Overhaul
With crucial Senate votes on welfare legislation expected in the coming week, President Clinton today urged the Republican-controlled Congress to prevent the debate on antipoverty policies from becoming a hostage to Presidential politics or the looming confrontation over the Federal budget.
"This is a time to deliver for the American people, not to pander to extremists who have held us back for too long," Mr.
Clinton said in his weekly radio address.
"We can't let welfare reform die at the hands of ideological extremism or Presidential politics or budget politics."


Amy E. Moran, R. L. Durocher Jr.
Amy Elizabeth Moran, a daughter of Judith B. Moran and Edmond J. Moran Jr. of Baltimore, was married there yesterday to Robert Louis Durocher Jr., a son of Rosamond E. Durocher and Mr.
Durocher Sr. of Gambrills, Md.
The Rev.
William Au, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Church of Saints Philip and James.
Mrs.
Durocher, 24, graduated from Muhlenberg College and in May received a master's degree in social work from Columbia University.
Her father is the president of the Moran Mid-Atlantic Corporation, a tugboat operation in Baltimore that is a subsidiary of the Moran Towing Corporation in Greenwich, Conn.


Campaign English From Senator Dole
Senator Bob Dole's declaration that English should be made "the official language of the United States" was couched in purest patriotism -- to bind the nation together.
But, as a contender for the Presidency, he surely knows this issue is divisive.
It reeks of xenophobia and is particularly popular among the conservatives he seems too eager to please.
America is and must remain an English-speaking country.
The ability of all Americans to communicate without translation is woven into the fabric of our open society.
Foreigners who come here know that learning the language is in their own self-interest.
Economic opportunity, employment and advancement depend on it -- even following "E.R." on TV.


Annalisa Hinckley And Adam Savin
Annalisa Mjornell Hinckley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
G.
F.
Steedman Hinckley of Orlean, Va., was married there yesterday to Adam Maxwell Savin, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Howard A. Savin of Doylestown, Pa.
Harvey Pearson, a justice of the peace, officiated at the farm of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Savin is an assistant in the exchange division of the American-Scandinavian Foundation, a cultural organization in New York.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College.
Her father retired as the chairman of Overseas National Airways in New York.
Her mother, Ingrid Hinckley, is the owner of Skandina, an antiques shop in Middleburg, Va.


Irma Bensinger, Alexander Ross
Dr.
Irma L. Bensinger, an osteopath, and Dr.
Alexander F. Ross, a public-health analyst, are to be married today in Kings Point, L.I.
Cantor David Weissman is to officiate at the Officers Club at the United States Merchant Marine Academy.
The couple graduated from the State University at Albany.
Dr.
Bensinger, 33, who will keep her name, is a staff member of the Columbia (Md.) Medical Plan, a health maintenance organization.
She received a D.O. degree from the Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine.
She is a daughter of Saimi and Bert Bensinger of Monroe, N.Y.


U.S. Has Evolved Beyond Tribal Conflicts; Who Is an Indian?
To the Editor:
"Ethnic Cleansing Didn't Start in Bosnia" (Week in Review, Sept. 3) does not consider a less extreme but equally destructive form of cultural eradication practiced by the Bureau of Indian Affairs.


A Restaurateur Kills 1 Suspect In a Robbery
A Harlem restaurant owner yesterday morning shot to death one of three men who were fleeing after a robbery at the restaurant, the police said.
The owner was charged with second-degree murder.
The incident occurred at about 12:30 A.M. at the Strawberry Jamaican Cuisine Restaurant at 2354 Seventh Avenue, between 137th and 138th Streets.


After School, Where to Go?
William Glover's school day rarely ended with the last bell at Junior High School 126 in Williamsburg.
He stayed late almost every day.
"I played basketball, did homework, and studied," he said.
"We learned math skills, and I got better in math."
But all after-school programs in Community School District 14, which covers Williamsburg and Greenpoint, are being cut this year to save money.
"I guess I'll go home and play Sega," a popular video-game system, said William, 13 and an eighth grader.


Having Guts and Taking Risks: 49ers Enjoying Carroll's Defensive Scheme
After the 49ers barely escaped New Orleans last Sunday with a 24-22 victory in their season opener, San Francisco quarterback Steve Young said all Niners fans should say thank you to the defensive coordinator Pete Carroll for a series of aggressive blitz calls on the Saints' last offensive series.
"It takes a lot of guts to make those calls and not just play it safe and play zone in that situation," Young said.


The Celebrity Soldier, on Tour
Gen.
Colin Powell says he will tell us in November whether he wants to try for the Presidency in 1996.
But an examination of his views on everything from foreign policy to affirmative action has already begun.
The main reason is that Mr.
Powell's stock as an independent challenger continues to rise as loyalty to the political parties declines.
Another is that he invites curiosity.
With 500,000 copies of "My American Journey" about to appear in bookstores nationwide, and with the general shipping out on a 25-city promotional tour, Mr.
Powell is hard to miss.
Mr.
Powell enjoys the mystique and special protections that attach to a prominent personality who is not yet a declared candidate.
Flirting with politics is not the same thing as marrying it.
Right now, Mr.
Powell is a celebrity soldier-statesman.
His picture is appearing on the covers of the leading news magazines.
He inspires articles in The New Yorker and Vanity Fair.
He offers a truly admirable resume.
But if he decides to run he will be exposed to relentless inquisition, a fate that he and his family have so far been spared.


Ann Ellinghaus, Christopher Hackett
Ann Tucker Ellinghaus, a daughter of Mrs.
Richard Andrew Ellinghaus of Baltimore and the late Mr.
Ellinghaus, was married yesterday to Christopher John Hackett, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul L. Hackett Jr. of Indian Hill, Ohio.
The Rev.
Alexander Ogilby performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Chapel in Weekapaug, R.I.
Mrs.
Hackett is a financial analyst at Moody's Investors Service in New York.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford and received a master's degree in international affairs from Columbia University.
Her father was an agent in Baltimore for the John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Company.


In Chicago, a Homeless Man Gains Currency in Death
In life, Joseph Gould was one of America's forgotten: a homeless black man who scratched out an existence on the streets of this city washing the windshields of cars stopped at red lights.
But in death, Mr.
Gould has become the subject of radio talk shows, a City Council hearing and protest marches as another bloody symbol in the national debate about justice, race, class and the police.


BOOKS IN BRIEF: NONFICTION
THE MIND'S FATE  A Psychiatrist Looks at His Profession -- Thirty Years of Writings.
By Robert Coles.
Little, Brown, $25.95.
Unconcerned with shoring up the status of psychology as a real science, and with no marriage-saving, desk-clearing theory of consciousness to promote, Robert Coles has always stood out from the mass of writing psychiatrists as a beacon of readability.
"The Mind's Fate" comprises three decades of his fluid and ruminative essays -- social commentary, literary criticism and writings on psychiatry -- which show Dr.
Coles, a professor of psychiatry and medical humanities at Harvard, with characteristic grace penciling in and then gently erasing various answers to life's and society's great questions.
A deep conviction that psychology cannot explain everything makes Dr.
Coles's meditations on what it can explain all the more compelling.
BRUNO MADDOX


Melissa Cranmer, John E. McManus
Melissa Anne Cranmer, the daughter of Eileen Cranmer of Riverside, Conn., and R. George Cranmer of New York, was married yesterday to John Ecker McManus, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael J. McManus of Bethesda, Md.
The Rev.
Robert Loftus performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Catherine of Siena Church in Greenwich, Conn.
Mrs.
McManus, 25, graduated from Sweet Briar College and is training as a teacher at the Washington Montessori Institute in Washington.
Her father is the president of Cranmer &amp; Cranmer, a securities brokerage and specialist firm in New York.


A Parade of Steamboats Launches a Festival
An event being billed as the largest 20th-century gathering of paddle-wheel steamboats will take place on the Ohio River in Cincinnati Oct. 11 to 15.
Tall Stacks '95 is scheduled to bring together 19 riverboats, five more than the first festival's tally in 1988.
This year's celebration of the steamboating era, featuring cruises, entertainment on six stages, boat tours, exhibits and strolling singers and musicians, will take place mainly in Cincinnati, but there will also be activities in the Kentucky cities of Covington and Newport across the river.
An area for children, called Tom Sawyerville, will offer crafts, games, contests and performances.


Robert A. Friedman, Jill H. Kingsly
Dr.
Jill Hilary Kingsly and Dr.
Robert Aaron Friedman, both radiologists, are to be married today.
Rabbi Steven Kushner is to perform the ceremony at the Hilton at Short Hills, N.J.
Dr.
Kingsly, 32, is keeping her name.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received her medical degree from the Albert Einstein College of Medicine.
She has just completed a fellowship in musculoskeletal imaging at the Hospital for Special Surgery in New York.
She is a daughter of Myrna Kingsly of Short Hills and the late Dr.
Martin H. Kingsly, who was an orthodontist in Union, N.J., and Brooklyn.


Schools Learn to Live with Less
"Some teachers are not comfortable with multi-age classes," Ms.
Schaefer said, and students are bound to suffer.
The average class is expected to get five or six more pupils, with K-3 classes averaging 28 pupils, grades 4-6 averaging 32, and junior high classes averaging 34.
This growth will be especially felt in special education classes, Ms.
Schaefer said.
For example, she expects the average special ed class in the district's junior high schools to jump to 18 students from 14.
"That may not seem like a lot," she said, "but it is when you're talking about one teacher assigned to 18 adolescent kids who need special help."
The loss of two guidance counselors leaves the elementary schools with only four in a district where each school had a its own guidance counselor just a few years ago.
"AIDS is very prevalent in our community," Ms.
Schaefer said.
"I can't go in a classroom where there isn't at least one, or maybe two, children who have lost close relatives to AIDS."  MONTE WILLIAMS


Corrections
An article in the Neighborhood Report last Sunday about Frederic S. Papert, the promoter of the proposed 42d Street trolley, referred incorrectly to his wife, Diane, who originated the idea.
She is not deceased.


Returning To the Sound Of Those Golden Years
David Bowie, whose album "Let's Dance" was one of the hippest of the 80's, couldn't feel worse about that decade now.
"The worst thing that could have happened to me was to have a big hit with 'Let's Dance,' " he said.
"I had never been popular with the masses, and suddenly I was in this place where I was on bubble gum wrappers. I thought, 'What do I do with this?' "
In the 70's, of course, Mr.
Bowie, who was born and raised in London, turned out some of the most innovative popular music on either side of the Atlantic, beginning with the aptly named "Space Oddity" in 1972 and culminating, in 1977, with a pair of albums that rank among rock-and-roll's most inventive, "Low" and "Heroes." In New Hampshire, where I was warehoused (at boarding school) for the 70's, no party was complete without a succession of Mr.
Bowie's funk-modernist grooves.
"Suffragette City," "Rebel Rebel," "Fame" -- all his hits adorned our gymnasium dances.


FOSSILIZING
AFTER THREE years out of sight, the dinosaurs are back, in splendid new quarters, at the Museum of Natural History in New York.
A different kind of fossil meanwhile continues on permanent display, in language.
When President Clinton describes someone as dumb as a post or Senators talk about each other as show horses or workhorses, they're giving merely routine examples of Washington political vernacular -- but superb illustrations of how a living language changes and churns.
Each generation finds ways to reflect new experience.
Yet many old expressions remain embedded in the language, long after the experience that prompted them has passed.
Just as deep digs in Egypt or Kenya or Yucatan yield up the bones of species long extinct, earthy expressions often yield up language fossils.


IN BRIEF
New Law Raises Fees For Drunken Driver Classes
From now on, drunken drivers in New Jersey will pay more for rehabilitation.
Governor Whitman has signed a law raising the fees for mandatory training.
The higher fees will mean $1 million more a year for the Intoxicated Driver Resource Centers, run by the Health Department.


Some Say Streamlining Customs at Miami May Help Smugglers
For travelers, few Customs stations are more annoying than Miami's, where vigilance against drug smuggling can make the wait as long as three hours.
As bags are searched, the line backs up and the hours tick by.
Relief, however, is in sight, now that the White House has picked Miami International Airport for an experimental streamlining that could cut the maximum stay in Customs and immigration to 45 minutes.


IMMIGRANTS IN, NATIVE WHITES OUT
Whites would not flee these high-immigration areas if there were perks for not doing so.
If you stay, you're held responsible for all sorts of problems and get little in return.
RICHARD BENNETT Yonkers


Prudential Dismisses Struggling Child
Some initial public offerings are snapped up by eager buyers.
The brokers have the luxury of sorting through the piles of orders, deciding who will be honored by being allowed to buy shares.
So it has been with many technology companies this year.
And then there are the deals that must be sold, the companies whose stories do not whet the appetites of investors.
Perhaps they are in an industry not currently fashionable on Wall Street, or perhaps their history raises questions.
For those, it takes a determined sales campaign.


PHOTOGRAPHY
Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the months ahead.
As usual, programs change, some events are sold out, and some have not yet scheduled locations or exact opening dates.
Unless indicated, all dates listed are for openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone numbers have a 212 area code.
Addresses for locations in New York City cited more than once appear at the bottom of page 68.
September
"POINTS OF ENTRY" -- In an unusual, perhaps unique collaboration, three museums address three different aspects of a hot topic, immigration.
The Museum of Photographic Arts in San Diego traces the history of the camera's involvement with immigration; the Center for Creative Photography in Tucson, Ariz., presents an America as European emigre photographers re-envisioned it, and the Ansel Adams Center for Photography in San Francisco looks at contemporary work that deals with issues of cultural duality and displacement.
Opening at the three locations Tues. to Fri., then traveling after March 10 to International Museum of Photography, Rochester; Center for African-American History and Culture, Smithsonian Institution, Washington; High Museum of Art, Atlanta, and Center for the Fine Arts, Miami. (619-238-7559).


Biking Across the Channel
People swim the English Channel, and now they can also cross it by bicycle -- sort of.
Le Shuttle trains, which link England and France via the Eurotunnel, now transport bicycles.
For $24.50 (including the rider's fare), cyclists can place their bikes on a trailer towed by a minibus, which rides through the tunnel on the train.
The trailer has room for 12 bikes.


Trios in Southport, Duets in Westport
THE fall season is gradually unfolding, but there remains a bit of unfinished summer business, as the South Shore Music Festival concludes its 62d season at the Pequot Library in Southport.
Appearing at Friday's 8:30 P.M. finale is the Eroica Trio, with a program listing trios of Mozart, Brahms and Shostakovich.
The pianist Erika Nickrenz, the violinist Adela Pena and the cellist Sara Sant'Ambrogio will remain to present the South Shore Festival's first children's concert at the Library, the 11 A.M.
Saturday session featuring demonstrations, commentary and pizza.
For more details, call 227-0695 or 227-7153.
For many years, Performers of Connecticut have also been celebrating young artists via the annual Heida Hermanns Competition, and at 8:30 on Saturday, "Duos and Dances" at the Westport Arts Center will help raise money for the 1995 scholarship awards.


Allyson Farmer, Ronald DeMatteo
Allyson Star Farmer, a daughter of Mary and Arthur V. Farmer of Lenoir, N.C., was married yesterday to Dr.
Ronald Paul DeMatteo, the son of Donna DeMatteo of Clifton, N.J., and Ronald C. DeMatteo of Upper Montclair, N.J.
The Rev.
M.
Joe Parker performed the ceremony at the Rumple Memorial Presbyterian Church in Blowing Rock, N.C.
Mrs.
DeMatteo, 29, is a vice president of Berwind Financial Group, an investment banking concern in Philadelphia.
She graduated from the University of North Carolina at Greensboro and received an M.B.A. from New York University and a master's degree in Spanish from Middlebury College.


IMMIGRANTS IN, NATIVE WHITES OUT
During criminology's infancy, a sociologist who discovered that most prisoners had brown eyes brayed: "Eureka! The gene for brown-eyedness causes criminality!"
Similar sociological shenanigans appeared in "Immigrants In, Natives Whites Out." Noting the arrival of many immigrants and the departure of native whites in states like California, the authors bellowed, "Cause and effect!"


New Type of Kidnapping Strikes Fear Into Chinese Immigrants
On the surface, the kidnapping and murder of Gao Liqin, the Chinese immigrant whose mutilated body was found in a basement apartment in Brooklyn on Sept. 2, had all the markings of an abduction by smugglers.
Ms.
Gao had come to this country from Fujian Province, a prime smuggling area, and, like thousands before her, had assumed a crushing $30,000 debt to pay for her trip.
Kidnapping is a common fate for those unable to pay off their debt to the smugglers.


Seeking A.T.M.-Style Probation System
With a growing number of people on probation and dwindling money to pay for the staff to handle them, New York City is preparing to use an automated system that would have probationers report to electronic kiosks instead of probation officers.
The idea has been discussed off and on for several years, as the city's fiscal picture has grown steadily bleaker.
But the city's Department of Correction has now set out its specific plan, and it began advertising last week to find a company to build the kiosks.
They would go into operation by the end of next year.


Katie Simon, Michael Morris
Johanna Katrina Simon, a daughter of William E. Simon of New Vernon, N.J., and the late Carol Girard Simon, was married yesterday to Michael Walter Morris, the son of Marianne and Walter H. Morris Jr. of Harding Township, N.J.
Msgr.
John F. Corr performed the ceremony at the Church of Christ the King in New Vernon.
Mrs.
Morris, 28, is known as Katie.
Later this month she is to become an assistant kindergarten teacher at the Peck School in Morristown, N.J.
She graduated from New England College.
Her father, the former Secretary of the Treasury and president of the United States Olympic Committee, is now the chairman of William E. Simon &amp; Sons Inc., a private merchant bank in Morristown.


THE MAN INSIDE BILL CLINTON'S FOREIGN POLICY
I am writing to correct Jason DeParle's mischaracterization of my son's grandfather, William Hard, as "a muckraking journalist."
Anthony Lake's grandfather, though he was an early and passionate advocate of women's rights and crusaded against several social ills, was a lifelong Republican.
He fought for Theodore Roosevelt, whom he knew, was a friend both of Calvin Coolidge and Herbert Hoover and was a longtime writer for The Saturday Evening Post and Reader's Digest.


Hamptons Bookstores Take Extra Steps for Hometown Writers
SO many authors, so little shelf space.
As the manager of a small bookstore, Henry Alegria would like to display prominently all the local writers.
But as the manager of Bookhampton in East Hampton, Mr.
Alegria has found that local writers keep cropping up faster than the crabgrass.
Take Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato.
Some do, some don't.
Buy his book, that is.
This summer the senator became an "author" and a part-time resident of East Hampton.
The combination brought him into Bookhampton the other day.


THEATER
Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the months ahead.
As usual, programs change, some events are sold out, and some have not yet scheduled locations or exact opening dates.
Unless indicated, all dates listed are for openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone numbers have a 212 area code.
Addresses for locations in New York City cited more than once appear at the bottom of page 68.
September
"THE ISLAND OF LOST SHOES" -- Even if Imelda isn't in the audience, she should be.
Bloolips, the British troupe of high-heeled clowns, extends the season for summer camp with a musical about shipwrecked drag queens.
The songs are by Ray Dobbins.
Through Sept. 24.
Performance Space 122.


Caryn J. Carton, Robert Moskowitz
Caryn Jennifer Carton, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul Carton of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married last evening in Tarrytown, N.Y., to Dr.
Robert Marc Moskowitz, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Harold Moskowitz of West Hartford, Conn.
Rabbi Amiel Wohl performed the ceremony at Tarrytown House.
Mrs.
Moskowitz, 24, graduated from New York University and is a candidate for a master's degree in education at Lesley College.
Her father is an orthopedic surgeon in Yonkers and the president of the Westchester County Medical Society in White Plains.
Her mother, Bobbe Carton, is an associate broker at Oshlag-Eisner Realty in New Rochelle.


From Way Up Above to Deep Down Below


Esiason Hears the Grumbles but Continues His Quest
Maybe his days as a quarterback are starting to dwindle.
Maybe not.
In any case, Boomer Esiason desperately wants a place in Jets -- make that New York -- history.
And the home opener today against the Colts, in front of those edgy, often disappointed fans at Giants Stadium, is where he continues his search.


Detonation in the French Pacific
WITH the flip of a switch on a tiny white-sand atoll close to nowhere, France may have managed to guarantee the end of centuries of Western colonialism in the Pacific.
What began in the 1520's when Magellan bravely crossed an uncharted ocean to discover Guam and the Philippines for the Spanish crown could well be drawing to an ugly close because of the determination of a newly elected French President to defy world opinion and test nuclear weapons in the pristine waters of Polynesia.


Jamie Whitten, Who Served 53 Years in House, Dies at 85
Jamie L. Whitten, a son of the Old South who made a smooth transition to the New South as a Democratic Congressman from Mississippi for 53 years -- the record for the longest service in the House of Representatives -- died today in Oxford, Miss.
Mr.
Whitten, who was chairman of the powerful Appropriations Committee from 1979 to 1992, was 85.
Mr.
Whitten had been under treatment since the beginning of August for cardiac problems and kidney failure and was hospitalized on Sept. 4 at Oxford's Baptist Memorial Hospital-North Mississippi, in the heart of his old House district.


Catherine Denn, Andrew S. Freed
Catherine Elizabeth Denn, a daughter of Edward and Patricia Denn of Groveland, Mass., is to be married today to Andrew Scott Freed, the son of Arthur and Judith Freed of White Plains.
Rabbi David Kudan is to officiate at the Memorial Church at Harvard University in Cambridge, Mass.
The Rev.
Robert Ver Eecke, a Roman Catholic priest, is to take part in the ceremony.
The bride, 34, graduated from Merrimack College and is a candidate for a master's degree in public administration at Harvard.


Every Dog Has His Day
A canine fashion show benefits Powars, Sept. 7.


Hospital Joining Club on Fitness
IN an unusual association between a public hospital and a private health club, the Westchester County Medical Center here has announced that it will open a fitness evaluation center at Club Fit in Briarcliff Manor and staff it with cardiac specialists.
The association is believed to be the first of its kind in the Northeast.
William Beck, general manager of Club Fit in Jefferson Valley and the club official in charge of coordinating the new cardiac services, said that similar agreements are already in effect on the West Coast, "which is four or five years ahead of us in this respect." He said his club's association with the public hospital was prompted by the recent emphasis on preventive care in medicine.


The Red Ink Is Drying, and the Schools Are Back. And Struggling.
After Mayor Giuliani cut the Board of Education's projected spending for the new fiscal year by $750 million, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines told the city's 32 community school districts, which operate elementary, intermediate and junior high schools, that they were responsible for a total of $72 million in cuts.
But the amount of each district's sacrifice -- and its options -- shifted all summer as projections of how many teachers would take early retirement changed and state officials refused to shorten the school day for elementary pupils.
Days before school opened last week, many superintendents had to identify other cost-cutting measures, including enlarging classes, cutting after-school programs and sending excess guidance counselors, teachers and assistant principals to the district office or the Board of Education for reassignment.
Students, Jamming In, Crowd Programs Out
There's a joke among teachers in central Queens that all roads from Kennedy International Airport lead to Community School District 24.
With more than 32,600 students, the district has one of the largest enrollments in the city -- and among the most diverse.
At least 80 percent of students are recent immigrants, and they speak more than 150 languages.


Rescuing Wisdom
To the Editor:
Peter Finn writes engagingly about Thomas Cahill's "How the Irish Saved Civilization" (Aug. 13).
However, I was stunned by the omission in his statement that Mr.
Cahill notes "the survival of a lot of literary material in Jewish communities and in Byzantium" in addition to the preservation of classical learning by those diligent Irish monks.


CRITIC'S CHOICE


Doing More With Less: School Buses, Too
On the first day of school last Thursday, Marita Regan, the principal of Public School 222 in Marine Park, found herself doing more with less.
Already reeling from the loss of seven teachers who took early retirement and were not replaced, Ms.
Regan was confronted with parents registering far more students than had been expected.
Every available nook at the elementary school -- from book closets to the gymnasium -- has been requisitioned for classroom space.
And this year there is no money for new books or furniture.
"We can't take much more of these cuts," Ms.
Regan said.
"This will surely have a negative impact on the children."


Specialties Spur Rebound For Nurseries
BENDING over a clump of beach grass that was growing in the middle of a North Shore field, Ellen Talmage pulled out a stalk, or culm.
"I plant one of these and I get it back thirtyfold," said Ms.
Talmage, 35, a fifth-generation member of one of Long Island's largest and oldest nursery families.


FILM
Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the months ahead.
As usual, programs change, some events are sold out, and some have not yet scheduled locations or exact opening dates.
Unless indicated, all dates listed are for openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone numbers have a 212 area code.
Addresses for locations in New York City cited more than once appear at the bottom of page 68.
September
"CLOCKERS" -- Any Spike Lee or Harvey Keitel film is a must-see.
This double-must is based on Richard Price's novel, which brought new life to two stale ideas: good cop/bad cop, good brother/bad brother.
With John Turturro and Delroy Lindo.
Wed.


New York Can Regain Its Place as Transit Pioneer
To the Editor:
Fred Papert's vision of clean, fast, high-capacity surface transit, ("Be It Vision or Folly, There Is One Man Behind the Trolley," Sept. 3), is shared by many New Yorkers who have seen modern light-rail systems in other cities throughout the world.


Out-and-Out Racism
To the Editor:
In his review of Page Smith's "Democracy on Trial: The Japanese American Evacuation and Relocation in World War II" (Aug. 20), Patrick Smith makes no mention of the lack of wartime hysteria vis-a-vis people of German and Italian heritage.
He also fails to point out not only the great psychological trauma to the elderly and to families torn from homes and businesses to live in despicable conditions, but also the material losses of homes, possessions and businesses, for which these people were never wholly compensated.


Sheryl E. Reich, David Greenberg
Sheryl Esther Reich, a lawyer, and David Martin Greenberg, a retailing manager, are to be married today in New York.
Rabbi Michael Strassfeld is to officiate at the Congregation Ansche Chesed.
The bride, 41, is an associate at Lefcourt &amp; Dratel, a New York law firm.
She graduated from the State University at Stony Brook, L.I., and received her law degree from the State University at Buffalo.
She is the daughter of Jeanne Reich of Cranbury, N.J., and the late Sidney Reich.


Finding Out What Plants Can Handle a Drought
September is a good time to take stock of plants that have suffered through this summer's drought in the Northeast.
In my own garden in Maryland, the butterfly bushes and Russian sage are full of bee-covered blossoms.
On the other hand, the snakeroot, or cimicifuga, which never did well in our hard clay soil -- I think it would be happy with its feet near a marsh -- is headed for the compost pile.


Deal Expected On Street Fair In Little Italy
Virtually assuring that New York's largest street fair will go on as scheduled, city officials and organizers of the Feast of San Gennaro said yesterday they had all but reached agreement to open the festival's books to the Mayor's handpicked monitor to answer charges of Mafia control.
A day after Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani threatened to shut down the festival by withholding a street permit, he said he expected the issue to be settled before the end of the weekend.


MARKET TIMING
Monday The National Association of Manufacturers begins its three-day annual meeting in San Francisco.
Robert Parry, the president of the Federal Reserve, is scheduled to speak.
Tuesday The producer price index, the first of two inflation indicators out this week, is expected to show inflation still in check.
Forecast: up 0.1 percent.
The index was unchanged in July and fell 0.1 percent in June.
The Rockefeller Group is scheduled to present a reorganization plan for the bankrupt Rockefeller Center at a Federal bankruptcy court hearing in New York.
H.
J.
Heinz is expected to report fiscal first-quarter earnings of 69 cents a share.
Wednesday Labor Department releases the consumer price index for August.
Forecast: prices up 0.2 percent, the same increase reported for July.
The index rose 0.1 percent in June.
The Labor Department will also report August real earnings.
They rose 0.8 percent in July and 1.2 percent in June.
The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development is expected to begin negotiations in Paris over rules to ease foreign investment.
The Reader's Digest Association is expected to report fiscal fourth-quarter earnings of 23 cents a share.
Thursday The Commerce Department reports retail sales for August.
Forecast: up 0.2 percent, following a 0.1 percent decline in July and a 0.8 percent increase in June.
The Labor Department releases its initial weekly unemployment report.
Friday The Federal Reserve reports industrial production and capacity utilization for August.
Forecast: production up 0.4 percent, after a 0.1 percent increase in July.
Utilization is expected at 83.5, from 83.4 percent in July.


Beyond Brown Grass, Nature Withers in Drought
This summer's record dry spell has left lawns brown with thirst, forests parched, reservoirs and creeks drained, and crops wilted.
It has also disrupted nature's patterns in less obvious ways, some of them deeply alarming, say naturalists, biologists and other experts.
Les Alpaugh, the state forester, says the drought could kill one out of every 20 trees in the state -- far more than this season's forest fires.
"It's an extreme situation," he said.
"For many, the roots can't get enough water out of the ground."


The Red Ink Is Drying, and the Schools Are Back. And Struggling.
After Mayor Giuliani cut the Board of Education's projected spending for the new fiscal year by $750 million, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines told the city's 32 community school districts, which operate elementary, intermediate and junior high schools, that they were responsible for a total of $72 million in cuts.
But the amount of each district's sacrifice -- and its options -- shifted all summer as projections of how many teachers would take early retirement changed and state officials refused to shorten the school day for elementary pupils.
Days before school opened last week, many superintendents had to identify other cost-cutting measures, including enlarging classes, cutting after-school programs and sending excess guidance counselors, teachers and assistant principals to the district office or the Board of Education for reassignment.
Prized Programs Stay, At Least for Now
Like other Queens school districts faced with closing budget gaps, Community School District 29 in southeastern Queens has had to reduce personnel to trim $2.7 million from its budget.
But unlike many districts, it has managed to leave several prized programs virtually untouched, at least for now.


The Nicest Places to Live Aren't Necessarily the Best
To the Editor:
"The Richest and the Poorest Blocks in Queens" (Aug. 13) detailed my section of Douglaston as the most affluent in Queens and a section of Jamaica as the poorest.


County Braces for Relentless Drought
THE Northeast region's driest August on record came to a close 10 days ago, but no one is sighing with relief.
Drought conditions are worsening daily in the county and around the state, with meteorologists predicting little rainfall in the coming weeks to soak dangerously dry wooded areas and fields and replenish depleted reservoirs.
The state's Drought Management Task Force -- in which Westchester and New York City take part -- is meeting on Wednesday in Albany, and officials are expected to upgrade the severity of the drought response from a drought watch to a warning, said Warren T. Lavery, director of the Bureau of Water Resources for the State Department of Environmental Conservation.


The Senate, Embarrassed and Proud of It
HOURS before Senator Bob Packwood finally went to the Senate floor to offer a maudlin adieu to his colleagues and career, the chairman of the Ethics Committee took care to cast the occasion in terms of the day's operative cliche of Senate sensitivity.
"There can be no doubt today that the Ethics Committee 'got it,' " Mitch McConnell insisted, offering as the Senate's bona fides the committee's 40-pound, 10-volume documentation of the sordid, grossly embarrassing sexual and official misconduct of Senator Packwood.
The exhaustive work product seemed a grafting of the Warren Commission report and "The Diary of a Flea," a wedding of the ponderous to the pornographic in its painstaking tracking of the serial gropings and denials of Senator Packwood.
Senator McConnell, a Kentucky Republican, patted the huge indictment as gingerly as an executioner's gurney as he uttered those definitive words of the Senate's day in washing its hands of Mr.
Packwood.
Remembering 1991
In behalf of his colleagues, he was trying to amend the Senate's great morality play of four years ago, rebutting the allegation that has haunted males in the Senate -- "they just don't get it" -- since the confirmation hearings of Clarence Thomas for the Supreme Court.
That painful showdown saw male Senators rendered variously glassy-eyed or combative before Anita Hill's accusations of sexual harassment.


THE CITY IN A QUIET KEY
MOST visitors do not come to New York for mild sensations.
They want the big roller-coaster ride, with noise, lights and lots of shrieking.
They're looking for the place encapsulated in the title of a recent British book about New York, "Maximum City."
But just as yang must have its yin, so max must have its min.
The mind can handle only so many powerful impressions before begging for mercy.
Those of us who live here cherish certain little corners and byways that slow down the city's pulse rate and ease its tendency to hyperventilate.
These quiet spots, usually off the beaten track, are just as much a part of New York as Rockefeller Center or Radio City.
You just have to look a little harder for them.
A five-star New York day could begin with the riverside esplanade at the edge of Carl Schurz Park, on the Upper East Side.
The park runs along East End Avenue from 84th Street to 90th Street, a long hike from the Lexington Avenue subway stop at 86th Street.
It is best known as the site of Gracie Mansion, a dignified old clapboard affair that serves as the mayor's official residence.
In truth, habitues of the park barely glance toward the old pile, most of it screened off by a gray wood fence.
Anyone with a hankering for fresh air, sunshine and a river view heads right for the esplanade.
On a recent sunny day, sunbathers were scattered all over the park -- on little patches of grass, on green wooden benches, on the brick-and-concrete columns that set off the flower beds at the center of the broad promenade.
On benches that had not been claimed by sunbathers, couples sat and chatted next to lone readers.
Urban dogs, out for a brisk walk, panted with the happy expression of animals who knew they were on to a good thing.
This is a slice of the city that everyone should taste, a public space that lifts the spirits.
New Yorkers tend to see the city as an arena of conflict and competition.
It's remarkable to see the change in human behavior that a bit of green, open air and flowing water can accomplish.
Dog walkers greet one another, people have been known to nod or say hello to strangers, and even homely babies get a full day's worth of admiration as they are pushed along in a stroller.
Walk toward the north end of the esplanade, and look at the Triborough Bridge and the appealing blue-green span of the footbridge to Wards Island.
Walk south and take in the sight of the Queensboro Bridge.
Look across the river at the red-and-white smokestacks of Con Edison's biggest generating station, in Long Island City (known as "Big Allis," after Allis Chalmers, the company that made the generators), and at the cool aquamarine Citicorp skyscraper rearing up to the ridiculous height of 45 stories in a three-story borough.
It would be nice to say that fat trout and largemouth bass can be seen leaping from the waters of the East River, but that would be an exaggeration.
The occasional pleasure craft provides diversion for the eye, though.
And the mere sight of the river makes a sizzling day seem 10 degrees cooler.
New York, as E. B. White famously remarked, is a city of neighborhoods.
It still is, although the visitor to Manhattan can be forgiven for finding it hard to make out the outlines of one.
It's a little easier in the so-called outer boroughs, which don't feel outer to the millions who live there.
They feel like home, and anyone who wants to get the feel of New York should spend at least a half day exploring places like Cobble Hill and Bensonhurst in Brooklyn, or Sunnyside and Ridgewood in Queens.
May I suggest Astoria, in Queens?
It's close to Manhattan, just a jump across the East River.
It is also the place I know best, after living there for 15 years.
It's a lively, unpretentious sort of place, inhabited primarily by Greeks and Italians, but also offering an ethnic smorgasbord ranging from Brazilians to Ukrainians to Bangladeshis.
Take the N train from 59th Street and Lexington Avenue, making sure to look back at the Manhattan skyline as the train rises above ground and threads its way along the approach to the Queensboro Bridge.
Proceed three stops to Broadway.
Broadway is one of the main arteries of the neighborhood, its Boulevard St.
Germain, so to speak.
Like Ditmars Boulevard and 30th Avenue a little farther north in Astoria, it has the restaurants and the night spots.
It has the butcher, the baker and, if not the candlestick maker, certainly the finest selection of sculptured Greek deities you're likely to find outside the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
The neighborhood has a cultural ornament, the American Museum of the Moving Image, two blocks south of Broadway, on 35th Avenue at 36th Street in the Kaufman-Astoria film studio complex.
The museum pre sents tasty film programs, like a Spike Lee retrospective beginning Saturday, and it has a permanent collection devoted to the art, history and technology of motion pictures, television and video.
The enormous warehouses surrounding it are sound stages, where films like "The Cocoanuts" and "The Front Page" were made back in the 20's and 30's.
Filming resumed here in the 1980's, and Hollywood stars slip in and out unobtrusively, unnoticed by Astorians.
The operation is extremely low-key, and no studio tours are offered.
The neighborhood is the thing, anyway.
Take a stroll eastward on Broadway and have a bite at Karyatis restaurant near 35th Street.
The popular spot on the street is Uncle George's, a Greek restaurant that offers a lot of food for a little money in Spartan (surely the right word here) surroundings.
Lines often spill out on the sidewalk.
Karyatis offers a more refined interpretation of Greek cuisine in a fairly tony room.
Before entering, look down the block and behold the melting pot.
Broadway between 35th and 36th Streets has an Italian restaurant called the Bank, a fabulous Ukrainian meat store with garlicky sausages that hang overhead like horse collars, and an Italian deli, not to mention Walter's hardware and Quinn's funeral parlor.
Look a little farther down the street, to the Atlantic Bank in the middle of the next block.
One day about 10 years ago, a former cabdriver walked in, withdrew his life savings of $30,000, and threw the money up in the air outside the bank in a grand gesture of defiance, despair, jubilation, or some combination of the above.
It made quite a stir.
Some of it was even recovered.
Wander north down some of the side streets, like 35th, 36th or 37th, and continue as far as 30th Avenue. (Yes, this is confusing and, no, you have not gone out of your mind if you find yourself at the corner of 30th Street and 30th Avenue.) The walk will take you past six-flat apartment buildings whose cheap rents make them a point of entry for immigrants, and onward to attractive blocks with one- and two-family houses, the next step up the ladder to success.
Go back to Broadway between 33d and 32d Streets and stop in at El Greco Superette, a packed little deli with a large selection of olives (try the small green Cyprus olives marinating in lemon, garlic and coriander) and every variety of feta cheese known to man, including Bulgarian and, believe it or not, French.
Step in next door and have a Greek coffee, a baklava and a Metaxa brandy in Omonia, a cafe, pastry shop and conversation pit.
To take the memory with you, go into the Panellinion gift store on the corner, the one with the Greek gods and temples in the window, and ask for a tape of rebetika music, the kind Zorba danced to, by the great singer George Dalaras.
Buy a piping-hot loaf of Italian bread from Parisi's on your way up the stairs to the elevated station.
Proceed to Greenwich Village.
At first glance the neighborhood would seem to be the last place in New York that qualified as being off the beaten track.
The human herd that throngs Sixth Avenue, Washington Square Park and Seventh Avenue South makes the Village a stirring spectacle but also a pedestrian nightmare.
There are times, on weekend nights, when the entire Village seems to be rehearsing a new urban performance genre, the nonviolent riot.
For those who fear sensory overload, the best advice is Horace Greeley's: Go West.
In the narrow, confusing streets west of Seventh Avenue, an entirely different Village unfolds, a curious 19th-century maze so quiet that it seems as though a giant door has closed on the rest of the city.
There are no mandatory sights here, only exquisite, shady blocks with beautiful Federal and Italianate town houses rubbing shoulders with classic brownstones.
Walk along Barrow Street east of Hudson and follow Commerce Street as it loops south into the tranquil backwater where the Cherry Lane Theater is located.
Follow Perry Street between Bleecker and West Fourth, or Grove Street west of Bleecker.
Admire old cast-iron railings, fancy stonework or curious, inexplicable features like the protruding Tudor bay window at 73 Perry.
By all means head to 75 1/2 Bedford (between Morton and Commerce), the narrowest house in the village, with its Dutch-style roof.
Built in 1873, it is a mere nine and a half feet wide.
Edna St.
Vincent Millay lived there in the 1920's.
There is no official itinerary in these parts. Just follow your feet.
As the day wanes, spirits tend to flag, feet throb, and even the most energetic brain screams out for the kind of mental massage that only a tall pint of beer can provide.
The setting matters, so head uptown and pay a visit to the Landmark Tavern, at 11th Avenue and 46th Street.
Built in 1868, the Landmark is an old waterfront saloon that got left behind when landfill pushed the waterfront away from it.
It's a classic, part of a grand old New York fraternity that includes P. J. Clarke's on Third Avenue at 55th Street, the Old Town on East 18th Street, and Walker's on North Moore Street in Tribeca.
The floors are tile, the ceiling is tin and the bar is solid mahogany.
The Landmark has Bass, Murphy's Stout, Saranac and McSorley's on tap, along with a long list of single-malt whiskies and single-barrel bourbons.
It does not court a trendy crowd.
It does not get one.
Everyone is happy.
You will be, too.
Exploring city byways
American Museum of the Moving Image, 35th Avenue at 36th Street, (718) 764-0077, across the street from the revived Astoria Studios, is devoted to movies, television and video.
The museum's second- and third-floor galleries are closed until February, but Computer Space, a digital game arcade, is open, and the film program continues, with a Spike Lee retrospective beginning Saturday.
Hours: Tuesday to Friday noon to 4 P.M.
Saturday and Sunday noon to 6 P.M.
Closed Monday.
On weekdays admission and film screenings are free.
Weekend admission $5, children and students free.
At Karyatis, 35-03 Broadway, (718) 204-0666, a meal for two with a bottle of wine will cost about $70.
Uncle George's, 33-19 Broadway, (718) 626-0593, has meals from $4.50 to $12 a person.
A glass of wine costs $1, a kilo of wine (about 32 ounces by volume) $6.
El Greco Superette is at 32-16 Broadway; (718) 274-0309.
At Omonia, 32-20 Broadway, (718) 274-6650, a Greek coffee, baklava and a Metaxa brandy will cost $11.75.
The Panellinion Gift Center is at 32-02 Broadway; (718) 274-5525.
The Parisi Brothers Bakery is at 30-17 Broadway; (718) 728-5282.
Landmark Tavern, 626 11th Avenue, at 46th Street, (212) 757-8595, serves hearty American food.
A complete meal, including appetizer, entree, coffee, dessert and a pint of beer, costs about $30.


Drought: Where Help Is Needed, Where Not
GARDENERS in the Northeast will not soon forget the summer of '95 -- no rain, prolonged heat spells and high humidity.
Everything turned droopy, then brittle under the onslaught, even the weeds.
The most obvious evidence of the season's severity is the suburban lawn.
It turned to straw.
But this is the least of the homeowner's worries.
The grass is simply dormant.
Deep rooted, to depths of six feet and more, these plants should easily survive.


Ms. Tannenbaum, Mr. Nussbaum
Alexis Gabrielle Tannenbaum and Peter Gerald Nussbaum, whose magazine, Natural Living Today, is to begin publication in December, were married last evening at the University Club in New York.
Rabbi Amy Ehrlich officiated.
The bride, 27, graduated from Brandeis University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jeremy Tannenbaum of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The bride's father is the president of Enchanter Entertainment, a film production company in New York.
Her mother, known professionally as E. B. Asbyll, is an artist.


School Task No. 1: Find More Room
AS inevitable as new school wardrobes and crisp morning air, the start of the new school year carries with it certain housekeeping chores.
For students and their parents, it is the frenzied search to find just the right backpack, binder and lunchbox.
For teachers, there are the familiar rituals of restoring their classrooms to perfect, welcoming order for their new pupils.
But for many school district administrators this year, the usual scramble to have their buildings ready for the current academic season that began this last week was complicated by upswings in enrollment that exceeded projections.
In some communities, new housing developments brought an influx of families with school-age children.
In others, neighborhood increases in immigrant populations corresponded to more children entering grade school.


Corrections
A sketch with the Soapbox column last Sunday by Myra S. Goldstein, a public school teacher in the Bronx who chose to accept the Board of Education's recent offer of early retirement, carried an erroneous credit.
The illustrator was William Neeper.


Andrea Combes And Eric Olsson
Andrea Walbridge Combes, the daughter of Alice Schwab Combes of Danbury, Conn., and Abbott C. Combes 4th of Bedford Hills, N.Y., was married yesterday to Dr.
Leif Eric Olsson, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Carl Olsson of Larchmont, N.Y.
The Rev.
Richard Tabor performed the ceremony at the Congregational Church in Salisbury, Conn.
Ms.
Combes, 29, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Bates College and is to receive a master's degree in counseling psychology this fall from Lesley College.
Her father is an editor of The New York Times Magazine.
Her mother is a guidance counselor in Ridgefield, Conn.


An Angry Man, Ugly Epithets, a Gun
It was a scene of terrifying ugliness on a New York City bus: a blustering, apparently drunken man with a beer bottle in a paper bag, pushing his way through the crowd, then confronting a man in a turban, an Indian-born medical doctor with six college degrees, a gentle, level-headed man who had always tried to avoid conflict.
They were aboard the northbound M-15 bus on First Avenue near 42d Street about 8:15 Friday night when the man came lurching and stumbling through the crowd, Dr.
Kanwarjit Singh, a 40-year-old internist in residence at New York University Medical Center, recalled yesterday.


Corrections
The Behind the Wheel column in the Automobiles section on Aug. 20, about the GMC Sierra SLT and other 1995 model pickup trucks, misstated the comparison between sales of such light trucks and those of cars.
Cars outsell trucks.
Light truck sales are greater only among several domestic brands that offer both cars and trucks.


Agency Offers the Poor More Than Just Sandwiches
To the Editor:
"Three Men Under a Tree" (Aug. 13) mentions a social service agency that gives out free sandwiches to the homeless twice a week.
That agency, as 241 West 72d Street, is a project of the National Council of Jewish Women New York Section.
More important for the three men under the tree, it also operates the Council Senior Center.


Terror on a City Bus
It was a scene of terrifying ugliness on a New York City bus: a blustering, apparently drunken man with a beer bottle in a paper bag, pushing through the crowd, then confronting a man in a turban, an Indian-born medical doctor who had always tried to avoid conflict.
The drunken man raised his bottle as if to strike.
That is when someone noticed the bulge in his waistband and shouted: "Gun! He's got a gun!"
Article, page 47.


Disasters and the Dollar Affect Tokyo Tourism
A GOVERNMENT official admitted the other day that his daughter, who is at school in Pennsylvania, had planned to bring an American friend to Japan for summer vacation but that the friend had backed out at the last minute.
" 'Japan has earthquakes almost every day, crazy gas attacks in the subways, and even the top police chief was shot at!' " he quoted the friend's mother as saying.
" 'Japan is not a safe place anymore.' "


A Sheath With a Past
The Chinese cheongsam, an early form of the sheath dress, is enjoying a revival.
Young women find them at Chinatown boutiques, where ready-made cheongsams -- traditional satin brocades with stand-up collars and side slits -- cost around $60.
Custom versions can be ordered at Mott Street fabric shops for $200 to $300.
Uptown, the fashion world is reviving the 1950's sleeveless sheath.
Both groups of sheath wearers are part of a trend, making a shift from sportswear separates to the one-piece dress, which can be slipped on in 30 seconds.


S. K. Rimmer, W. H. Cannell
Stephanie Kirsten Rimmer, the daughter of Marily and James W. Rimmer Jr. of Los Gatos, Calif., was married yesterday to William Harley Cannell, a son of Elizabeth and John R. Cannell of Montclair, N.J.
The Rev.
Janet Griffin officiated at the Episcopal Church of St.
Mary the Virgin in San Francisco.
Mrs.
Cannell, 26, graduated from the University of Oregon.
She is a saleswoman for Young's Market, a beverage distributor in Union City, Calif.
Her father owns Hayward Nissan, a dealership in Hayward, Calif.


REPUBLICANS DRAW PLAN FOR SLOWING MEDICARE GROWTH
In a Medicare plan to be unveiled next week, Republicans expect to propose increasing most premiums, imposing annual limits on the growth of the program and reducing payments to doctors, hospitals and suppliers.
Republicans said their plan would also propose slowing the growth of Medicare by encouraging elderly people to join health maintenance organizations.


U.S. Has Evolved Beyond Tribal Conflicts; When Texas Joined
To the Editor:
Re "Ethnic Cleansing Didn't Start in Bosnia" (Week in Review, Sept. 3):


Leslie Morgan, Perry Steiner
Leslie Morgan, a daughter of Julia Harmon Morgan of Westmoreland Hills, Md., and Donald L. Morgan of Tokyo, was married last evening to Perry Winter Steiner, the son of Patricia Winter Davidson of Somerset, N.J., and Joseph Steiner of New York.
Rabbi Charles Davidson performed the ceremony at the West Side Tennis Club in Forest Hills, Queens.
The couple received M.B.A.'s from the University of Pennsylvania.
Mrs.
Steiner, 30, is an international marketing manager at the McNeil Specialty Products Company in New Brunswick, N.J.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard University.
Her father is a partner in the Tokyo office of Cleary, Gottlieb, Steen &amp; Hamilton, the New York law firm.
Her mother is a special-education teacher and the director of assessments in special education at the Ivymount School in Rockville, Md.


The Nicest Places to Live Aren't Necessarily the Best
To the Editor:
"The Richest and the Poorest Blocks in Queens" (Aug. 13) detailed my section of Douglaston as the most affluent in Queens and a section of Jamaica as the poorest.


New Luxury Hotels Join Singapore's Roster
Several international chains are opening hotels in Singapore this year, among them the Ritz-Carlton Hotel Company, Inter-Continental Hotels and Resorts, and Shangri-La Hotels and Resorts.
A Ritz-Carlton hotel will be the centerpiece of the quirkily spelled Millenia Singapore, a new waterfront development, along with a second hotel (which has not yet been signed up), a shopping center and two office towers.
Scheduled to open in mid-January, the Ritz-Carlton, Millenia Singapore will have 532 guest rooms and 80 suites whose large windows will provide views of the skyline and Marina Bay.
The hotel will have three restaurants, a 24-hour business center and meeting facilities, an outdoor swimming pool, a fitness center, tennis courts and seven acres of landscaped tropical gardens.
Rates start at $316 a night for a double room.
Reservations: (800) 241-3333.


Chronicle of Abuse: The Packwood Papers -- A special report.; Packwood Diaries: A Rare Look At Washington's Tangled Web
Senator Bob Packwood had a problem on his conscience in 1989.
Ronald Crawford, a lobbyist for the Shell Oil Company, urgently needed the Senator's help.
To his diary, Mr.
Packwood confessed that he put aside his beliefs to accommodate his friend.
"Ron, I still hate the oil companies, but I'll do you a favor," the Senator said.
The Senate Finance Committee, on which Senator Packwood was the senior Republican, passed a special tax bill avidly sought by Shell.
The bill became law.


Schools Learn to Live with Less
But just below the surface, other services are suffering, said Superintendent James Mazza.
The DOME Alternative School, which had five teachers assigned to 30 students at risk of dropping out, was abolished.
Six of 17 drug and alcohol abuse prevention jobs were cut.
Special music performances from Lincoln Center were eliminated, at least for now.
Three after-school centers were cut, and extended school hours are being curtailed.
Two teacher-training centers closed.
Special education also lost two of five language coordinators and its one industrial arts post.
"It's the first time in my memory," Mr.
Mazza said, "that special ed has been cut." B.L.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
LOWER EAST SIDE  Jewish Neighborhood As Concept and Celebration
Knishes, kosher pizza, potato soup and kosher Chinese food will be in abundance today along East Broadway between Rutgers and Montgomery Streets at the 19th Annual Jewish Festival. (Above, last year's festival.)
"It's a celebration of the concept of the Jewish Lower East Side, past present and future," said Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, a Manhattan Democrat, a sponsor.
There will be food stands, rides, games, arts, crafts and people selling yarmulkes, biblical pictures and T-shirts, and performances by musicians like Robyn Spector, the puppeteer Jonathan Geffner and Yoel Sharabi and the Malka Orchestra.
Lower East Side Jewish Festival; East Broadway between Rutgers and Montgomery Streets; today, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; free; (212) 385-6611.
CROWN HEIGHTS  Arab Culture, Without the Biases
Joe Pedoto, operations director of the Ethnic Folk Arts Center, says its mission "is to counteract negative stereotypes, like Italians associated with organized crime, Arabs with fundamentalism and terrorism."
The center, on Varick Street in Lower Manhattan, sponsors cultural festivals with music, food, dance and folklore of various ethnic groups.
Next weekend, it is sponsoring Mahrajan al-Fan, the second annual festival of Arab World Culture, at The Brooklyn Museum.
The program will include more than 60 Arab-American musicians, singers, dancers (below left, the Egyptian dancer Husni), poets and storytellers.
There will also be a fashion show of traditional garb, native foods and lectures about the museum's collections of Islamic and Egyptian art.
The Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway at Washington Avenue; Saturday, Sept. 16, noon to 7 P.M.; Sunday, Sept. 17, noon to 5 P.M.; $15 for adults, $8 for children, $25 for a two-day pass; (718) 638-5000 ext. 230.
FLUSHING  Colombian Folk Tale In Bilingual Musical
The Latin-American Cultural Center of Queens will present the musical "And the Carnival Erupted!" at Queens Theater in the Park in Flushing Meadows Corona Park.
The story, presented in Spanish with a simultaneous English translation, is that of a simple peasant who receives five wishes, which he uses to outsmart gamblers, the Devil and death.
It is "an old folk tale from Colombia," said Ruby Danta, the cultural center's acting director.
Queens Theater in the Park, Flushing Meadows Corona Park, Flushing; Saturday, Sept. 16, 8 P.M.; $12; (718) 760-0064.
ALSO AROUND TOWN MUSICAL TRIBUTE The late Jimmy Keyes, a co-writer of the song "Sh-Boom" and a member of the Chords, will be eulogized at Abyssinian Baptist Church, 138th Street and Seventh Avenue; performances by the Cadillacs, Five Discs, Velours, members of the Drifters and the Harptones; Monday, Sept. 11, 7 P.M.; free; (212) 475-8872.
CHELSEA GARDENS Guided tour begins at 4 P.M., Saturday, Sept. 16, at 345 West 22d Street, between Eighth and Ninth Avenues, proceeds to private rooftop and ground-level gardens on West 22d Street and ends with a reception from 6 P.M. to 7 P.M. at Chelsea Garden Center; tickets: $12.50 in advance, $15 day of tour.
SINGLES SWING Tavern on the Green, Central Park West and 65th Street, sets aside a section of outdoor garden tables every Wednesday night at 9 P.M. for singles to meet and dance to the music of Frank Sinatra, Tony Bennett, Nat King Cole and other singers of popular standards; $5 and no drink minimum; through September; in case of rain, 9 P.M., Thursday; (212) 576-1300.
MONIQUE P. YAZIGI


The Bonus Holdup
YOU DON'T KNOW the meaning of anarchy until you've seen Wall Street at bonus time.
As Labor Day recedes in the rearview mirror and Thanksgiving comes in sight, each firm creates a committee to decide the bonus for each employee while each employee tries in various ways to convince the committee that he is underpaid.
The trick here has always been to point out the terrible injustice of the $685,000 you were paid last year without seeming either ridiculous or ungrateful.
A rumor that you have received a big offer from a rival firm is helpful, so long as you aren't caught spreading it.
It's treasonous to complain too loudly, but it's suicidal not to complain at all.
The person who rises above the bonus fray is as Godforsaken as the man who stands back from the luggage conveyor belt at the Calcutta airport.
He'll spend the rest of his life waiting for his bags to arrive. (Nice guy. Shame it happened to him.) MY SPECIFIC MEMORY OF bonus time at Salomon Brothers is of an entire firm rumored to be leaving for Merrill Lynch unless they were paid the fortune they deserved.
Around mid-October everyone became artfully disgruntled.
That no one wanted to be thought to be poorly paid further complicated the ritual.
You might go into your meeting with the bonus committee disgruntled, but when you came out you were officially pleased (until 10 months later, when once again you became disgruntled).


Opening Day Jitters


CRITIC'S CHOICES


For Better or for Worse
RULES OF ENGAGEMENT  Four Couples and American Marriage Today.
By Lis Harris. 256 pp.
New York:  Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.
DIVORCE  An Oral Portrait.
By George Feifer. 322 pp.
New York: The New Press. $25.


Shevardnadze Prodded Soviet on Rights
To the Editor:
Re "Eduard Shevardnadze's Passion" (editorial, Sept. 3):


At the Casinos
What's happening on stage at all the Atlantic City casinos this week.
Tickets are available through Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Bally's Park Place  Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 225-5977.
PARK CABARET "Legends in Concert," impersonations of Neil Diamond, Judy Garland, Whitney Houston, Roy Orbison, Tom Jones, Elvis Presley, Tina Turner, Madonna, Elton John and the Blues Brothers.
Sunday through Thursday at 7:30 and 10 P.M.; Saturday at 8 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $20; $25 on Saturday.
Caesars Atlantic City  2100 Pacific Avenue. (800) 677-7469.
CIRCUS MAXIMUS THEATER Don Rickles.
Thursday at 8 P.M., Friday at 10 P.M., Saturday at 9 P.M. and next Sunday at 8 P.M.
COMING UP Richard Jeni, Sept. 29-Oct. 1.
Claridge Hotel  Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 257-8585.
COMING UP Al Martino, Oct. 6-8.
The Grand  Boston at Pacific Avenue. (609) 340-7200.
CAMBRIDGE BALLROOM Liza Minnelli.
Friday at 10 P.M., Saturday at 8 P.M. and next Sunday at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $50-$75.
COMING UP Pual Anka with Stewie Stone, Oct. 7-8.
Harrah's Hotel Casino  Harrah's Boulevard and Huron Avenue. (800) 242-7724.
BROADWAY-BY-THE-BAY The Oak Ridge Boys.
Tonight at 8.
Tickets: $30.
Merv Griffin's Resorts Casino Hotel  1133 Boardwalk. (609) 340-6830.
COCONUT BALLROOM Ron O'Brien's "Four of a Kind," with the Four Aces, the Four Lads, the New Chordettes and the Platters.
Wednesday and Thursday at 3 and 7:30 P.M., Friday at 8 P.M., Saturday at 7 and 10 P.M. and next Sunday at 3 and 6 P.M.
Tickets: $20-$25.
COMING UP Wayne Newton, Sept. 28-30.
Sands Hotel and Casino  Indiana Avenue and Brighton Park. (800) 257-8580.
COPA ROOM "Sophisticated Rhythms." Six singers, a five-piece live band and Walter Freeman, dancer, accompany Clint Holmes as he covers hits by the Mills Brothers, Smokey Robinson, Louis Armstrong, Nat King Cole, the Supremes and the Pointer Sisters.
Sunday through Wednesday at 3:30 and 8 P.M.; Saturday at 8 and 11 P.M.
Through Nov. 26.
Tickets: $20.
Showboat Hotel Casino  Delaware and Pacific. (609) 343-4000.
MARDI GRAS SHOWROOM "The Basin Street Follies," a revue with birds, song and comedy, with new acts every month, featuring Corey Schmidt, animal trainer, and his four birds; Alto and Mantai, sketch comedians, and Duke Daniels, singer.
Monday through Saturday at 8 and 10:30 P.M.
Through Sept. 30.
Tickets: $10.
Tropworld  Boardwalk and Brighton Avenue. (800) 257-6227.
SHOWROOM The Four Tops and George Wallace.
Tonight at 7 and tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $30-$35.
COMING UP Ben Vereen, Sept. 20-25.
Trump's Castle Casino Resort  Huron Avenue and Brigantine Boulevard. (800) 777-8477.
KING'S COURT SHOWROOM Dick Clark's "American Bandstand Live: The Beat Goes On." Four decades of rock-and-roll, presented through song, dance, magic, comedy and novelty acts.
Monday through Thursday, 3:30 and 7:30 P.M.; Saturday at 7:30 and 10:30 P.M. and Sunday, 6 and 9 P.M.
Through Sept. 21.
Tickets: $12.50 on weekdays and $15 on Saturdays.
One-drink minimum.
COMING UP Steve Lawrence and Eydie Gorme, Sept. 22-23.
Trump Plaza  Boardwalk at Mississippi Avenue. (800) 759-8786.
COMING UP Frank Sinatra Jr., Sept. 28-Oct. 1.
Pat Cooper, Oct. 6-8.
Trump Taj Mahal  1000 Boardwalk, at Virginia Avenue. (609) 449-1000.
CASBAH The Diamonds.
Sunday through Thursday, 7:30 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $12.50 on weekdays and $15 on Saturdays.
One-drink minimum.
Through Sept. 21.
XANADU Keely Smith and Mal Z. Lawrence.
Tonight at 7.
Tickets: $20.
COMING UP Buddy Hackett, Sept. 22-24.


Full Disclosure
To the Editor:
Of those polled by The New York Times on their attitudes toward popular culture, 43 percent said that movie ratings did not do a good job informing people about how much sex and violence to expect in a film.
The reason may not be that the ratings are inadequate but rather that the movie industry fails to clearly print the full rating.
Many movie ads give only the letter designation, or delete the second part of the rating entirely, or print the second part so small that only a fly could read it.


Orchid Cultivation 101
Some people think orchids grow only on prom gowns.
For them, the Naples Beach Hotel in Naples, Fla., offers the Mystique of Orchids seminar Oct. 26 to 29.
Experts will speak on various facets of orchid cultivation, and workshops will offer growing tips.
The cost for two nights is $270 single or $335 double occupancy; for three nights, $330 single or $395 double.
Rates include a banquet and one breakfast.
For reservations, call (800) 237-7600.


Sponsorship Also Becomes A Chess Game
Executives from the Intel Corporation will be in the limelight today at the opening celebrations of the Intel World Chess Championship atop the World Trade Center.
But if the promoter for the event had his way, Intel might have been swept aside for its rival, I.B.M.
The tussle shows that as chess becomes more commercial, its promoters are adopting the high-pressure tactics common to popular spectator sports.


Volunteers Pitch In at State Parks
THEY have gorgeous features and fascinating pasts.
They've also got troubles -- and they don't get enough attention.
They, the state parks, need to be noticed and looked after; they need friends.
So goes the argument of a new group called Friends of Connecticut State Parks Inc.
Its president, Randall S. Miller, calls the state park system "a jewel," albeit one in need of more volunteer effort and more funds.


Beijing Says Women Have It Better in China Than in U.S.
In a detailed report on the status of women, Chinese authorities assert that women enjoy more personal safety, greater career opportunities and better legal protection in China than in the United States.
The report was an apparent response to criticism of China's human rights record by Hillary Rodham Clinton and other participants at the United Nations Fourth World Conference on Women being held here.
It argues that even though "certain groups in the United States" have attacked China over the status of its women, the Chinese Government has taken a far more progressive stance toward women than has the United States.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Woods Loses, U.S. Lags
Having won his second United States Amateur title as a teen-ager, and having heard his father predict he would win 14 major championships, the last thing anybody expected from Tiger Woods was defeat on the final hole of yesterday's pivotal Walker Cup match to a 35-year-old English law clerk.


Larger Classes, Smaller Staffs
At Public School 204 in Dyker Heights on Thursday, Celia Rossi's second graders pored over their phonics workbooks.
It was a typical first-day-of-school scene.
And the number of students in Mrs.
Rossi's class, 29, was typical of the larger, more crowded classes throughout Community School District 20, which covers Bay Ridge, Dyker Heights and Fort Hamilton.
Budget cuts have raised the average class size to 27 from 25.
Many classes are larger.
After trimming administrators and after-school programs, the superintendent, Vincent Grippo eliminated 33 teaching positions although the number of teachers will stay at 1,200.
"Somebody had to do it," said Mr.
Grippo, who cut his district office staff to 37 from 57 last year.


Big Brother Could Be Proud Of the 'Diversity' Industry
To the Editor:
"Beyond Affirmative Action," by Thomas M. O'Neill (Soapbox, Aug. 20), is a prime example of the Orwellian attitudes of the "diversity" industry.
Mr.
O'Neill writes that imposing affirmative-action quotas in hiring and promotion is not sufficient.
He demands that employers go beyond these steps and eliminate "values" that handicap women and minorities (including such wrong-think values as giving "higher marks for employees that work overtime").
Most chilling, he demands re-education and outright punishment of those who do not share his views: "We should find ways to reward those who promote diversity and to correct or punish those who don't."


Summer's Flavor, And Its Variety
IT'S that time of year again, when everyone, it seems, is trying to unload tomatoes.
After paying high prices all winter for those imported Dutch hothouse varieties that come on the vine, you can now harvest your own tomatoes or get them by the bushel for practically nothing at a farmers' market.
I never tire of that quintessential summer dish, pasta with raw tomatoes and basil.
But there are many variations on this theme.
My sister brought back a recipe from Italy in which tomatoes are mixed with diced Emmenthaler and mozzarella as a sauce for penne.
The cheeses melt slightly when they are tossed with the hot pasta and combine with the juice of the tomatoes to make a light, summery sauce.


Making It Harder For Investors to Sue
NOW that Congress is back at work after the summer recess, it faces the task of crafting, out of rival House and Senate proposals, a single bill that would change the rules governing how and when American investors can sue companies for securities fraud.
The competing proposals, sponsored by the Republicans who control Congress, both aim to protect companies from ill-founded investor lawsuits.
And, despite differences in the fine print, both would make it significantly harder for investors to sue.


Sept. 3-9; Now You See It, Now You Don't
AGAPE at how fast the balls fly at the United States Open?
You should be, even if they don't always go as fast as you think they do.
When Pete Sampras serves his fastest, the tennis ball leaves his racket at 138 miles an hour.
In theory, if the ball maintained that speed, Sampras's opponent would have less than half a second -- actually, as little as .39 seconds -- to respond, however well positioned he might be.


Joan F. Whelan, David A. Bowen
Joan Frances Whelan, the Asian marketing director at G.E.
Capital in Hong Kong, was married yesterday in Princeton, N.J., to David Alan Bowen, the resident manager for Offitbank in Hong Kong.
Bishop Frederick H. Borsch of the Episcopal Diocese of Los Angeles performed the ceremony in the faculty room of Nassau Hall at Princeton University.
The bride and the bridegroom received M.B.A.'s from the University of Pennsylvania.
Ms.
Whelan, who is keeping her name, graduated from Lafayette College.
She is a daughter of Jean Whelan of Baldwin, L.I., and Thomas Whelan of South Dartmouth, Mass.
Her father, who is retired, taught the sixth grade at School Nine in Oceanside, L.I.
Her mother, also retired, taught the fifth grade at School Three in Oceanside.


King of the Ring
ONLY IN AMERICA  The Life and Crimes of Don King.
By Jack Newfield.
Illustrated. 352 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $23.


With New Issues, Small Can Be Beautiful
IN the dicey world of initial public offerings, many people invest only in headline deals put forth by well-known companies and underwritten by major Wall Street firms.
First issues are nail-biters anyway, the thinking goes, so better to play it safe in some respects, going with a Nabisco Holdings, a Netscape or a similar venture backed by a giant that researches, underwrites and markets several billions of dollars in new issues every year.
Sometimes, though, it pays to look at smaller deals done by modest-sized firms far from Wall Street.
"Many of the regional houses do very well with these small offerings," said Robert Mascale, a research analyst for New Issues, a newsletter published by the Institute for Econometric Research in Deerfield, Fla.
Not only can investors avoid the exorbitant prices that often accompany highly publicized deals, but they also have a better chance of finding a broker willing to sell some shares.


Artistic Shortstop Makes Hall of Fame With Brush, Not Bat
Surrounded by her son's paintings, Jackie Fiorentino sat in the family room of her town house here, leafing through an old photo album.
"Here's a picture of James when he was 10 years old," Mrs.
Fiorentino said.
"He was at an art show, selling his portraits and sketchings for 25 cents each. I remember this postman coming over to James that day, looking over his stuff and telling him, 'I'll buy all of them from you.' "


Fantasy in the Bronx and Justice in White Plains
FANTASY versus real life: The first can be seen in the Bronx, at the Lehman College Art Gallery, the second in Westchester, at Krasdale Gallery, in White Plains.
Andrea Arroyo left her native Mexico for New York City in 1993, with the purpose of studying dance with Merce Cunningham but has since changed professions.
Either that or Ms.
Arroyo has found an avocation in art for, at Lehman, she is showing off her paces as a self-taught painter, having already produced a mural for a Bronx school by way of the Percent for Art Program.


Temporary Work Finds a Permanent Niche
ANYONE newly dismissed or retired, young or old, male or female, could be one of the 4,200 people in the county working as temporary employees, commonly known as temps.
"Temps represent a complete cross-section of the population, ranging from experienced executives in their 50's and 60's to recent high school and college graduates," said Robert Miller, president of Career Blazers, a permanent and temporary personnel employment agency in White Plains.


Tomatoes Add Distinctly Summer Variety
It's that time of year again, when everyone, it seems, is trying to unload tomatoes.
After paying high prices all winter for those imported Dutch hothouse varieties that come on the vine, you can now harvest your own tomatoes or get them by the bushel for practically nothing at a farmers market.


QUESTIONS FOR: Abel Ferrara
Q: How did you acquire a taste for blood?
A: You're born with it.
What did He say?
"This is my body, and this is my blood," as He held up a glass of -- you know, it ain't Barolo.
This is my blood.
This is my life force.
Do you have a taste for it?
Do you have a desire to live?
I think most people are living with an obsession for life.
Q: What are you addicted to?
A: White wine, cold on a hot day.
Being born Italian, you just pick it up.
What am I really addicted to?
The pursuit of happiness.


If He Only Had a Brain
GUMP &amp; CO.  By Winston Groom. 242 pp. New York: Pocket Books. $22.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about a New York teacher's efforts to foster friendship between Arab and Jewish youths in Israel misspelled the surname of one pupil.
He is Rafi Nulman, not Nulan.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
944 Park Avenue (82d St.)  3 bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 3,457-sq.-ft. condo in a prewar building; 24-hr. doormen, concierge, eat-in kitchen, high ceilings, hardwood floors; common charge $2,124; taxes $12,456, listed at $2.25 million, 1 year on market (Broker: David Day)  UPPER WEST SIDE  $399,000
70 Riverside Drive  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,250-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doormen, dining foyer, eat-in kitchen, 2 exposures, Hudson River view; maintenance $1,102, 50% tax-deductible, listed at $425,000, 8 weeks on market (Broker: Klara Madlin)  BRONX
RIVERDALE  $320,000
2621 Palisade Avenue  (River Terrace)  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,420-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doormen, remodeled kitchen, c/a, terrace, pool, Hudson River view; maintenance $1,275, includes gas and electricity, 40% tax-deductible, listed at $375,000, 8 weeks on market (Broker: Sopher)  WILLIAMSBRIDGE  $215,000
747 East 221st Street  2-family brick house; 4 bedrooms in primary unit; 3 bedrooms in other; dining room, eat-in kitchens, 1 bath in each; 1-bedroom, 1-bath hospitality suite, 2-car garage, 50- by 100-ft double lot; taxes $2,100, listed at $230,000, 3 weeks on market (Broker: Heritage First/Better Homes &amp; Gardens)  BROOKLYN
BROOKLYN HEIGHTS  $285,000
104 Pierrepont Street  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft. co-op in a brownstone; 2 fireplaces, terrace; maintenance $825, 60% tax-deductible, listed at $295,000, 2 weeks on market (Broker: Brooklyn Landmark)  CARROLL GARDENS  $275,000
334 Union Street  3-family semi-attached brownstone; 2 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths, dining room in primary duplex; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, den in simplex units, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,018, listed at $295,000, 26 weeks on market (Broker: Harbor View)  PROSPECT HEIGHTS  $392,000
153 Prospect Place  2-family, 4-story brownstone; 4 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room, 2-story atrium, eat-in kitchen, 6 fireplaces in primary triplex; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, fireplace in simplex; Italianate detail, rear garden; taxes $1,200, listed at $419,000, 1 year on market (Broker: Brooklyn Properties of 7th Avenue)  QUEENS
ELMHURST  $255,000
94-26 40th Street  3-family, 50-year-old detached house; 5 bedrooms in primary unit, 4 bedrooms and 3 bedrooms in others; eat-in kitchen, 1 bath in each; taxes $1,512, listed at $275,000, 22 weeks on market (Broker: Veterans)  FOREST HILLS GARDENS  $360,000
116-23 Union Turnpike  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 70-year-old 3-story Tudor; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage, 40- by 123-ft. lot; taxes $2,600, listed at $399,000, 27 weeks on market (Broker: Advantage Forest Hills)  STATEN ISLAND
DONGAN HILLS  $142,000
42 Xenia Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old semi-attached house; eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 22- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,100, listed at $149,900, 3 weeks on market (Brokers: Vitali-Sunshine; Century 21/Calabrese)  WESTCHESTER
CHAPPAQUA  $790,000
8 North Way  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 11-year-old colonial; library, fireplace, eat-in kitchen, den; 1 acre; taxes $20,433, listed at $849,500, 28 weeks on market (Brokers: Holmes &amp; Kennedy; Houlihan/Lawrence)  SCARSDALE  $1.55 million
64 Cushman Road  7-bedroom, 5 1/2-bath, 66-year-old Tudor; reception hall, sunken living room, library, pool, cabana; 1.1 acres; taxes $32,180, listed at $1.695 million, 16 weeks on market (Broker: Dudley D. Doernberg)  WHITE PLAINS  $620,000
258 Soundview Avenue  6-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 73-year-old Mediterranean; entry hall, ballroom, beams, Florentine fireplace; 1.6 acres; taxes $10,492, listed at $650,000, 12 weeks on market (Brokers: Century 21 Wolff; The Foxes-Better Homes &amp; Gardens)  YONKERS  $346,500
10 Chatfield Road  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 85-year-old colonial; vestibule, fireplace, dining room, screened porch; taxes $6,618, listed at $369,000, 39 weeks on market (Brokers: The Prudential Ragette; Bronxville/Ley)  CONNECTICUT
DANBURY  $226,750
3 Grenier Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 16-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage, .92-acre lot; taxes $3,508, listed at $229,900, 25 weeks on market (Broker: William Pitt)  GREENWICH  $529,000
522 West Lyon Farm Drive  (Lyon Farm West)  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath condo in 19-year-old building; hardwood floors, 2 fireplaces, 2-car garage; common charge $342; taxes $5,206, listed at $541,000, 19 weeks on market (Broker: Coldwell Banker/Schlott)  NAUGATUCK  $102,500
241 Cherry Street  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 71-year-old aluminum-sided colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, 1-car garage, 1/4-acre lot; taxes $2,382, listed at $114,900, 50 weeks on market (Brokers: Beazley; Coldwell Banker)  STAMFORD  $361,000
76 Imperial Drive  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 14-year-old colonial; dining room, new eat-in kitchen, deck, 1-car attached garage; taxes $4,800, listed at $144,900, 7 weeks on market (Broker: ERA Manzoni)  ROSLYN HEIGHTS  $200,000
35 Cherrytree Lane  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 45-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, fireplace, 1-car garage; taxes $4,900, listed at $225,000, 1 week on market (Broker: Atanas )  SAYVILLE  $299,000
121 Benson Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 24-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, fireplace, 2-car attached garage, 0.5-acre waterfront; taxes $9,500, listed at $299,999, 6 weeks on market (Brokers: Prudential Long Island; Seaville) NEW JERSEY
FAIR LAWN  $290,000
42-00 DeBrunin Drive  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 10-year-old bilevel; c/a, patio, 2-car garage; taxes $7,400, listed at $314,900, 13 weeks on market (Brokers: T.P. Mabey; Re/ Max Paramus)  FREEHOLD  $149,000
917 Elton Adelphia Road
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 46-year-old ranch; deck, 2-car garage, butler's pantry; taxes $2,840, listed at $149,900, 12 weeks on market (Broker: Weichert)  HILLSDALE  $182,000
123 Legion Place  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 54-year-old ranch; porch, c/a, full basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,726, listed at $182,000, 6 weeks on market (Broker: Prudential Higgins)  OCEAN CITY  $179,000
3303 Haven Avenue 3-bedroom, 2-bath, newly constructed condominium apartment; front and side decks, ocean views, fireplace, skylights; taxes $2,751, listed at $179,000, 6 months on market (Broker:Richards)


Off the Map: Officials Battle to Revive a Discarded Highway Plan
For years, it was the most suggestive of dotted lines, an omnipresent reminder of highway heaven or highway hell, depending on your perspective.
Then, last year, the dotted line was removed from official maps of Morris County.
And that has caused a bit of a scene.
The dotted line is the on-again, off-again proposal to extend Route 24 about five miles west of its present terminus, Interstate 287 in Hanover Township.


It's Not a Monumental Time in America. Is It?
THE late 19th century -- America's gilded age -- was a period of immense poverty and corruption, but also a time when tycoons channeled fortunes into great public institutions like the Metropolitan Museum, Carnegie Hall, the New York Botanical Garden, the New York Public Library and the Metropolitan Opera.
"It was a Protean time, a period of great vitality," said David McCullough, author of "The Great Bridge" (Simon &amp; Schuster 1972), about the building of the Brooklyn Bridge, another great public monument of that period.
"It was a great American story. We should sing hymns."


Sanders Agrees To Dallas's Rich Deal
After weeks of courting and days of arduous negotiations, the Dallas Cowboys owner Jerry Jones finally got coveted cornerback Deion Sanders signed and sealed.
Jones won't know whether the two-sport star will be able to deliver until late January, when the Cowboys hope to be in the Super Bowl.
"This was a window to get some great talent for the Cowboys, so that these players can have an opportunity over the next five or six years to get to the Super Bowl," Jones said yesterday by telephone from Irving, Tex.


Suit Fights Station Renovation
A group of business owners, Councilwoman Julia Harrison and two citizens' groups have filed suit in State Supreme Court seeking to delay the $27 million renovation of the Main Street IRT station, the Queens terminus of the No. 7 line.
The suit, against the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, the New York City Transit Authority and the city's Department of Transportation, seeks further study of the project's environmental impact.
Construction is to begin in January.
No court date has been set.


Larger Classes, Smaller Staffs
At Public School 204 in Dyker Heights on Thursday, Celia Rossi's second graders pored over their phonics workbooks.
It was a typical first-day-of-school scene.
And the number of students in Mrs.
Rossi's class, 29, was typical of the larger, more crowded classes throughout Community School District 20, which covers Bay Ridge, Dyker Heights and Fort Hamilton.
Budget cuts have raised the average class size to 27 from 25.
Many classes are larger.
After trimming administrators and after-school programs, the superintendent, Vincent Grippo eliminated 33 teaching positions although the number of teachers will stay at 1,200.
"Somebody had to do it," said Mr.
Grippo, who cut his district office staff to 37 from 57 last year.


Schools Learn to Live with Less
Average class sizes will remain the same as last year in District 2, except in grades 1 through 3, which are expected to have an average of 27 pupils.
The payroll stands at about 1,600, reduced in part because 93 employees took early-retirement.
Officials offset $580,000 of the budget shortage by winning new grants.
But like most districts, it is still worse off financially than last year because of a $700,000 cut by the Board of Education and $2.4 million in higher costs for increased enrollment and mandated wage increases.
Superintendent Anthony J. Alvarado said: "In spite of budget cuts, our students will receive quality education, because our principals and teachers are committed to doing more with less." BRUCE LAMBERT


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Emily Widmann, Robert McBurney
Emily Sara Widmann, the daughter of Judith and Roger M. Widmann of Larchmont, N.Y., is to be married there today to Robert Charles Iverson McBurney, a son of Jeane Samuelsen and a stepson of J. Roger Samuelsen of Lafayette, Calif.
Cantor Kerry Ben-David is to officiate at the home of the bride's parents.
The couple, both 27, received law degrees from Harvard University.
They graduated magna cum laude, she from Brown University and he from Harvard, and were elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
They are to begin working in Atlanta later this month, she as a staff lawyer at the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit and he as an associate at McKinsey &amp; Company, the management consulting concern.


Paula Robinson, Thierry Pradines
Paula Suzanne Robinson, an assistant vice president of Sotheby's in New York, was married yesterday to Thierry Paul Michel Pradines, an assistant director of Cafe Centro, a New York brasserie.
The Rev.
Joseph Coltro, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at l'Eglise de Notre-Dame de l'Assomption in Fronton, France.
Mrs.
Robinson-Pradines, 31, is also a specialist in 19th-century European paintings and sculpture at Sotheby's.
She graduated cum laude from the University of New Mexico.
She is the daughter of Suzanne F. Stratmann and C. Paul Robinson, both of Albuquerque, N.M.
The bride's father is the president of Sandia National Laboratories in Albuquerque.


Alisa B. Lebeau and Eric R. Goldman
Alisa Beth Lebeau, a daughter of Rabbi and Mrs.
William Lebeau of New York, was married on Monday to Eric Reuven Goldman, a son of Sara Lief of Berkeley Heights, N.J., and Samuel Goldman of Chatham Township, N.J.
The bride's father, a vice chancellor at the Jewish Theological Seminary in New York and the dean of its rabbinical school, performed the ceremony at the seminary.
Ms.
Lebeau, 28, is keeping her name.
She graduated cum laude from Barnard College and received a master's degree in organizational psychology from Columbia University.
She is an associate at Assessment Systems Inc., human resource consultants in New York.
Her mother, Beverly Lebeau, is an accountant at BDO Seidman, an accounting firm in New York.


The Immortal Duke
JOHN WAYNE: AMERICAN  By Randy Roberts and James S. Olson.
Illustrated. 738 pp.
New York: The Free Press. $27.50.


It Took Almost Forever, but the Bell Finally Tolls
TO AGGRAVATE A VIDEOPHILE, mention the fact that so many old movies -- some of them famous old movies -- aren't on cassette.
With thousands of films available, it is more than a little exasperating that thousands of others, equally worthy or more so, either aren't on tape or seemingly take forever to get there.
One high-profile example is "Belle de Jour." Luis Bunuel's 1967 classic was re-released in theaters over the summer, but it has never been on home video.
Many big films have been long in coming.
Among the tardy, for example, is "For Whom the Bell Tolls," Sam Wood's 1943 adaptation of the Ernest Hemingway novel.
Only on Tuesday, almost 20 years behind the VCR, will the film be released on tape (restored to its original 166-minute length).


Village Corner Turns a Corner
Jim Smith's neighbors see the construction workers crawling over the former Village Corner, removing walls, installing French doors, ripping out the small kitchen that prepared burgers, soups and salads for jazz lovers who came to hear the late Lance Hayward play the piano.
And the neighbors are curious and, frankly, worried about who the next tenant will be.


On the Waterfront, a 20-Mile Trolley Chugs Closer to Reality
From the 1890's to the 1930's -- Hudson County's heyday as a booming industrial and commercial center -- commuters and shoppers could hop on a trolley and ride elevated tracks from Hoboken to Jersey City.
But as the Hudson River waterfront faded and crumbled, so did the county's transportation system, and the trolleys fell victim to bad times and competition from buses and highways.
Now, the trolley is poised for a comeback.


Gerry Adams Discusses I.R.A. Arms
For the first time since the Northern Ireland peace effort was interrupted last Tuesday, Gerry Adams, the political leader of the Irish Republican Army, reaffirmed today that he would consider any "reasonable proposal" for an international commission on disarmament of the guerrilla organization.
He said also, in an interview in Dublin, that disarmament of the I.R.A., which is in the 13th month of a cease-fire it declared in its fight to free Northern Ireland of British control, was one of the chief issues he wanted to discuss with American officials on a trip to Washington and New York that Mr.
Adams will begin on Monday.


Synagogue Restoration
To the Editor:
Phyllis Bronfman Lambert's project that would restore the 1,000-year-old Ben Ezra Synagogue in old Fostat, the city that existed before Cairo was founded, is laudable.


Agency Offers the Poor More Than Just Sandwiches
To the Editor:
"Three Men Under a Tree" (Aug. 13) mentions a social service agency that gives out free sandwiches to the homeless twice a week.
That agency, as 241 West 72d Street, is a project of the National Council of Jewish Women New York Section.
More important for the three men under the tree, it also operates the Council Senior Center.


The ABC's of Budget Cuts


Kathryn S. Mack, Andy Anderson
Kathryn Suzanne Mack, until recently a director for international economics at the National Security Council and the National Economic Council, both at the White House, was married yesterday to Lawrence Leslie Anderson 3d, the president of Anderson Technologies, a manufacturer of industrial gas-purification systems in Cheshire, Conn.
The Rev.
Wayne Sandau performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Cheshire.
Ms.
Mack, 36, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a law degree from Yale University.
She is the daughter of Dr.
Mary M. Mack and Dr.
Gerhard T. Mack of Cheshire.
Her father retired as an internist and her mother as a pediatrician, both in Cheshire.


Rangers Rout Brewers
Rangers 10, Brewers 4
Mickey Tettleton hit a grand slam and Juan Gonzalez had a three-run homer and drove in four runs as the visiting Texas Rangers routed the Milwaukee Brewers by 10-4 last night.
Kevin Gross (8-14) snapped his three-game losing streak in winning for the first time since Aug. 19.


Weekend Escadrille
HIGH noon at Sky Manor Airport in Pittstown, and the breakfast buffet is going great guns.
At least 20 people gather around the steam tables with the blue-checked tablecloths, loading and reloading their plates while they keep an eye on the big picture windows, watching the Cessnas and Pipers, and the occasional old-fashioned tail-dragger, take off and land.
Nice, confident flying earns knowing nods.
Takeoff too low?
There is a quick, acerbic remark, a raised eyebrow.
Nothing vicious: they'll be facing the same judges when they leave.
The walls are covered with framed photographs and posters of airplanes in flight.
The regular menu has items like the "copilot's special" (a hamburger).
But the buffet is the main attraction.
Mushroom and sausage omelettes, biscuits with sausage gravy, waffles, bacon, sausage, fruit salad, chocolate pudding, whipped cream, orange juice, tomato juice, grapefruit juice, coffee, soda.
All you can eat and drink, $7.99.


Smoke and Mirrors
There are no trocks here, just artifice.
The play of dark against light.
The smoky eye and the pale lip.
The mod face in all its playfulness.


China Defends Record
Apparently in response to criticism of its rights record at the United Nations women's conference, China issued a report asserting that Chinese women are better off -- in terms of safety and job opportunities -- than women in the United States.
Article, page 10.


Leslie Goldman And Gidon Caine
Leslie Ruth Goldman, a picture editor at The New York Times, and Gidon Menahem Caine, an associate at the New York law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison, are to be married today in Palenville, N.Y.
Rabbi Michael Szenes is to officiate at the couple's summer residence.
The bride, 35, graduated from Sarah Lawrence College and received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Mildred Goldman Eisner of Ballston Lake, N.Y., and the late Michael Goldman, and a stepdaughter of Arthur Eisner.
The bride's mother retired as a teacher at the Chango Elementary School in Ballston Lake.


BOOKS IN BRIEF: FICTION
HORSEMAN  By Mike Nicol. Knopf, $23.
Somewhere in northern Europe sometime in the fairly distant past, an unnamed youth flees his village following the arrest of his father for some barely fathomable crime.
From this vagueness, the South African writer Mike Nicol's third novel turns to squalid adventuring and becomes, in its own dark way, a misanthropic tour de force.
In "Horseman," the depravity and evil of Mr.
Nicol's characters become metaphors for the depths to which we all can sink, leaving simple survival as the best we can manage.
These characters-- murderers, drunkards, fornicators -- believe that "in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was Kill," a credo often sanctified, the story reminds us, by religion.
The youth joins Madach, a denizen of the forest in dubious battle with his own demons; from him he will learn the art of revenge.
First, though, the youth is captured by monks, imprisoned in a "hell unique to himself," forced into a contract with a sinister hooded figure and warned by his father's ghost about the world he is growing into.
The youth escapes, rejoins Madach and drifts south through a series of small, desolate settlements, each dedicated to its own private form of violence.
These landscapes are, for the youth, places of transition.
By the time he emerges, alone, in southern Africa, he is ready to execute the terrible contract.
Now a hardened adult called Daupus, he is the leader of a band of freelance vigilantes offering slaughter and pillage for hire.
They are in great demand.
In the chapters that follow, "Horseman" recounts in shadowy imagery the brutal history of South Africa, but the rest of the world doesn't get off any easier.
The human race, Mr.
Nicol suggests, is much like Daupus and his comrades: we are all locked in a struggle to the death, fighting for no cause beyond ourselves.
JAMES POLK


After School, Where to Go?
William Glover's school day rarely ended with the last bell at Junior High School 126 in Williamsburg.
He stayed late almost every day.
"I played basketball, did homework, and studied," he said.
"We learned math skills, and I got better in math."
But all after-school programs in Community School District 14, which covers Williamsburg and Greenpoint, are being cut this year to save money.
"I guess I'll go home and play Sega," a popular video-game system, said William, 13 and an eighth grader.


Out-and-Out Racism
To the Editor:
Patrick Smith challenges the conventional wisdom that the internment of Japanese-Americans was racist, "out and out, plain and simple." There were reasonable, if misguided, security concerns motivating the policy, he argues.
However, this is one case where the conventional wisdom is correct.


Sept. 3-9: Forget O. J.; The Question Becomes: Is Fuhrman the Question?
First the question was what Mark Fuhrman told a screenwriter, and how much of it jurors could hear.
Then it was what he said to three witnesses in the 1980's.
Then it was what Mr.
Fuhrman said, and would not say, in Judge Lance A. Ito's courtroom, and what the judge could tell the jury about it.
Listening intently was O. J. Simpson, who is charged with two murders.
But his presence in court was virtually the only reminder that he was the one on trial and not Mr.
Fuhrman, the former detective who says he found a bloody glove behind Mr.
Simpson's house.


Heat and F.S.U. Depth Too Much for Clemson
In Warrick Dunn's freshman year at Florida State University, fullback William Floyd, who now plays for the San Francisco 49ers, made a pronouncement: Dunn would win the Heisman Trophy while playing for F.S.U.
Dunn seems to be doing his part.
He averaged 7.5 yards in 68 carries as a freshman, then last year became the fifth Seminole to rush for more than 1,000 yards in a season.
This season, he's been even better.


A Night at the Opera
New York City Opera opens its 52d season, Sept. 7.


Easy on the Eyes but Hard on the Ears
IT reminds me of Manhattan," said a diner who was right. The Grill Room, with its sleek, spare good looks, would be right at home in the big-city singles' scene.
Instead it anchors one end of a small L-shaped shopping center in Hauppauge, a mecca of workers at lunchtime.
The Grill Room, with its market umbrellas and sliding window walls, is surrounded by more modest neighbors, Chinese takeouts, pizza places, bagel and doughnut shops.


QUICK BITE/Red Bank; Eggs Benedict Worth Slowing Down For
In Red Bank, a town that bustles with art-gallery and antiques shoppers in winter and boaters and beachgoers in summer, the Riber's Edge Cafe gives good reasons for browsers to take time to slow down and enjoy a breakfast or brunch.
Off the banks of the Navesink River, the cafe is a great place to sit back and contemplate one's catch, whether it's bluefish or a rare Victorian vase.
Among the best dishes is eggs Benedict, topped with a light, creamy sauce.
Bob Guido, the owner and chef, is mysterious about the exact contents of his magical hollandaise sauce for the eggs Benedict.
"I put just enough of butter, cream and certain seasonings," he said with an impish grin.
It might be easier to learn the combination to the office safe.


Lynda A. Moss, Thomas E. Rubin
Lynda Ann Moss, a daughter of Evelyn and Ronald E. Moss of Westfield, N.J., was married there esterday to Thomas Edward Rubin, the son of Marie and Allen Rubin of New Hyde Park, L.I.
The Rev.
Elizabeth Geitz performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Rubin, 29, is the creative coordinator for the European fragrance division of Cosmair, a cosmetics company, in New York.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
Her father, who works in Bloomfield, N.J., is the advertising project director for the New Jersey Weekly section of The New York Times.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a front-page table last Sunday with an article about proposed changes in the Federal tax code referred incorrectly to one proposal.
The abbreviation in "U.S.A. Individual Income Tax" stands for unlimited savings allowance, not universal savings account.
A table with the continuation of the article, comparing potential effects of the proposals on the tax bills of several hypothetical taxpayers rendered some data incorrectly.
Under the current income tax, the standard or itemized deduction for the family with no children and an adjusted gross income of $100,000 is $19,000, not $15,000.
Under the flat-tax proposal, the total tax for the families with adjusted gross incomes of $50,000 and $300,000 would be $3,395 and $31,923, respectively, not $2,885 and $27,135.


To Wong Foo, Who Is Julie Newmar?
NAME: Julie Newmar.
IDENTITY: Actress, dancer, choreographer, model, owner of a real estate agency.
Born: Aug. 16, 1933, in Hollywood.
Married: J. Holt Smith, a lawyer; divorced 1984.
Children: John Jewl Smith, 14.


Council Vote
The City Council voted Wednesday to allow the Fire Department to begin a pilot program to deactivate fire-alarm boxes for 45 days in approximately half of Brooklyn, and portions of Queens, Manhattan and the Bronx.
The program is scheduled to begin Nov. 1.
A yes vote was to approve the measure.
It passed 26 to 21, with 4 members not voting.
Manhattan  Duane (D-L) . . . No  Eldridge (D-L)
Not Voting  Eristoff (R-L) . . .
Yes  Fields (D-L) . . .
No  Freed (D-L) . . .
Yes  Linares (D-L) . . .
No  Michels (D-L) . . .
No  Millard (R-L) . . .
Yes  Pagan (D-L) . . .
Yes  Powell (D-L) . . .
No  Bronx  Cruz (D) . . .
Not Voting  DeMarco (D-C) . . .
Yes  Eisland (D-L) . . .
Yes  Foster (D-L) . . .
No  Rivera (D-L) . . .
Yes  Rosado (D) . . .
No  Ruiz (D-L) . . .
No  Warden (D-L) . . .
Yes  Queens  Abel (R-C) . . .
Yes  Harrison (D-L) . . .
No  Koslowitz (D) . . .
Yes  Leffler (D-L) . . .
Yes  Marshall (D-L) . . .
No  McCaffrey (D-L) . . .
Yes  Ognibene (R-C) . . .
Yes  Povman (D) . . .
Yes  Sabini (D-L) . . .
Yes  Spigner (D-L) . . .
Yes  Stabile (R-C) . . .
Yes  Vallone (D) . . .
Yes  Watkins (D-L) . . .
No  White (D) . . .
Not Voting  Brooklyn  Albanese (D-L) . . .
No  Berman (D) . . .
Yes  Clarke (D-L) . . .
No  Dear (D) . . .
Yes  DiBrienza (D-L) . . .
No  Fisher (D-L) . . .
Yes  Henry (D) . . .
No  Lasher (D) . . .
Yes  Malave-Dilan (D) . . .
Yes  McCabe (D) . . .
No  Pinkett (D-L) . . .
No  Robinson (D)
Not Voting  Robles (D-L) . . .
Yes  Weiner (D) . . .
Yes  Williams (D) . . .
No  Wooten (D) . . .
No  Staten Island  Fossella (R-C) . . .
No  Fusco (R-C) . . .
No  O'Donovan (D-C) . . .
Yes


Simple Solution
To the Editor:
If Americans find almost nothing good to say about television, why don't we just turn off our television sets?
PAUL STAVRAND  Atlanta


CRITIC'S CHOICES
Ralph Lemon -- One of the oddest events of the dance season promises to be "Threestep," choreographed and performed by Mr.
Lemon and his long-ago teacher Viola Farber.
He's all velvet; she's a long-stemmed, somewhat prickly rose.
At the Joyce Theater, starting on Oct. 3. (Sara Krulwich/The New York Times); Paul Taylor -- What's left after you've plumbed the depths of the Andrews Sisters' biggest hits?
Offenbach, of course.
Mr.
Taylor takes on the 19th-century French composer in his new "Offenbach Overtures," starting Oct. 10 at City Center. (Lois Greenfield); San Francisco Ballet -- The ground will be anything but solid when this troupe storms into City Center with James Kudelka's dark "Terra Firma," opening on Oct. 31. (Lloyd Englert)


Businesses Beware: Phone Repairman Might Be Phony
If a telephone service worker with an unfamiliar face shows up at the office, watch out.
Instead of installing or fixing phones, the stranger may try to steal compact but valuable circuit boards from the phone system, disabling it.
One sophisticated team of thieves posing as Nynex workers with forged identification and false work orders has pulled that scam on dozens of companies in midtown and some in lower Manhattan in the last two years, the police said.
As as result, hundreds of thousands of dollars worth of circuit boards has disappeared.


Victoria S. Hall, Mark R. Graham
Victoria Sylvester Hall, a daughter of Susan F. Hall of Norwell, Mass., and P. Dinzey Hall of Charlestown, Mass., was married yesterday to Mark Richards Graham, the son of Judith R. Watson of Tulsa, Okla., and John A. Graham of Claremore, Okla.
The Rev.
Peter Larsen, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Andrew's Dune Church in Southampton, L.I.
Mrs.
Graham is a senior vice president in the leveraged buyout department at Dillon, Read &amp; Company, the investment bankers in New York.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a vice president of the Bank of Boston.
Her mother is a district manager in Boston for the Forgotten Woman, a clothing retailer.
The bride's maternal grandfather, the late Timothy Fuller, was an author of mystery novels including "Harvard Has a Homicide."


CRITIC'S CHOICE


Therapy, Thy Name Is Legion
Following is a brief description of some of the more common approaches to psychotherapy.
BEHAVIOR THERAPY
This approach posits that emotional and behavioral problems develop through the laws of learning -- reinforcements, punishment, conditioning, modeling and so on.
Therefore, the theory goes, those problems can be treated using those same laws.
"This is very different from the psychodynamic or psychoanalytic approach which believes that most problems people have derive from early childhood trauma or unresolved conflict," said Dr.
Barry S. Lubetkin, clinical director of the Institute for Behavior Therapy in Manhattan.
"The behavior therapist is more focused on the here and now and assumes that many problems have broken away from the original root causes, taking on a life of their own."
The task of the behavior therapist is to direct patients toward activities and techniques that will help them overcome behavior problems, teaching communication assertiveness skills, as well as relaxation techniques.
One tool is called "systematic desensitization," which is most effective in treating phobias.
The patient is talked into deep relaxation, and then the therapist talks the patient through a few stages of an anxiety-producing event, such as flying, beginning with the drive to the airport and ending with takeoff.
There are homework assignments, too, usually after every session.
It might be to take a colleague out to lunch if the problem is social isolation, or to ask for a promotion if the problem is assertiveness.
COGNITIVE THERAPY
This approach is concerned with perceptions, judgments and thoughts that are unfounded or unnecessarily negative and that can produce depression, phobias, obsessions, social isolation and other uncomfortable states of mind or behavior.
Cognitive therapists help patients analyze and change that thinking.
More and more practitioners are calling what they do cognitive-behavioral therapy, merging the two approaches.
According to Dr.
Robert L. Leahy, director of the American Institute for Cognitive Therapy in Manhattan, people who are depressed often think of themselves as failures, predict that negative things will happen to them, blame themselves for bad events, think they must be perfect to be worthwhile and assume people don't like them.
"In cognitive therapy we help the patient identify the particular thinking errors that they have, and we have homework exercises they can do to change their thinking," Dr.
Leahy said.
A female patient of his was convinced that men didn't find her attractive.
She was asked to list all the ways in which people show an interest in each other and then to record each time a man behaved in one of those ways toward her.
The next assignment was to engage in the same behavior toward them.
"In the past two years she has been averaging two dates a week," he said.
Books are recommended, like David Burns's "Feeling Good Handbook," and questionnaires measure progress.
GROUP THERAPY
Thanks to managed care, group therapy has experienced a resurgence in recent years.
That's because it is cheaper; a therapist might charge $95 dollars for an individual session, while a group session might cost each member only $45.
"One of the main differences between group and individual therapy is that you see right in front of you live examples of your problems, coping mechanisms and strengths," said Stephen Bendich, a Manhattan psychologist who has led groups on and off for 25 years.
"It's a safe, controlled environment that lets you try out new behaviors. If you can't get close to people, you can try that out; if you can't assert yourself, you can try that out."
Groups vary enormously.
In one group the therapist might say one or two things during a session; in another, the therapist might dominate.
Some groups delve into patients' pasts as part of the therapy, while others stick to the present.
Some groups encourage confrontation that, when not handled sensitively by the therapist, can verge on abuse.
Group therapy, like individual therapy, allows patients to project the qualities of significant people in their lives -- usually a parent -- onto the therapist, an instructive phenomenon called "transference." But group therapy also provides a half dozen or so others with whom to connect.
Over months, and years, these interactions often start to mimic those with siblings, spouses and even colleagues.
As a 32-year-old management consultant on the Upper West Side put it: "It's working out family issues in a group that isn't your family. Your individual therapist is non-judgmental and careful about what she says. But in the group you get more honest feedback from your peers."  FAMILY AND MARITAL THERAPY
Entering therapy with a significant other or the whole family is like continually turning a kaleidoscope a few degrees: new perspectives naturally emerge.
The kinds of problems that family and marital therapists see range from incest or domestic violence to common communication problems in marriage or a child's suddenly failing in school.
Such therapy often seeks to clarify goals and devise new ways of relating.
Say a spouse feels neglected or, in psychology-speak, unattended to, and he or she starts to complain or yell at the partner.
The partner withdraws, the spouse yells louder.
"Before you know it, you have this repetitive cycle," said Elana Katz, a family therapist and faculty member at the Ackerman Institute for Family Therapy on the Upper East Side.
"Nobody's benefiting from that, and nothing moves forward. A lot of attention is paid in therapy to focusing on what people want and also how they're going about getting it."
Usually what propels a family into therapy is a child's behavior.
But often the problem rests in the parents' relationship, said Dr.
Neil Maron, president of the Center for Marital and Family Therapy in New York City.
"In many cases the child acts out because he prefers to be the one who is the focus of the anger -- out of fear of divorce and abandonment," he said.
"As long as the child is the scapegoat, the parents do not have to deal with their own relationship. Children are extremely revealing about what's going on. They learn to manipulate their environment in order to exist." FREUDIAN PSYCHOANALYSIS
There is no single approach to Freudian analysis.
But whether the patient goes twice a week or five times a week, lies down or sits up, the goal is to gain insight by exploring the unconscious, the reservoir of repressed memories, thoughts and impulses.
The process is that the patient says whatever comes to mind, whether a conflict at work or a memory from age four.
And the therapist listens, makes connections and occasionally, when the patient seems ready to hear it, offers an interpretation.
The process includes analyzing dreams and fantasies, as well as acts of transference and resistance, which is a patient's unwillingness to probe further.
The unconscious is a big, complex place, and, for Freudians, analysis generally lasts for years, not months.
"We don't promise happiness," said Dr.
Gerd H. Fenchel, a self-described mainstream Freudian analyst and executive director of the Washington Square Institute for Psychotherapy and Mental Health in Greenwich Village.
"We feel that if you understand yourself better, you are able to take charge of your life, and that's our goal," he said.
"Behavior therapy works very well with some conditions like phobias. But we feel we need a more basic restructuring of the personality, that this is more lasting and more promising. That doesn't mean the person is completely different, but it means they handle things differently."
Some of Freud's psychoanalytic theories may seem overly focused on sexuality or downright bizarre.
His theories include castration anxiety, penis envy and his idea that young boys and girls fall in love with the parent of the opposite sex on their way to emotional maturity.
But the topic of sex doesn't dominate psychoanalysis, Dr.
Fenchel said.
"You'll talk about sex, money, religion and whatever you want to talk about, or whatever you don't want to talk about," he said, "but sex will be just one of many areas." JUNGIAN ANALYSIS
Some of Freud's most brilliant students and adherents formed their own schools of psychoanalysis.
While all stressed the importance of the unconscious and the goal of insight, they turned away from some of Freud's basic tenets about human development and personality formation, playing down the emphasis on early sexual stages, as well as the roles of the id and libido.
Perhaps the most famous of these offshoots is Jungian analysis, also known as analytic psychology.
It was developed by Carl Gustav Jung, one of Freud's star students before the two had a falling-out in 1912.
Jung believed in a collective unconscious, in universal, timeless patterns of behavior and emotions, like the archetype of the hero and the fear of darkness.
"It is a therapy that looks to bring in the collective unconscious from myths, fairy tales and legends," said Aryeh Maidenbaum, director of the New York Center for Jungian Studies.
"For example, people tend to want to live a heroic life, even on a personal level. They are always sacrificing. One has to understand that they are gripped by these archetypes that guide their life."
There are only about 100 Jungian analysts in New York City.
Typically, the therapist sees the patient once a week for anywhere from two to seven years.
Dream analysis makes up a quarter to a third of the therapy.
Dr.
Maidenbaum said that Jungian analysis was ideally suited for people dealing with "second half of life" and "transition" issues.
"People reach midlife -- even people who are successful in the world -- and they begin to question: What am I up to in life?" he said.
"Am I happy? I may have a career, I've started building a family, but what is it now that really gives me meaning in life?"


Off-Duty Policeman Is Stabbed in Bronx
An off-duty police officer was stabbed in the chest early yesterday while walking with his wife in the Bronx, the police said.
Officer Shane Delarosa, 26, and his wife, who was not identified, had left a subway station at East 148th Street and Willis Avenue about 3:20 A.M. when a man walked up to the couple and stabbed Officer Delarosa, said a police spokesman, Detective Mark Patterson.


JELLYFISH ALERT: Taking the Sting Out
Jellyfish, most Americans would agree, are beautiful blobs that can ruin a day at the beach.
In the Far East, however, Asians don't mind biting the fish that sting them, and jellyfish are anything but snubbed.
Koreans, for example, can stock up on packaged jellyfish at the supermarket, complete with sauce packets (center).
They consider it a low-calorie health food and skin beautifier.
And in China it might be flavored with soy sauce, sesame oil and wine vinegar, perhaps a sprinkle of sugar, served on a bed of lettuce and garnished with oranges, tomatoes and cucumbers (right).


F.Y.I.
Chirp, Chirp, Chirp Q. There seems to be an abundance of small chirping birds in the city this summer.
They build nests on street lights and under air-conditioners, among other places.
What are these birds, and do they winter elsewhere?
And has this been an especially good bird season?
A.
That chirpy avian is the English, or house, sparrow (Passer domesticus), a common -- some say too common -- denizen of the city's nooks and crannies, according to "Birds of the New York Area," by John Bull (Harper and Row, 1964).
An immigrant from Europe, the house sparrow first showed up in Brooklyn in 1850 and multiplied like crazy.
By the 1890's, they were so prevalent that an early birder once counted 4,000 sparrows in a Central Park fountain.
Mr.
Bull writes that the birds declined in number during the 1910's, partly from the fumes from those new auto-things.
As for the rest of the birds of summer, Tom Burke, an veteran New York birder, said it was a "good but not unusual" season. (A savvy birder can spot up to 320 species inside the city limits and as many as 200 in Central Park alone.) Though exact numbers are hard to determine, the warm winter may have spared some less-hardy resident birds and their chicks and made for bigger flocks this summer, Mr.
Burke said.
Weather may also play a role in this fall's bird watching.
Mr.
Burke said the recent drought may cause birds to head south earlier, looking for better grub(s).
Tower Among the Trees Q. Driving along the Major Deegan Expressway, just before the George Washington Bridge, I can see a tower in the distance high among the trees.
It has a strange pointed dome.
What is it?
A.
The imposing structure (above right) is the Highbridge Tower, an old watertower that as part of the Croton Aqueduct system used to help provide the city with its water.
The Croton system, which opened in 1842, brought water from a reservoir near Croton, N.Y., some 33 miles north of the city, via large iron pipes.
The 195-foot tower, topped by a 48-foot copper minaret, was built at 174th Street on the eastern bluffs above the city in 1872, according to documents from the Parks Department.
It contained a 47,000-gallon tank which, when filled, guaranteed constant water pressure for the burgeoning metropolis below.
It was in use until 1965 and from 1957 on contained a carillon that chimed daily over the local din.
In 1984, a deranged arsonist set the tower's belfry on fire and jumped to his death.
The tower underwent a $900,000 restoration in 1988, including a new copper belfry and weather vane.
Plans to open the top floors of the tower, as an observation point for visitors, were never realized.
The Parks Department has plans for a tour next spring, however.
For information, call (212) 408-0218.
A Subway Sleuth Q. As a professor at Brooklyn College who commutes from Manhattan, I often find myself waiting at the Flatbush Avenue terminus of the IRT No. 2 and No. 5 trains.
My question: Why are the station's tracks numbered 2 and 3 rather than 1 and 2?
A friend believes that a track is hidden behind the station wall and used by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority for some mysterious purpose.
But if, as I suspect, there is no Track 1, why not?
A.
Contrary to both of your suspicions, there is a Track 1, and it's no secret.
Track 1, along with a fourth track, runs right down Eastern Parkway.
As the No. 2, 3, 4 and 5 IRT lines traverse northwest Brooklyn, they travel on four numbered tracks: Track 1, for southeast-bound local trains; Track 2, for southeast express trains; Track 3 for northwest-bound expresses and Track 4, for northwest locals.
When the tracks diverge at the Franklin Avenue station, the No. 2 and 5 lines use Tracks 2 and 3, while the 3 and 4 use Tracks 1 and 4.
That's why, at your stop, it looks like you're missing some numbers. JESSE McKINLEY


In the Region: Connecticut; A Life-Care Complex for the Well-to-Do Aged
THE financially fertile market of lower Fairfield County has been chosen by the Marriott Hotel chain for its first foray into the state with an upscale life-care community, a growth industry across the nation that caters to the well-to-do elderly.
The community that will be called Edgehill, proposed as a joint venture of Marriott Hotels and Stamford Hospital, is expected to break ground in early 1997 and open in mid-1998, doubling the current number of Stamford apartments designed for the wealthy elderly from 342 to 688.


Miller Keeping the Faith And Talking the Talk
His biceps look like something out of a Popeye cartoon, and you could play a game of one-on-one basketball on his chest.
Corey Miller is sitting on a stool at his locker, looking imposing, talking about God in an almost inaudible whisper.
He is not preaching; he does not stuff his religious beliefs in your face.
And to understand the Giants linebacker, to understand why he is so good but in the predicament he is in, you must understand his faith.
His passion, his life, is professional football.
But Miller, a born-again Christian, puts it all in perspective.
No matter what happens to him -- if he hurts himself or if the Giants someday release him -- he believes he always has God.
That is one reason he is so outspoken, an outspokenness that sometimes gets him in trouble.
In fact, it is safe to say that as good as Miller is, it is not out of the question that he will not be with the Giants by the time next season begins.


Streetscapes: 27 West 67th Street; An Artists' Co-op, Put Up for Art's Sake
THE 1903 co-op at 27 West 67th Street is one of the most important apartment houses in the history of New York City, but even after a million-dollar restoration project, it still looks like a factory.
The original artist-owners didn't mind, however, because all they wanted was studio space -- the idea of making money came later.
The early movement for apartment houses for the well-to-do, beginning about 1880, was closely connected to the development of artists' studios -- the first co-op, the Rembrandt, at 152 West 57th Street, had both studio and conventional apartments.


Yeltsin Foes Use NATO Bombing to Press Him
Seeking to turn what they called an international humiliation into a domestic campaign issue, nationalists, Communists and some moderates in the Russian Parliament today demanded that President Boris N. Yeltsin suspend Russia's cooperation agreement with NATO because of its bombing of the Bosnian Serbs over Russia's objections.
In a special session of the lower house called to consider Russia's position on Bosnia, the legislators passed a nonbinding resolution that called for Russia to suspend the NATO agreement and demanded the dismissal of Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev.


Elisabeth Malkin, Eduardo Garcia
Elisabeth Malkin, a contributing correspondent for Business Week magazine, and Eduardo Garcia, a correspondent for Bloomberg Business News, were married yesterday at the Century Association in New York.
Acting Justice Frederic S. Berman of State Supreme Court in Manhattan performed the ceremony.
The couple work in Mexico City.
Ms.
Malkin, 32, graduated magna cum laude from Yale University and received a master's degree in international affairs from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Edith and Lawrence Malkin of New York.
The bride's father is the United States correspondent for The International Herald Tribune.


A Country House Opens in Yorkshire
A Victorian country house in the South Yorkshire village of Brodsworth has opened to the public after four years of work by the Government-financed conservation body English Heritage.
The hall was given to English Heritage in 1990 by Pamela Williams, great-granddaughter of Captain Charles Sabine August Thellusson, for whom it was built in the early 1860's.
Designed by an Italian architect, Chevalier Casentini, the two-story Italianate house has survived largely intact, along with its contents, including a variety of trompe l'oeil work (such as richly marbleized walls), Axminster carpets, Minton tiles, marble sculptures, equestrian paintings by James Ward and family portraits.
The kitchens, with their Victorian equipment, and the servants' rooms are also open to the public, as are the 15 acres of Victorian gardens.


Take One Down, Pass It Around . . .
THERE will be Brooklyn Black Chocolate Stout, Bayrisch Gfrozen Eisbock and Dubuque Star Big Muddy Red, and drinkers who are actually familiar with these three esoteric brands of beer.
NY Beerfest 3 will take place next weekend in five tents along the Brooklyn Bridge Esplanade from the River Cafe to the Empire-Fulton Ferry State Park.


Mimi Zlatkowski and Ben Lipitz
Mimi Zlatkowski, the daughter of George and Margarite Zlatkowski of Cherry Hill, N.J., is to be married today to Ben Lipitz, a son of Marilyn Lipitz of Cherry Hill and Leonard Lipitz of Delray Beach, Fla.
Town Justice John E. Parker of Hurley, N.Y., is to officiateat the Mohonk Mountain House in New Paltz, N.Y.


Taking a Head Count? In the Hamptons It's Tricky
IN the Hamptons, where the phrase "year-round summer person" is heard fairly frequently, taking a head count is tricky.
Defining a resident is not only difficult, but some critics also say it is beside the point in a place where a person may use the post office but not the schools, pay local taxes but have the tax bill mailed elsewhere or register to vote but vote absentee.
Demographers at the Census Bureau discount all but the hard-core, the people living in their houses on April 1 every 10 years.


Nadia Bardwil, Edward Gerrity Jr.
Nadia Bardwil, a real estate agent in Rye, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Edward J. Gerrity Jr., the chairman of Executive Telecard Ltd., a telephone calling-card service in Nanuet, N.Y.
The Rev.
Mark Connolly performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Resurrection.
Mrs.
Gerrity, 69, works for Prince &amp; Ripley Real Estate.
She graduated from Manhattanville College.
She is the daughter of the late Odette and Simon Barsa.
Her parents were involved in former negligee concerns in New York, her father as owner of A. Barsa &amp; Brothers, a manufacturer, and her mother as founder of the Odette Barsa Lingerie Company.
The bride was a widow.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Welcome Record Setter
IT was a mini-NATO meeting on the Long Wharf at Sag Harbor.
A German couple were standing next to an English couple, who were chatting with a West Babylon couple as all the couples, and some single tourists as well, gawked at a French racing yacht.
For the last month the talk of the East End boating world has been the 86-foot French catamaran Explorer, one of the fastest ocean-going sailboats.
The boat has been clocked at 37 knots.
"It's the greyhound of the sea," said Michelle Suna of Sag Harbor, a friend of the skipper, Bruno Peyron.


CRITIC'S CHOICE


Chemical Treaty Appears on Hold in the Senate
An international treaty barring the manufacture and use of chemical weapons will almost certainly not be ratified by the Senate this year and could be sidelined indefinitely, says a spokesman for Senator Jesse Helms.
"There is no momentum in the Senate to pass this thing," the spokesman, Marc Thiessen, said on Thursday.
When Bob Dole, the Senate majority leader, released his agenda of priorities for the session that began this week, the list for action did not include the chemical treaty or a strategic arms accord with Russia also awaiting ratification.


Jennifer Wilson, E. M. Matthews Jr.
Jennifer Ellen Wilson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph P. Wilson of Katonah, N.Y., was married yesterday to Elmer Maurice Matthews Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Matthews of Bernardsville, N.J.
The Rev.
Donald Matthews, an uncle of the bridegroom, performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Mary of the Assumption in Katonah.
Mrs.
Matthews, 27, is an account supervisor at Wunderman Cato Johnson, a marketing agency in New York.
She graduated from the College of the Holy Cross.
Her father is the president of Sogo U.S.A.
Inc., an importer of telecommunications equipment in Hackensack, N.J.
Her mother, Christina H. Wilson, is an administrative supervisor at MedPro, a medical insurance company in Bedford Hills, N.Y.


The Monument Glut
There's a monumental competition going on in Washington that has nothing to do with balanced budgets or Presidential politics.
It has to do with, well, monuments.
Every war, it seems, now has to have its own triumphal memorial, and it's all the fault of one immensely popular and profoundly moving monument: the Vietnam Veterans War Memorial, specifically The Wall.
Other wars are envious of Vietnam.
It's as if that dirty little kid down the block slipped under the fence and stole all the glory.
Now the proper folks want their due.
After 13 tortuous years when one design after another was rejected and the original competition winners sued the organizers, the Korean War Veterans Memorial was dedicated with military flourishes this summer near the Lincoln Memorial.
Between them, the Vietnam memorial and the Korean War memorial have gobbled up close to 14 of the manicured acres encircling the Reflecting Pool.


Schools Learn to Live with Less
"Some teachers are not comfortable with multi-age classes," Ms.
Schaefer said, and students are bound to suffer.
The average class is expected to get five or six more pupils, with K-3 classes averaging 28 pupils, grades 4-6 averaging 32, and junior high classes averaging 34.
This growth will be especially felt in special education classes, Ms.
Schaefer said.
For example, she expects the average special ed class in the district's junior high schools to jump to 18 students from 14.
"That may not seem like a lot," she said, "but it is when you're talking about one teacher assigned to 18 adolescent kids who need special help."
The loss of two guidance counselors leaves the elementary schools with only four in a district where each school had a its own guidance counselor just a few years ago.
"AIDS is very prevalent in our community," Ms.
Schaefer said.
"I can't go in a classroom where there isn't at least one, or maybe two, children who have lost close relatives to AIDS."  MONTE WILLIAMS


Kristin Baird, Rokas Masiulis
Kristin Ona Baird, the daughter of Irena and James W. Baird of West Milford, N.J., was married there yesterday to Rokas Masiulis, a son of Janina and Tadas Masiulis of Vilnius, Lithuania.
The Rev.
Kevin Daly performed the ceremony at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church.
The bride, 26, is the manager of retail operations for Shell Oil in Vilnius.
She graduated from Cornell University.
Her father is the president of Rowan International Inc., an import-export company in Pompton Lakes, N.J.


Businesses Beware: Phone Repairman Might Be Phony
If a telephone service worker with an unfamiliar face shows up at the office, watch out.
Instead of installing or fixing phones, the stranger may try to steal compact but valuable circuit boards from the phone system, disabling it.
One sophisticated team of thieves posing as Nynex workers with forged identification and false work orders has pulled that scam on dozens of companies in midtown and some in lower Manhattan in the last two years, the police said.
As as result, hundreds of thousands of dollars worth of circuit boards has disappeared.


Adina Lewis, Lawrence Garbuz
Adina Lewis, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Lewis of New Rochelle, N.Y., is to be married today to Lawrence Ira Garbuz, the son of Sheila Garbuz of Boca Raton, Fla., and the late Leon Garbuz.
Rabbi Reuven Fink is to officiate at the Westchester Marriott in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The couple, both 25, graduated from New York University and received law degrees from Yeshiva University.
The bridegroom is an associate at Peck &amp; Heller, a New York law firm.


Magazines On Fifth
Vogue Italia and L'Uomo Vogue pay tribute to style at Bergdorf Goodman, Sept. 6.


NEW YORK SWINGS AT NIGHT
THE other night, the rock singer Terence Trent D'Arby was thanking the audience for choosing his show at Irving Plaza among all the other possibilities in the city.
"If you can't find something to do in New York City," he said, "then you can't find something to do." He was right; after sundown, the city provides endless gathering spots, from cafes and restaurants to poetry slams.
But the true glory of New York's night life is live music.
Musicians flock to prove themselves in front of famously discerning (or skeptical) audiences and influential media gatekeepers.
In New York, a local legend can leap to national prominence or be dismissed with a yawn.
World-class, name-brand musicians can also be heard all over town, every night of the year. (One measure of the abundance is that big bands, once declared dead, appear regularly at half a dozen clubs.) To be heard in New York, musicians perform in surprisingly small spaces as well as intimidatingly large ones, in plush rooms with a view and in concrete bunkers.
The vagaries of Manhattan real estate can make live music an expensive proposition or a crowded one, and while clubs in other cities often double as hangouts, many New York clubs brusquely disperse the customers within minutes after the music ends. (They're trying to keep peace with the neighbors.) But you can hear nearly every kind of music, from Irish traditional songs to the latest post-grunge mutation.
What follows is a visitor's guide to a dozen quintessential New York night spots -- institutions and neighborhood joints, elite watering holes and beer-soaked dives.
It's easy to make a long night of it in Manhattan -- an early set at the Bottom Line, perhaps, followed by a late one at the Mercury Lounge and then at CBGB, or an early jazz set at the Knitting Factory and a late one at the Village Vanguard.
Dance halls like the Latin Quarter and the Tunnel come alive after midnight, so it would be easy to squeeze in an earlier show at S.O.B.'s.
They are glimpses of the myriad cities within the city, of ephemeral communities that are conjured for the length of a set or an evening, then dissolve into the night.
The Bottom Line, on West Fourth Street, the old reliable of New York rock clubs, has a simple mission: to present rock, pop and occasionally jazz before a comfortably seated audience.
Almost aggressively nondescript, it serves a menu of burgers, pizza and fries.
The Bottom Line started out as a music-business showcase club, and there are still nights when most of the seats have been bought for executives, radio programmers and journalists; look for visiting performers in the ring of tables next to the aisle.
But on most nights, ordinary music fans from their 20's to their 40's -- people who don't slam-dance -- settle in to appreciate old favorites or promising newcomers.
Even when seats have been sold out, there's a chance to cram into the bar area, where admission is sold only on the day of the show.
Recently the club instituted a no-smoking policy.
The dump as institution: punk-rock was born at CBGB and OMFUG (which initially stood for Country, Bluegrass, Blues and Other Music for Uplifting Gourmandisers), and in more than 20 years, little has changed beyond the depth of the soot at the stucco-fronted dive on the Bowery at Bleeker Street.
It still has its uneven floor, its line of neon beer signs over the bar, its low admission prices and its policy of booking rock bands that play their own material -- five and six a night, mostly loud, often worthwhile.
The crowds now include foreign visitors and record-company talent scouts as well as buzz-cut youth, N.Y.U. students and people who learned about punk-rock on MTV, all providing continued amusement to the Bowery's street dwellers.
Inside, fans shoulder their way to the front to be blasted by one of the loudest, clearest sound systems among New York rock clubs.
And those who visit the bathrooms will find a graffiti history of the rock underground.
No one believed that the rock and jazz avant-garde could regularly pay the bills when Michael Dorf opened the first Knitting Factory on the edge of Little Italy.
Last year he moved to a bigger space, at 74 Leonard Street in TriBeCa.
There he presents better-known jazz and rock acts in a large, two-story room and lesser-known improvisers, performance artists, poets and indescribables downstairs in the AlterKnit room, as well as free late-night jam sessions.
Students and other bohemian types populate the new Knitting Factory, eagerly comparing notes on artistic obscurities.
The place is small enough so that jazz groups can perform unamplified -- a rare setup indeed -- but large enough to book bands on the alternative-rock circuit.
There are bars upstairs and down serving microbrewery beer.
The first thing that greets the well-dressed patrons at the Latin Quarter, on Broadway at 96th Street, is a metal detector; even ladies' handbags are searched for weapons.
But upstairs, in the fully renovated space of the former Club Broadway, is an elegant slice of Miami or an updated Havana: a permanent prom in a room of subdued grays and pinks, with etched-glass medallions of the club's logo and mirrored disco balls on the ceiling.
In a crowd whose ages range from the 20's to the 70's, women of all shapes wear skin-tight dresses; men arrive in jackets or stylish casual wear (but no T-shirts or sneakers), and everybody comes to dance: rhumbas, guarachas, cha-chas and merengues played by some of the best-known performers on the salsa circuit.
The well-heeled sit at tables, where a couple or a group share a seriously marked-up bottle of liquor (at $70 to $90); by the bar, single people eye one another, shy until they pair off and stroll onto the dance floor; then the sensual rhythms take over.
The Mercury Lounge on East Houston Street, a relative newcomer among Manhattan clubs, is an unostentatious, brick-walled box with a superb sound system and a mixture of local performers and up-and-coming bands on tour: songwriters, country bands, pop-rock groups, alternative rockers.
For some reason, the place seems to invite conversation between sets; maybe it's a result of squeezing past the long bar to get to the music room's few seats.
But even when the room is crowded, it stays relaxed.
AT the top of Rockefeller Center, that Art Deco monument, are two clubs that feel like colorized versions of 1930's movies, where staff people stroll by in pillbox-hatted uniforms straight out of Fred Astaire's heyday.
The express elevator ride up 65 stories makes ears pop, and eyes pop when they see the view.
The panorama is shared by the Promenade bar and two swank supper clubs, where jackets are required, dinner for two runs upward of $100 and photographers work the tables, offering romantic couples a chance to preserve the moment.
One club is the Rainbow and Stars, which has shiny silver stars on the walls and stars and rhinestones strewn on the tables.
Waiters glide discreetly past banquettes and tables nestled close to the stage; the club's dropped ceiling increases a sense of cozy intimacy, and a $40 cover charge ($20 for late weekday sets) brings a graying, affluent audience.
Behind the performer, usually a cabaret singer, the windows reflect rainbow-colored lights in the walls, above a view of city lights radiating for miles.
When Vic Damone wanted to sing about moonlight not long ago, he could turn around and search the sky for the Moon.
The Rainbow Room, by contrast, offers grandeur: windows two stories high and a big circular dance floor below a curlicued chandelier, with tiers of tables facing an old-fashioned bandstand.
From 7:30 P.M. to 1 A.M. there is nonstop music.
The Rainbow Room Orchestra plays big-band and Latin tunes, featuring a singer in a satin gown; between its sets, small groups play easy-swinging jazz.
The dance floor fills up with yuppie couples in their 20's, retired couples in their 60's, tourists out on the town, office-mates celebrating a birthday, mothers dancing with grown-up sons.
It's a vision of a bygone New York, literally above it all.
The punk parade of St.
Mark's Place starts to thin out about a block west of Sin-e, a street-level storefront where neighborhood folks drop in to hear people pour out their souls with the help of acoustic guitars.
Sin-e is the 1990's version of the 1960's coffeehouse; longhaired post-hippies share space with pierced college students, and plugging in is not prohibited.
It's a small place, with fewer than a dozen tables and a simple cleared space against one wall as a stage; cappuccino and cake are on the menu.
Singer-songwriters are one of pop's most persistent species, and Sin-e puts on up to four performers a night, with hourly sets beginning at 8 P.M.
They might be singing about politics, picking the blues or bemoaning lost love.
On a slow night, performers say hello to each new arrival; on crowded ones, or on nights when a well-known performer (often an Irish one) drops by for a surprise set, Sin-e can be like a subway car filled with sensitivity.
With vine-painted columns and African instruments on the walls, S.O.B.'s (for Sounds of Brazil) presents New York as the port of call for music of the tropics: from Senegal, Brazil, Nigeria, Trinidad, Puerto Rico, Zaire, and other places where traditional music has annexed electric guitars.
S.O.B.'s, on Varick Street at Houston, is a halfway house between ethnic clubs and the rock circuit, finding new audiences for bands outside their own enclave; its crowds are as hybrid as the music.
Tall, dreadlocked Jamaicans shimmy alongside tie-dyed hippies on reggae nights; Haitian bands inspire fervent sing-alongs in Creole.
Potent rum concoctions add to the rhythm-induced intoxication.
One caveat: Announced set times are sometimes highly conjectural.
Jazz musicians may face agoraphobia when they leave their usual basements and smoky bars for the Tavern on the Green's Chestnut Room, near Central Park West at 67th Street.
Part ski chalet, part Winter Palace, it has a high, open-beamed ceiling, a view of a lantern-draped garden cafe outside and, when the lights go down, flickering candles to augment bejeweled chandeliers.
Of course, the Tavern is a tourist trap, with a busy gift shop, but the Chestnut Room is also a winning combination of an epicurean restaurant and music showcase.
Bookings are genteel: cabaret singers one week, the plush Illinois Jacquet big band the next.
And while most visitors dine before the music begins (entrees cost $20 to $30), the Chestnut Room's secret is that there's no required minimum, just a music charge of $12.50 to $18.50.
There might be a chattering tour group at the next table, or a couple celebrating a 25th anniversary; the music and twinkling lights cast a romantic glow.
Tramps, on West 21st Street, with a capacity of 1,000, mutates between a club and a dance hall.
It usually books bands with a sense of roots: country, reggae, garage-rock, funk, blues.
When Tramps brings in someone like George Jones or Little Richard, it's a sit-down club, but when an alternative-rock sensation or an Irish rock band comes in, the tables disappear and the broad, semicircular dance floor becomes a mosh pit.
The less intrepid take refuge in back at the bar.
Most often, the communal frenzy tends to be good-natured; the place is sweaty but amiable.
There's some live music at the Tunnel -- usually tucked away downstairs in a rec-room-styled basement.
But most of the Tunnel, in a warehouse building on 12th Avenue at 27th Street, at Chelsea's western fringe, is a dance club -- actually, multiple dance clubs, a New York City department store of a discotheque.
People in their early 20's, dressed for modern mating rituals in anything from fluorescent orange overalls to black cocktail outfits, wait outside a velvet rope to be admitted to a warren of dance rooms.
The main one, thumping to house and techno music with lyrics like "I've really got the hots for you," has a skateboarding ramp at one end.
There's also a disco room, an alternative-rock room, a vest-pocket dance floor with rap and reggae, and conversation zones with couches or padded walls.
The Village Vanguard, on Seventh Avenue South, is just a Greenwich Village basement, down a narrow flight of steps, where a crusty doorkeeper waits to collect the cover charge.
The room itself is shaped like a crumbling slice of pie, with worn banquettes, undistinguished tables and chairs, The 123 seats hold an assortment of longtime jazz buffs, collegiate types trying to upgrade from Kenny G, and groups of Japanese or European tourists.
Pillars make it impossible for most of the audience to see the whole stage, so regulars strategize over whether to choose the pianist's side, the drummer's side or maybe a place back at the bar.
But once the musicians start playing, it's easy to hear why the Vanguard has been a hallowed jazz spot for most of its six decades.
The acoustics are magnificent: Saxophones declaim, piano notes gleam, every drum tap and bass line is crisply defined.
A Vanguard engagement is a rite of passage for a purist jazz musician; after all, the walls still hold reverberations of gigs by John Coltrane, Miles Davis, Thelonious Monk, Charles Mingus and Bill Evans.
At the Vanguard, musicians play as if those ghosts might still be listening.
Navigating the music places
Bottom Line, 15 West Fourth Street, at Mercer Street, (212) 228-7880.
Open Monday through Saturday, with shows at 7:30 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets are available at the box office, which is open daily from 10 A.M. to 11 P.M.
No reservations are taken.
Tickets are usually $15 but range from $12.50 to $17.50 (cash only).
There is no minimum for most performances.
CBGB and OMFUG, Bowery at Bleecker Street, (212) 473-7743.
Open from 7 P.M. to 4 A.M.
Sunday through Thursday, and from 8 P.M. to 4 A.M. on Friday and Saturday.
The cover charge is $3 on Sunday and Monday, $5 Tuesday through Thursday, and $8 to $10 Friday and Saturday, depending on the band.
There is a two-drink minimum at tables.
The Knitting Factory, 74 Leonard Street, at Church Street, (212) 219-3055.
Open daily, the tap bar from 5 P.M. to 2 A.M. and the front bar from 12:30 P.M. to 2 A.M.
Music begins at 7 or 8 P.M., depending on the band.
There is no minimum.
Latin Quarter, Broadway at 96th Street, (212) 864-7600.
Open Monday and Thursday through Saturday from 9 P.M. to 4 A.M.
Monday admission is $15.
On Thursday and Friday, women are admitted free and men pay $10 until 10 P.M.; after 10, women pay $10, men $15.
On Saturday, women pay $5 and men $10 until 10 P.M.
A table minimum of three drinks a person, or a service of whiskey for the table, is in effect on Saturday.
The Mercury Lounge, 217 East Houston Street, (212) 260-4700.
Open nightly from 6 P.M. to 4 A.M.
The cover charge ranges from $5 to $12.
There is no drink minimum.
Rainbow and Stars, 30 Rockefeller Plaza, (212) 632-5000.
Open Tuesday through Saturday, with two shows nightly.
The early show starts at 8:30, with a required dinner available from 6:30 P.M.
The late show begins at 11 P.M.; supper, which is optional, is available at 10 P.M.
There is a music charge of $40 a person.
Rainbow Room, 30 Rockefeller Plaza, (212) 632-5000.
Open Tuesday through Saturday, with pre-theater dining (but no dancing), accompanied by a pianist, from 5:30 to 6:15 P.M.
Dinner and dancing from 7:30 P.M. to 1 A.M.
Tuesday through Saturday and from 6 P.M. to midnight on Sunday.
The music charge is $20 a person.
Sin-e, 122 St.
Mark's Place, (212) 982-0370.
Open daily from 10 A.M. to 1 A.M.
No cover; no minimum.
S.O.B.'s, 204 Varick Street, at Houston Street, (212) 243-4940.
Open Monday from 5 P.M. to 2 A.M., Sunday and Tuesday through Thursday from 8 or 9 P.M. to 2 A.M., Friday from 5 P.M. to 4 A.M., and Saturday from 8 or 9 P.M. to 4 A.M.
Admission ranges from $12 to $20.
There is a table minimum of $15 a person.
Tavern on the Green's Chestnut Room, Central Park West at 67th Street, (212) 873-3200.
Open Tuesday through Sunday.
Sets are at 8 and 10 P.M.
Tuesday through Thursday and Sunday, and at 8:30 and 10:30 P.M.
Friday and Saturday.
The music charge ranges from $13.50 to $28.50.
There is no minimum.
Tramps, 51 West 21st Street, (212) 727-7788.
Open Monday through Saturday, usually with two sets a night.
Tramps Cafe also offers lunchtime performances on select days.
Tickets are sold at the box office from 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Monday through Friday and from noon to 7 P.M.
Saturday, or through Ticketmaster, (212) 307-7171.
Ticket prices range from $10 to $30.
There is a two-drink minimum at tables.
The Tunnel, 220 12th Avenue, at 27th Street, (212) 695-4682.
Open Friday and Saturday from 10 P.M. to 10 A.M. and Sunday from 9 P.M. to 4 A.M.
Admission ranges from $15 to $20.
No minimum.
Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, (212) 255-4037.
Open nightly, with sets at 9:30 P.M. and 11:30 P.M.; there is also a 1 A.M. set on Friday and Saturday.
Prices vary.
Usually a $10-a-person drink minimum.


NATO Raids in Bosnia Damage Civilian Area
In what appears to be a systematic if sometimes inaccurate bombing campaign, NATO planes have taken out three of four bridges in this important river town but have also caused substantial damage to civilian buildings.
The local authorities say 15 civilians have been wounded.


Here's Looking at You, Kid
BOGART  In Search of My Father.
By Stephen Humphrey Bogart.
Illustrated. 325 pp.
New York: Dutton. $24.95.
PLAY IT AGAIN  By Stephen Humphrey Bogart. 239 pp.
New York: Forge/Tom Doherty Associates. $19.95.


Of Mice and Men
CHEZ CHANCE  By Jay Gummerman. 211 pp. New York: Pantheon Books. $21.


Commercial Property: Government Leases; When Albany Pulls the Plug on the Rent
TRINITY REAL ESTATE and a state agency were pretty close to closing a deal for what Walter F. Spardel, Trinity's managing director, calls a "substantial amount of space" at 345 Hudson Street, near King Street.
Yes, the state was insisting on the standard executory clause that allows governments to break a lease without penalty if the tenant agency loses its financing.
But with no state bankruptcy looming, that seemed pretty remote, so Trinity settled for a modicum of added financial protection if the lease is broken.
But that was before the state lowered the boom on 315 Park Avenue South, the 24th Street building that for two decades has been home to the State University of New York's College of Optometry.
This summer the state Legislature passed a bill that ends financing for the rent next July, eight years before the lease expires.
Now Mr.
Spardel is holding out for wording that says that, if the state ends its lease, Trinity will be reimbursed for any unamortized portion of brokerage commissions and costs of customizing the space.


County Government Gets a Personal Trainer
LET others boast of reinventing government.
James W. Treffinger is interested in de-inventing government -- county government, to be specific.
Mr.
Treffinger, a Republican, is the County Executive of Essex, the state's second most populous and, until recently, most corrupt and incompetently run county, and he would like nothing better than to see his job, and the 5,600 below it, disappear.
He believes that county government is an anachronism, a vast and unnecessary layer of bureaucracy wedged between the state and municipal governments.
While cries for the abolition of county government are not new in New Jersey, they have never before come from a sitting county executive.


Zoe Schneider and Phillip Caplan
Zoe A. Schneider, a Ph.D. candidate in French history at Georgetown University in Washington, is to be married today to Phillip M. Caplan, a special assistant to the President and the deputy White House staff secretary.
Rabbi Daniel Fink is to perform the ceremony in a meadow at Boulder Creek near Sun Valley, Idaho.
Ms.
Schneider, 34, will keep her name.
She graduated from Wellesley College, received a master's degree in history from Georgetown and was a Fulbright scholar in France.
She is the daughter of Doris and Richard Schneider of Stanley, Idaho.
The bride's father retired as an adjuster in Boise, Idaho, for the Medical Insurance Exchange of California.
Her mother retired as the executive assistant to the director of the Idaho Health and Welfare Department in Boise.


Starr Collins, Minturn Osborne
Rosemary Starr Collins, a public relations executive in Auburn, N.Y., was married yesterday to Minturn Sedgwick Osborne, the executive vice president of Auburn Cablevision.
Canon Brendan Griswold, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Aidan's Chapel in South Dartmouth, Mass.
Mrs.
Osborne, 32, who is known as Starr, graduated from Yale University.
She owns Collins Communications.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Atwood Collins 2d of Bloomfield, Conn.
The bride's father is of counsel to Lewis, Lewis &amp; Ferraro, a law firm in Hartford.
Her great grandfather Col.
Carl Frederick Hartmann was the founder of the United States Signal Corps.


Italian Bistro Where Robust Food Is the Rule
IT has been a long time since Hamburger Choo Choo in Huntington Village, with its electric trains that transported orders to delighted children of all ages, burned down.
In the intervening years other restaurants, diners and ice-cream parlors tried to make a go of it on the corner at 286 Main Street, but none succeeded.
About three months ago a restaurant opened there that gives promise of sticking around for a while.
The restaurant, the Pane Vino Cafe (271-8484), is a handsome Italian bistro of wood and brass, with multipaned windows, vivid murals, white tablecloths, pink napkins, bentwood chairs and a long glistening bar with a mirror that forms a backdrop for exotic bottles, glasses and an eye-catching old clock.


County G.O.P. Leadership at Stake
After a month of court fights and political wrangling, only a handful of positions for the Queens County Republican Party committee remain to be decided in the primary election on Tuesday.
The primary results will draw the final battle lines in the bitter contest for the leadership of the Queens Republicans.
Both the incumbent leader, Frances M. Werner, and the challenger, Joseph M. DeFronzo, a top aide to State Senator Serphin R. Maltese, are predicting victory at the party's reorganizational meeting, which must be held within 20 days after the primary to choose the party leadership.


Tomatoes Add Distinctly Summer Variety
It's that time of year again, when everyone, it seems, is trying to unload tomatoes.
After paying high prices all winter for those imported Dutch hothouse varieties that come on the vine, you can now harvest your own tomatoes or get them by the bushel for practically nothing at a farmers market.


For Gay Zimbabweans, a Difficult Political Climate
"Oh, my God, I can't believe it! I've been ripped off!"
Leonard, a 37-year-old professional man and locally well-known Diana Ross imitator, had discovered that the penalty for letting a young man you barely know stay in your apartment is the same all over the world: his television and CD player were gone.


A Shared Summer House Is Much More Than Parties
To the Editor:
As a member of the summer rental house featured in your front-page article "The Long, Shared Summer" (July 30), I was disappointed in both its content and its tone.
The article and some of its headlines implied that we rent this house largely to find romance.
In fact, our purpose is to enjoy our summer.
Members bike, play golf or tennis, fish or just read on the porch.
The day your reporter visited, it was 103 degrees, so there was little opportunity to see us in these activities.


The Men of The Glencairn
As piloted by John Ford, THE LONG VOYAGE HOME (1940) is a memorable blending of four one-act plays about the sea by Eugene O'Neill, set aboard a rusty freighter plying the West Indies to England.
The updated story concern the characters and reactions of the men in the face of lurking danger, including a German plane attack.
John Wayne, Thomas Mitchell (above), Ian Hunter and Barry Fitzgerald head the predominately male cast.
Mildred Natwick has an exquisite bit as a dockside prostitute.
It's on Friday at 4:15 P.M. and Friday/Saturday at 12:15 A.M.. on AMC.
Howard Thompson


Japan Catches Up In Bank Failures
THOSE who despair that America's economy has surrendered its leadership to Japan can take heart.
In at least one big area, Japan is scrupulously imitating one of the landmark American business events of the 1980's: banking disasters.
Nearly five years after Washington came to grips with the full horror of the $500 billion savings-and-loan collapse, Japanese banks and thrifts are following suit as precisely as if executives had studied a how-to manual by Charles Keating Jr.


Deborah Beckmann, Jacob Kotzubei
Deborah Elaine Beckmann, the daughter of Adrienne and John Beckmann of Guilford, Conn., was married on Monday to Jacob Tadgh Kotzubei, a son of Catherine Fitzmaurice and David Kozubei, both of Newark, Del.
Rabbi Solomon Acrish officiated at Estherwood in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
The couple, both 26, received law degrees from Columbia University, where they were Harlan Fiske Stone scholars.
In October they are to become associates at the New York law firm of Sullivan &amp; Cromwell.
Until recently they were judicial clerks in Wilmington, Del., the bride for Chancellor William T. Allen of the Delaware Court of Chancery, and the bridegroom for Senior Judge James L. Latchum of the United States District Court for the District of Delaware.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
TIPTOP CYCLISTS
Serious cyclists will be participating in 50- or 100-mile tours of eastern Connecticut next Sunday morning, starting at the Groton Cyclery, 1360 Route 184 in Groton.
Organized by the Pequot Cyclists, the tours do not provide assistance to participants, so riders and bikes should be in tiptop condition.
Helmets are a must, as are waivers, which for riders under the age of 18 must be signed by a parent or guardian.
Riders under 16 must be accompanied by an adult.


Mahler Resurrected
Like many another purveyor of grandiose visions, Gustav Mahler can exert a frightening grip on the susceptible mind.
Gilbert Kaplan, the founder of Institutional Investor magazine, descended on the music world in the unlikeliest fashion in 1982 by learning to conduct a single Mahler composition, the vast "Resurrection" Symphony, which he has since performed around the world and recorded.
In recent years he has expanded his repertory by at least a movement, the Adagietto of Mahler's Fifth Symphony.
Better still, through the Kaplan Foundation, he has diversified his efforts on behalf of the composer, issuing further recordings and publishing manuscript facsimiles and a discography and editing THE MAHLER ALBUM (Kaplan Foundation/Abrams, $75), a magnificent collection of photographs and other images.
The book represents an expansion and updating of a photograph collection published in 1922 by Alfred Roller, a stage designer and Mahler collaborator at the Vienna State Opera, and contains Roller's evocative prose portrait of Mahler (translated from the German by Norman Lebrecht).
"The job of a collector," Roller wrote, "is simply to collect and set down without distortion," and that spirit seems to have governed the enterprise.
The most telling detail appears on the dust jacket, which shows Mahler's reading glasses on the front and, in negative image, the back.
For the record, Mr.
Kaplan tells us, Mahler's "right eye was about 50 percent weaker than his left eye and had a moderate astigmatism (his left eye had none)." Could this imbalance relate in any way to the lopsided whimsy in Mahler's music?
If so, Mr.
Kaplan can be counted on to explain the connection in the near future.
JAMES R. OESTREICH


Gary G. Brandt, Jennifer E. Baron
Jennifer Elaine Baron, the daughter of Phyllis Hoffman Baron of New York and Jules M. Baron of Torrington, Conn., was married yesterday to Gary G. Brandt, the son of Anissa and William J. Brandt of Rehoboth Beach, Del.
The Rev.
J.
Barrie Shepherd performed the ceremony at the Huguenot Memorial Presbyterian Church in Pelham Manor, N.Y.
Mrs.
Baron, 23, graduated in May from Sarah Lawrence College.
She is the stepdaughter of Elizabeth Baron.


Caroline Merrell, Jeffrey P. Tucker
Caroline Clark Merrell, an advertising account manager in Atlanta for Business Week magazine, was married yesterday to Jeffrey Paul Tucker, an independent real estate broker in Atlanta.
The Rev.
Andrew W. Foster performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Nantucket, Mass.
Mrs.
Tucker, 35, graduated from Denison University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley W. Merrell of Rochester.
The bride's father retired as a senior vice president of Bausch &amp; Lomb Inc., the optical manufacturer, in Rochester.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
ROCKWELL EXHIBITION
Three hundred twenty-two of the original Norman Rockwell covers for The Saturday Evening Post will be displayed at the New Rochelle Public Library from Tuesday through Oct. 12.
The 11-by-14-inch framed covers date from 1916 to 1963 and demonstrate the changes in his style, technique and subject matter as well as the technological improvements over the years, from two-color printing to full color.


Donna J. Better, Steven Nachman
Dr.
Donna Jill Better, a daughter of Anita and Milton Better of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married on Monday to Steven Nelson Nachman, the son of Nancy and Dr.
Ralph Nachman of Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
Rabbi Melvin Sirner performed the ceremony at Temple Israel of Lawrence, L.I.
The couple graduated from Cornell University.


INSIDE
The Fate of the Uninsured
As Mayor Giuliani embarks on an overhaul of the public hospital system, what to do with poor, uninsured and uninsurable patients presents a major quandary.
Page 45.
Sinn Fein on Disarmament
The leader of the Irish Republican Army's political wing reaffirmed that he would consider any "reasonable proposal" for a commission on I.R.A. disarmament.
Page 9.
Hurricane Relief On the Way
With airstrips reopening on Caribbian islands battered by Hurricane Luis, disaster relief is arriving from neighboring nations and European countries with colonial ties.
Page 4.


THE MAN INSIDE BILL CLINTON'S FOREIGN POLICY
It has been clear for some time that America under this Administration has no coherent foreign policy.
Jason DeParle's article on Anthony Lake helped me to understand how this could be so.
Until I read it I thought that only Batman spent his time actively working to combat "evil" in the world.
Lake is going about in search of monsters to destroy.
All in the name of destroying evil so long as it is not too strong, the combat will insure media coverage, and any combat will not test our staying power.
This is a good and noble goal for an idealist, but it is not a foreign policy.
Certainly it is not a foreign policy for a nation whose vital interests face no all-threatening enemy anywhere in the world, who is a net debtor in the world economy and whose industrial and military strengths on a relative scale are far below what they were in the 1940's.


It's a Sampras-Agassi Final, But Not Without 2 Struggles
Boris Becker's and Jim Courier's resistance notwithstanding, the United States Open will have its dream men's final, too.
Pete Sampras and Andre Agassi did not quite steamroll their opponents yesterday, but they methodically set up the season's Grand Slam finale as their home-country showdown, if not an official battle for No. 1.
These two highly different personalities and players, who meet as torch carriers for their sport, United States Davis Cup teammates and Nike spokesmen -- though not necessarily in that order -- will clash this afternoon in their second Grand Slam final of the year.
Agassi defeated Sampras at the Australian Open in January.
Sampras matched Agassi's Grand Slam output with a victory at Wimbledon.
Forget the rankings, which show Agassi entrenched at No. 1 regardless of what happens today; whoever's arms are raised this evening will feel like the tennis year's king of the hill.


Bill, Bob, Newt: Watch Cal
AS has been its habit recently, Washington supplied a villain to the nation last week, in Bob Packwood of Oregon.
But Washington was fresh out of heroes.
It has been for some years now.
So, stolid, working-class Baltimore, just an hour's drive up the road, supplied one, a baseball player named Cal Ripken Jr. who embodies many of the virtues that voters seek in vain in their politicians and public officials.


Dennison T. Veru, Stavra N. Romas
Dr.
Stavra Nicole Romas, a first-year resident at the Neurological Institute of Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center in New York, and Dennison Theodore Veru, the president of Awad &amp; Associates, an asset management firm in New York, were married yesterday in New Rochelle, N.Y.
The Rev.
Peter Kyriakos performed the ceremony at the Holy Trinity Greek Orthodox Church.
Dr.
Romas, 26, is keeping her name.
She graduated cum laude from Princeton University and received her medical degree from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Serene K. Romas and Dr.
Nicholas A. Romas of White Plains.
The bride's father is the director of urology at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Medical Center in New York.


Jazz From Stride to Blues and Beyond
Signs of jazz's re-emergence as a mainstream cultural force in America are in abundance.
Clint Eastwood's "Bird" was a commercial as well as a critical success.
Billie Holiday's singing accompanies a Lexus commercial.
And record companies are tripping all over themselves in pursuit of young talent, each hoping to sign the next Joshua Redman, Christian McBride or Jacky Terrasson.
Another group that is excited about the heightened visability of jazz is documentary-film makers like Toby Byron, whose eight-part "Masters of American Music" began this month on Bravo.
"Jazz was something that hadn't been done and could be done with a reasonable amount of financing." said Mr.
Byron, 42, who was also a writer and a director of series.


Bosnian Serbs Say U.N. Shell Hit Hospital
Bosnian Serb officals said today that an artillery shell fired by a United Nations force killed 10 people and wounded 22 at a hospital in this Serbian-controlled suburb of Sarajevo.
What appeared to be a hole made by an artillery shell was visible today in the parking area in front of the hospital.
Patients inside vividly described an attack, which they said happened Friday.


Talking With...
Three familiar faces appear on sydicated daytime talk shows making their debuts this week.
Gabrielle Carteris (above), who played the brainy Andre Zuckerman, editor of the high school newspaper on "Beverly Hills 90210," is the host of "GABRIELLE" at 11 a.m. on Channel 5.
Tempestt Bledsoe, Vanessa, middle daughter of the Huxtable clan on "The Cosby Show" for eight years, can be seen on "TEMPESTT" at 2 P.M. on Channel 9.
And "DANNY!" -- at 3 P.M., also on Channel 9 -- is Danny Bonaduce, who faked playing the guitar and lip-synced for his role as one of "The Partridge Family" for four years in the 70's.
Rahadyan Sastrowardoyo


Melissa Pervel and Baron S. Lonner
Melissa Pervel, the daughter of Sgt.
Maj.
Michael B. Pervel and Nuallaor Pervel of Frankfurt, was married last evening to Dr.
Baron S. Lonner, a son of Joseph and Brigitte Lonner of New York.
Rabbi David H. Lincoln performed the ceremony at the Waldorf-Astoria in New York.
Mrs.
Lonner, 25, works in New York as an associate producer of "Straight Forward," an interview program on the CNBC and America's Talking cable television channels.
Her father is the officer in charge of the Armed Forces Network in Frankfurt, the United States Army's network of radio and television stations in Europe.


G.O.P. Leadership at Stake
After a month of court fights and political wrangling, only a handful of positions for the Queens County Republican Party committee remain to be decided in the primary election on Tuesday.
The primary results will draw the final battle lines in the bitter contest for the leadership of the Queens Republicans.
Both the incumbent leader, Frances M. Werner, and the challenger, Joseph M. DeFronzo, a top aide to State Senator Serphin R. Maltese, are predicting victory at the party's reorganizational meeting, which must be held within 20 days after the primary to choose the party leadership.


Azita Gorton, Robert Silvershein
Azita Bagheri Gorton, a lawyer for CBS Inc., and Robert Cary Silvershein, the director of media analysis for the CBS network, are to be married today.
Rabbi Charles Davidson is to perform the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The couple work in New York.
The bride, 33, graduated from Barnard College and received her law degree from Yeshiva University.
She is a daughter of the late Soraya and Azizollah Bagheri.
The bride's father, an engineer, worked on dam projects in Iran.


Setting Record Straight: The Original Bombalurina
To the Editor:
As one of the casting directors of the original "Cats" and "Les Miserables," I would like to point out that contrary to "The Endurance Tony" (July 23), Donna King, not Marlene Danielle, originated the role of Bombalurina.
While Ms.
Danielle has been with "Cats" since its opening, she began as an understudy and then played Demeter before replacing Ms.
King.
J.
C.
Sheets was in rehearsal for the first national company of "Les Miserables" when he was whisked off to join the Australian cast of the show.
He joined the Broadway company in mid-1988.
ANDREW ZERMAN  Midtown


Subtle Changes in a Garden of Perennials
NEWCOMERS to the Quietude Garden Gallery will quickly realize that while the gallery is not the main attraction and the garden is actually a small forest, the title is right about the quietude.
Even the birds cheep sotto voce.
Those who have not visited in a while will notice the addition of a Japanese garden, complete with footbridge and a pond rich in oversize goldfish.
But the biggest change is provided by the sculptures.
Though still outnumbered by the trees, they have multiplied to 100 or more and are now everywhere, with the larger pieces generally near the perimeter.


DANCE
Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the months ahead.
As usual, programs change, some events are sold out, and some have not yet scheduled locations or exact opening dates.
Unless indicated, all dates listed are for openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone numbers have a 212 area code.
Addresses for locations in New York City cited more than once appear at the bottom of page 68.
September
DANSPACE AT ST.
MARK'S CHURCH -- There will be wide-ranging dance at this intimate, light-filled space, starting tonight and continuing through June.
Among the participants are the lithe and lyrical Bill Young (Oct. 5-8), the relative newcomers Nicholas Leichter (Nov. 19) and Wally Cardona (Dec. 7-10), and the evocative Nancy Meehan (March 29-31). 131 E. 10th St. (674-8112)


Doing More With Less: School Buses, Too
On the first day of school last Thursday, Marita Regan, the principal of Public School 222 in Marine Park, found herself doing more with less.
Already reeling from the loss of seven teachers who took early retirement and were not replaced, Ms.
Regan was confronted with parents registering far more students than had been expected.
Every available nook at the elementary school -- from book closets to the gymnasium -- has been requisitioned for classroom space.
And this year there is no money for new books or furniture.
"We can't take much more of these cuts," Ms.
Regan said.
"This will surely have a negative impact on the children."


Rebecca Oreskes, Bradley C. Ray
Rebecca Eve Oreskes and Bradley Charles Ray, employees of the United States Forest Service at the White Mountain National Forest in New Hampshire, were married yesterday.
Terrie Kroger, a justice of the peace, performed the ceremony at the bride's home in North Chatham, N.H.
Ms.
Oreskes, 34, is keeping her name.
She is a graduate of St.
John's College in Santa Fe, N.M., and works as a public affairs specialist with the Forest Service.
She is a daughter of Susan and Dr.
Irwin Oreskes of New York.
Dr.
Oreskes is a professor of medical laboratory sciences at Hunter College, and Mrs.
Oreskes retired as a nursery school teacher at the Riverside Church Weekday School in New York.


Suit Fights Main St. Station Renovation
A group of business owners, Councilwoman Julia Harrison and two citizens' groups have filed suit in State Supreme Court seeking to delay the $27 million renovation of the Main Street IRT station, the Queens terminus of the No. 7 line.
The suit, against the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, the New York City Transit Authority and the city's Department of Transportation, seeks further study of the project's environmental impact.
Construction is to begin in January.
No court date has been set.


Quiet Weekend Spot in Litchfield County
WEST CORNWALL GRILL, tucked into a cozy enclave across from the defunct train station in West Cornwall, is a work in progress.
While the rating Good is applicable today, this small, unpretentious place has the culinary potential to be Very Good indeed.
The chef, Richard McCarty, was once at the West Street Grill in Litchfield, so he knows what he is about.
And the new owner, Laura McDonald, may be able to straighten out some inconsistencies.
The dining area, formerly a biker bar, has been expanded and reconfigured little by little.
The decor is charmingly modest with white lace cafe curtains, dark-stained post and beam construction and hanging plants plus fresh garden flowers at each well-napped table.


For Indian Politician, An Opulent Wedding Means Political Bliss
Half a century after India's maharajahs began fading into history along with their pink marble palaces and gold-plated Rolls-Royces, one of the country's most controversial politicians staged a wedding for her foster son here this week that was a show of maharajah-like opulence, as well as of political defiance.
The politician, Jayalalitha Jayaram, is a former movie star who succeeded her companion, a still bigger star named M. G. Ramachandran, after he died as Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu State, which has 55 million people.


Philippa Eckhardt and C. E. Filardi
Philippa Warren Eckhardt, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Eckhardt of Bridgehampton, L.I., was married yesterday to Christopher Edward Filardi, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward V. Filardi of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
The Rev.
Christine Rannie Grimbol, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Old Whaler's Church in Sag Harbor, L.I.
The couple, both 28, are to begin work next month with the Wildlife Conservation Society in Papua, New Guinea, she as an educator and land-use cartographer and he as a resident biologist.
They graduated from Bowdoin College and received master's degrees in environmental studies, she from the Antioch/New England Graduate School and he from Yale University.


Ruth E. Stanat, W. H. Lawson 3d
Ruth Ellen Stanat, the president of SIS International Research, a marketing research company in New City, N.Y., was married yesterday to William Hogan Lawson 3d, the chairman of the Franklin Electric Company in Bluffton, Ind.
The Rev.
David Harkness performed the ceremony at the Presbyterian Church in Irvington, N.Y.
Mrs.
Stanat-Lawson, 47, is also the author of "The Intelligent Corporation." She graduated from Ohio University and received a master's degree in psychology and an M.B.A., both from New York University.
She is the daughter of Ellen Corrigan of Titusville, Fla., and the late James F. Corrigan 2d.


THE SURVIVOR
For Dan Rather, 63, this past year has been a course in survival.
He survived as co-anchor of the "CBS Evening News" with Connie Chung, a woman he appeared to be allergic to.
He also survived the budgetary slashings of CBS's chairman, Laurence Tisch, and the ratings dive that the news program later suffered.
Rather even survived a cloud of rumors in the spring that his anchoring days might be numbered: in May, it was Chung, not Rather, who was pulled from the anchor's chair.
"I guess some of this comes from being born during the Depression," Rather was saying on a recent August morning as we drove through southeast Texas in a pickup truck.
"Also, I realized pretty early on that while I had skills, there were an awful lot of other people with better skills. All that may have given me strong survival skills."
These words were being spoken at a time when Rather's survival skills were likely to be tested once again: a couple of days after Tisch announced plans to merge CBS with the cash-poor Westinghouse Electric Corporation.
This move convinced many CBS staff members that there might be still more cuts in their future. (Not to mention bigger uncertainties. As this article went to press, Ted Turner, who had been trying to find the money to buy the network out from under Westinghouse, was himself negotiating a potential buyout of Turner Broadcasting System by Time Warner.)
We were talking on a blazingly gorgeous morning a full month before Rather would begin his 15th season as the "CBS Evening News" anchor and managing editor.
Our goal was to visit the places of his childhood, to do an interview free of the formalities of his New York life.
We dashed to Huntsville, the site of Rather's alma mater, Sam Houston State College.
Then it was on to the oil town of Wharton, his birthplace.
Finally, we drove to Austin for dinner with Mrs.
Dan Rather, the artist Jean Rather, 59.
Between stops, there were gawkings at cattle, an encounter with a highway patrolman, who pulled us over for driving without seat belts, and constant trips to pay phones as Rather sought updates on the pending CBS-Westinghouse merger.
Q: David Letterman did a Top 10 list the other night about the CBS-Westinghouse merger.
Among his predictions: The current CBS brass would be replaced by a "whole new batch of weasels," and your next co-anchor would be a coffeepot.
Can you work with a coffeepot?
A: The real question is, How will a coffeepot feel about working with me?  [ Laughs ]  Actually, I'd prefer a refrigerator.
But I'm not sure I'll have a coffeepot or a refrigerator because I'm not yet convinced we'll have Westinghouse.
And if we do, we may not have Westinghouse for long. . . .
As we speak, the deal is a long way from finished.
The thing to look for in whoever winds up with CBS is whether they have taken on so much debt that they have to squeeze CBS News down further to help service it.
Q: That's what happened when Tisch took over the company eight years ago, isn't it?
A: Uh-huh.
And now we are in 1995.
And this is a much bigger deal.
Q:Andy Rooney recently said: "Larry Tisch did all the wrong things with CBS. . . . He turned the best broadcasting company in the business into one of the weakest and got even richer in the process." Agree?
A:  [ Slowly ]  Mmmmm . . .
I'm going to have to say, I'm not going to answer that question.
What I will say is that there's real concern about what effect one merger after another, each one bigger than the last, will have on the news.
Everywhere.
Not just at CBS.
When we were purchased last time, much of what Wall Street said needed to be done with CBS was wrong.
Now, I understand that CBS needs to make a profit, but we also are, in some ways, a public trust. . . .
When the new buyers talk about "increasing margins," it makes me nervous.
A recent Wall Street Journal article quoted someone from the new potential ownership saying that more layoffs are inevitable. . . .
At CBS News, we're down to the bone, past the bone, and we've been there a long time.
Q: A lot of CBS News people are praying that Ted Turner will buy the network.
Are you a member of the "Waiting for Ted" camp?
A: Well, I like Ted Turner and respect many of the things he's done with CNN.
Now, I do have concerns.
Turner already has the infrastructure of a worldwide news-gathering operation.
If he were to take CBS, the danger is, that might gut CBS News, perhaps leave around it some of the trappings of what it once was, but wipe out the depth of our talent.
Q: This could happen anyway?
A: Well, with any potential new management, you don't know.
It's true, somebody else might get hold of CBS and gut us anyway.
The last time the company changed ownership, what we first believed turned out to be several area codes away from what was true.
The picture that was painted of the new ownership  [ then ]  was that it would bring in a new era of aggressive expansion and leadership in news.
You can make a case that we had a critical moment in 1988 -- when the "CBS Evening News" on the flagship CBS station in New York was moved from 7 P.M., where it was strong, to 6:30, where it would be weak.
What was put in at our place at 7 was a game show, "Win, Lose or Draw." When that happened, I knew the tide had turned against news.
I, among others, fought as much as I could.
"We can make more money by buying this syndicated program, and we decided we want the money," we were told by management.
And we said: "If this is only about money, it's a short-term gain and long-term loss. If you move the 'CBS Evening News' from where it is doing well, the signal goes out to our affiliates that they can move the news to any time they damn well please. They'll move it to terrible time periods."
Which they did.
Affiliated stations began playing the "Evening News" at 6:30, 4:30, 5 -- it was Death Valley.
The signal from the top was, "Go for the buck." Now, this move was not Larry Tisch's idea,  [ but ]  he approved it.
I'm now thinking, whoever winds up owning us, if they want to make a bold move for all of CBS News, they should put the news back at 7 at every owned and operated station.
Q: You made headlines earlier this summer when Connie Chung was removed as co-anchor.
At the time, she said she refused a smaller role because it was "inappropriate for the only woman on the three major network news programs to have anything less than coequal status." A: This is not and was not a gender issue.
Connie has often said, and rightly so, that she didn't come into the job because she's a woman.
And she didn't lose it because she was a woman.
It was a business decision to try it, and it was a business decision to stop it. . . .
There was a time when some people thought having two anchors would make us more flexible, give me a chance to get out in the field more -- and it was thought that it might improve our ratings.
After two years, basically, the same people who decided to do it realized that our ratings were poorer than when we started out.
Q: When did you first hear that Connie Chung might be leaving the "Evening News"?
A: By Friday  [ May 19 ] , word was beginning to get around that Connie's agent was negotiating. . . .  [ I figured ]  she'd probably sign a new contract, would stay on with CBS and be a central star and probably would continue to be a dual anchor.
I'd been told  [ by the CBS brass ]  fairly recently that the intention was to continue.
I left New York for Austin  [ after the Friday broadcast ]  to give the commencement address at the University of Texas. . . .
I thought, "They may very well say to me, 'We want you to work at CBS News, but we want you to go off in a different direction.' " Q: So you thought you, not Chung, might be pulled from the anchor's chair?
A: The thought occurred to me.
Television, after all, is a young person's game.
You can count on one hand the people in television, in news and entertainment, who are front and center who are over 59.
There's Angela Lansbury and Dan Rather.
Also, there had been this business with the Oklahoma City bombing coverage.  [ Immediately after the explosion, Chung was sent to the blast site; Rather was told not to go there.
Eventually, he did join the coverage team. ]  Afterward, I said  [ to management ] : "We have to work out something so that we don't have this situation develop again. . . . If something like that breaks, I want to be on it. Not to the exclusion of anybody else. My feeling was, I love this job, but I can't, I won't, go through this again.  [ Being kept from the story ]  chewed me up inside. It was like trying to swallow barbed-wire-wrapped ball bearings.
I got off the plane, my beeper was going off.
I was told, "Somebody is calling around the newspapers saying that Connie is trying to get out of her contract."
Of the things that I've read, the one that strikes me as having the strongest possibility of being true is that Connie and her agent made a decision that they wanted to put heat on CBS to get what they wanted by way of contract resolution.
And in order to get what they wanted, this writer quotes someone as saying that they made a conscious decision to pursue a "scorched earth" strategy.
With time, and seeing the whole context, that seems to be the most reasonable explanation.
Q: On screen, the two of you always looked miserable together -- as if you'd been pushed into the video version of a shotgun marriage.
A: People have said that to me.
But I never felt that.
I never had any personal problems with Connie, which surprised me in a high-pressured situation every day for nearly two years.
Now, it has been suggested -- and I think there may be some merit -- that the  [ on-air ]  dynamic between us changed in about late February or March of this year.
Q: Was that about the time of her "just between you and me" Kathleen Gingrich interview?
A: Yes.
That's a wee small answer, yes.
I spoke up for Connie at the time.
What I felt privately was something not to express publicly.
So, looking back on it, I did begin to notice a change in our on-screen dynamic in late February or March. . . .
Also in March, I learned of some meetings that had taken place before the November 1994 elections -- discussions about what the election coverage would look like.
I didn't know the exact details of who said what to whom.
But in March I was told -- and did confirm -- that there had been meetings at which  [ Chung's agent ]  Mr.
Geller and the person for whom he was working sought, at the very minimum, to have a much larger role in election-night coverage.
At my expense.
When I say that there was a change, I would have been foolish not to take that seriously.
Now, there are differing versions of what happened.
What stuck in my mind was Mr.
Geller saying to somebody, "You know, it's time for Dan to step aside." It's a rough trade and I understand that, but I didn't take kindly to that.
Q: What would you have done if that argument had been successful?
A: I would have said to my employers, "Well, do you have anything else besides anchoring for me to do?" If I am able to do something in journalism, I'd be O.K. . . .
You know, I was supportive  [ of Chung ] .
I worked hard to make it work.
I gave much more than I got.
And happily so.
I was protective and defensive.
I gave it everything.
I believed it would continue indefinitely, until I found out about election night and what had happened in secret.
Until it was made very clear to me that there was a push-on not for me to share, but to give up.
Of the three network anchors, you seem to be a lightning rod for personal attacks.
Do you have any insight on why that is?
A: I have no idea where that comes from.
The best I can come up with is that I've been around a long time.
Sometimes, there's been envy, jealousy, wonderment: "How did a guy as dumb as Rather get where he is?" My answer is, I got in early, stayed late, worked hard, cared a lot and God smiled on me.
And by the way, I might not be quite as dumb as you think I am.
Another thing, I think it sometimes peeves some people when someone from the bottom breaks through.
My background is Texas and poor.
There was a review of a book about education in The Wall Street Journal, and the headline was, "Dan Rather and Other Enemies of Civilization." The review said, more or less, that television news was incredibly literate before I was on the air and concluded that we should shut down all teachers' colleges.
I had attended Sam Houston State teachers' college.
It hurt.
The truth is, I got a wonderful education at Sam Houston State teachers' college and afterward at CBS, where I was trained by masters -- Charles Collingwood, Eric Sevareid and, by extension, Edward R. Murrow himself.
I met Murrow.
But he left CBS just about the time I got there.
Now, I know I'm not Ed Murrow.  [ Smiles ]  Every morning, when I shave, I say: "Boy, what a wreck you are. And I'll tell you one damned thing, you're not Ed Murrow, and Ed Murrow you're never going to be." But that doesn't mean I can't practice the lessons that these guys taught me.
Q: Tell us what the late Charles Collingwood taught you about men's haberdashery?
A: When I first came to CBS, Charles said, "If you want to make it here young man, 'dress British and think Yiddish.' " And he certainly taught me the British part.
"You should buy at least one tailored suit," he said, and then he took me to his tailor on Savile Row.
He showed me what traveled well.
I should have remembered his advice many years later when I was at "60 Minutes" doing a story on drug dealers.
We had an informant in Wyoming who said he'd only talk if I came into town in complete disguise.
So I dressed up in biker clothes -- jeans, a T-shirt, with sleeves rolled up to my shoulder, a pack of cigarettes stuck in the sleeve and a phony tattoo.
I thought I was completely unrecognizable.
But on the plane, I sat down next to an African-American businessman, who looked me up and down and declared: "Dan Rather, is that you? You look bizarre!" Moral of the story? 'Tis better to dress British than Biker.
Q: Or sing off-key.
TV Guide recently accused you of "conduct unbecoming a network news anchor" because you sang "What's the Frequency, Kenneth" on the David Letterman show with the rock group R.E.M.
A: Oh, that was so ridiculous.
Everyone knows I can't sing in a bucket with a lid on it.
I laughed when I read that.
What does "conduct unbecoming an anchor" mean, anyway?
Q: It means you're not being grave enough for a guy telling the country about Bosnia.
A: Verrrrry interesting.
Conduct unbecoming an anchor is "selling out." You know, most of the time I'm accused of being too grave.
All this comes under the heading of "Either way you go, you're going to catch it." If you read the news in a deep baritone, they are going to say, "God, he's stuffy." If you let any part of your other self show, it's "conduct unbecoming an anchor." Q: Can you envision Ed Murrow singing with R.E.M.?
A: Yes, I could.
Ed Murrow, you know, was roundly criticized for sitting down and just talking to Marilyn Monroe!
That was his equivalent of singing with R.E.M.
Q: The R.E.M. song is actually about your 1986 assault, when one of the people who attacked you said, most oddly, "Kenneth, what's the frequency?" What I recall about the coverage at the time was that there wasn't a lot of sympathy for you.
It was played as, "Well, weird things always happen to Dan Rather." A: And as with so many other things, I shrugged my shoulders and thought, "This is what comes with the territory." Who knows what it was about?
A lot of people get very badly hurt in assaults.
I came away lucky.
When Michael Stipe  [ lead singer of R.E.M. ]  was in New York last, I did talk with him about why he wrote this song, which I like a lot.
He said that one of the themes he thinks about is the surreal and unexplainable things that happen.
He remembered this as a kind of crazy surreal experience of the kind a lot of people go through.
Q: Speaking of the surreal, do you have any insight on why a journalist with Diane Sawyer's reputation would participate in something like her "interview" with Michael Jackson?
According to newspaper reports, the singer was able to alter his appearance on the videotape and choose the format.
A: With this kind of program, the problem is a servility to ratings.
Listen, Michael Jackson can produce a 42 share.
Dyn-o-mite!
There isn't an executive in television who doesn't lust for a 42 share!
And once we get ourselves into that obsession, we are all very close to making that mistake.
Even the best among us.
Q: How do you rate your competitors -- do you ever envy them?
A: They are all very decent, classy people -- Peter, Tom and Bernie Shaw.
Peter has a sense of elegance about him, which I greatly admire.
Tom has a steadiness and unflappability that I especially admire.
Bernie has a terrific tenaciousness, but with it, an ability to make it no big deal most of the time.
It doesn't even show.
Each, in his own way, tends to get less criticism than I do.
And I do envy their ability to avoid it.
It does make me ask questions within myself.
Both Tom and Peter seem to be at ease in every social situation.
I'm not.
I'm not a big Hamptons party guy.
I'm not even good at big New York parties.
Q: Do you ever watch "Murphy Brown"?
A: I do.
I know people like that.
Q: Which one is you?
A: Some of each.
Mostly Murphy.
First of all, she loves the news.
Secondly, she's vulnerable.
Thirdly, when she's on a story, she is focused and unstoppable.
In most of the characters, I see some part of myself.
Jim Dial -- he also loves the news and is so very serious about it.
There are times when he doesn't talk, he announces.
It's the common fate of anchormen.
"Heeeeeeey, I'm hoooooooome, everybody!" When I do that, my family cracks up.
Now the best movie about television, I think, was "Network." I saw that in the 1970's and thought, "Paddy Chayefsky's got it." He understood then the real danger of everyone worshiping at the temple of the ratings.
I think he was trying to say, "Realize where this is going to lead -- unless something dramatic and profound happens." Q: To return to your colleague David Letterman.
Does it trouble you that the atmosphere at CBS is so demoralized that even he is making jokes about it?
A: No, I'm pleased and relieved that we have David around to keep alive whatever humor he can.
I know that sometimes it's gallows humor.
But at least it's humor.


Beyond the Couch
IT was always a one-way love affair.
New York City adored Sigmund Freud.
Freud hated New York City.
He was here just once, in 1909, and he took in the usual sights: the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Coney Island, Central Park and Chinatown.
But as he left the States, he wrote to his sister: "I am very glad I am away from it, and even more that I don't have to live there."


Unmarried Pairs: Let Buyers Beware
To the Editor:
Your "Unmarried Pairs: Let the Buyers Beware" on Aug. 27 is an excellent guide to balancing the paradise and pitfalls of their real estate purchases.
Advance planning by the partners is at least as important as "location, location, location."


Marijuana Cure: Rx for Arrest
Once a week for the last two years, Johann Moore would take the subway from his home in Park Slope to lower Manhattan to give away marijuana.
He doesn't anymore.
Six months ago he had to start charging for the drug, he said, because of high demand and limited supply.
But he insists he's no dealer: His customers pay wholesale.


POSTINGS: It's Now Four in a Row on East 68th Street; Foreign Relations Council Adds a Building
The Council on Foreign Relations, the foreign-policy think tank on East 68th Street, recently purchased its fourth contiguous property on the block between Madison and Park Avenues.
The latest addition is at 50 East 68th Street.
The four buildings couldn't be more different architecturally.
A noble limestone palazzo at 56-60 East 68th Street holds the Council's entrance, marked only by two polished brass lions' heads on the black double doors.
The 1919 building was designed by Delano &amp; Aldrich for Harold I. Pratt, son of a Standard Oil magnate.
No. 54 is a limestone confection; next door at 52 is an elaborately trimmed brownstone.
And next to that is the painted-brick elevator apartment building the Council purchased on July 7 for $1,810,000.


Placing the Blame For Retirement Worries
To the Editor:
Your analysis of the "retirement crisis" barely mentioned the destructive role of over-regulation in the demise of the defined-benefit plan, which businesses have been discontinuing at a rapid rate since the mid-1980's.


Cheap Rates for Some, Confusion for Others
WHEN Gloria McMenimen received the letter, she was intrigued, but still adamant.
Long Distance Wholesale Club was offering up to half off the price of every long-distance call she dialed with a special numbered prefix.
With Ms.
McMenimen's daughter living in Spain, far from their Massachusetts home, the offer was tempting.
But Ms.
McMenimen says she repeatedly told the company, when she called for more information, that she wanted to stay with AT&amp;T, her primary long-distance carrier.
Yet later when she called AT&amp;T about the status of various AT&amp;T incentive plans, she was shocked to find that she had been switched to the Wholesale Club.


Alabama's Fob James Defends Today's Conservative Values
To the Editor:
Howell Raines's "Genius of Bad P.R." (Editorial Notebook, Sept. 3), on Gov.
Fob James of Alabama, is an unfair assessment of the man and the first six months of his second term.


NEWS AND TOPICS


Sunset View Is Blocked, So Cafe Is, Too
When Andrea Reich moved into her TriBeCa loft 14 years ago, she enjoyed fiery sunsets over the Hudson from her fourth-floor window.
But for the last three years, Ms.
Reich, a 49-year-old furniture designer, has had to watch the sun dip behind a five-story billboard.
At night, the glow of its lamps casts a ghostly pall on her walls.
"My million-dollar view has become an eyesore," Ms.
Reich said, frustrated that the billboard remains even though the city says it violates zoning regulations, and even though like-minded neighbors and Councilwoman Kathryn Freed have lobbied against it.


De La Hoya Wins Bout And Breaks Foe's Nose
Oscar De La Hoya's idol is Sugar Ray Leonard, and now they have a little more in common.
"No mas."


Why Liberalism Isn't Allowed to Die
YOU probably think liberalism dried up and blew away years ago.
There was George McGovern, but Richard Nixon clobbered him.
Then Spiro Agnew worked liberals over really good, before he quit.
Then Ronald Reagan, in '84, had Walter Mondale for lunch.
Michael S. Dukakis, he actually said "I'm a liberal" -- this was on television -- and even though he added right away that he was a Truman or Kennedy-type liberal and not some dope-smoking bomb-thrower who took over Berkeley, he got clobbered worse than McGovern.
Bill Clinton ran against liberalism, and is still in the doghouse for being too liberal.
Hubert Humphrey is dead.


Bad (as in Groovy) Hair Day
Wigstock drag festival, along the Hudson in Greenwich Village, Sept. 3.


Amy R. Singer, Richard L. Einhorn
Amy Rebecca Singer, the editor of on-line computer services for the Court TV cable television station, is to be married today to Richard Leon Einhorn, a composer.
Rabbi Miriam Ancis is to perform the ceremony at the Puck Building in New York.
The bride, 36, graduated cum laude from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master of studies degree in law from Yale University.
She is the daughter of Janice and Joe Singer of Oklahoma City.
The bride's father is the president of the Pedestal Oil Company in Oklahoma City.


Life After Dark, Plain And Fancy
DUSK comes quickly to downtown Chicago, where the skyscrapers and office towers trap the slanting afternoon sun in narrow canyons, and soon cast long evening shadows over the lakefront.
But even as the light fades from the Loop, and commuters begin to desert the city for the suburbs, the rest of Chicago is just switching on.
The soul of the city is in its neighborhoods, the patchwork of ethnic, racial and working-class communities that tumble away from the center.
The best restaurants and the best clubs are found beyond the circle of elevated rail tracks that define the Loop, and a good place to begin the night is Bucktown, a Near West Side working-class enclave that, over the last decade, has become the latest province of the trendy and moneyed.
At the corner of West Wabansia and Honore Streets is Club Lucky, a former American Legion hall nearly lost among the tiny shingle-sided houses and prewar duplexes that, one by one, investors are turning into fashionable urban redoubts.


Healing South Africa
South Africa's apartheid regime has been dismantled, but not its legacy of suffering, particularly among survivors of the violent crimes committed in its name.
Paying the debt of accountability and reparations owed to these South Africans is essential to building a peaceful nonracial democracy.
Other countries emerging from decades of authoritarian rule, in Latin America and Eastern Europe, have struggled to achieve a balance between retribution and reconciliation as they come to terms with their history.
It can be anguishing work.
South Africa has made a good start.


Gauging Guilt
To the Editor:
Alex Ross writes that Adolf Hitler received 37 percent of the vote.
This was true in the election of July 31, 1932.
But in another election seven months later, on March 5, 1933, the Nazis received 44 percent of the vote, and an allied party, the Nationalists, received 8 percent. (The dates and figures are taken from William Shirer's book "The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich.")


Finding Cuts That Hurt The Least
Dr.
Lester Young used to be a guidance counselor.
Now, as superintendent of Community School District 13, he watched as the Board of Education cut $1.6 million from his budget.
Instead of cutting teachers, he looked to his old profession for some of the savings he needed: this year the district's guidance staff was cut nearly in half.
The district -- which includes Brooklyn Heights, Fort Greene, Clinton Hill and parts of Bedford-Stuyvesant and Park Slope -- will lose 17 guidance counselors, bringing the total number to 20.
"I understand the need for children's support services," said Dr.
Young, who met with the remaining counselors last week.
"I think, realistically, 37 counselors for a district our size was large. Twenty counselors for 22 schools is not the best ratio, but it's not gloom and doom either."


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Over the River And to the . . .
Driving Range Tennisport, a tennis club on the East River in Long Island City, Queens, where the annual fee is $2,800, is getting a next-door neighbor: Golfport, a driving range with no membership fee and where a bucket of balls will cost $5.


Summer's Flavor and Variety
IT'S that time of year again, when everyone, it seems, is trying to unload tomatoes.
After paying high prices all winter for those imported Dutch hothouse varieties that come on the vine, you can now harvest your own tomatoes or get them by the bushel for practically nothing at a farmers' market.
I never tire of that quintessential summer dish, pasta with raw tomatoes and basil.
But there are many variations on this theme.
My sister brought back a recipe from Italy in which tomatoes are mixed with diced Emmenthaler and mozzarella as a sauce for penne.
The cheeses melt slightly when they are tossed with the hot pasta and combine with the juice of the tomatoes to make a light, summery sauce.


Our Next Senator . . .
Senator Bill Bradley and former Gov.
Thomas H. Kean have withdrawn from next year's Senate race.
Whom do you like to run for the seat?
A Vote for Zimmer
I believe Representative Dick Zimmer of Hunterdon County should and will prevail in the Republican primary.
I know of no other Republican more capable and worthy of representing his party.


A Running Man Turns To Golf
JOHN KENNEDY, Gerald Ford and George Bush all enjoyed their moments on a putting green.
But perhaps not since that unabashed duffer Dwight D. Eisenhower has there been such a golfing President as Bill Clinton.
By the end of his three-week vacation last week, Mr.
Clinton had logged more than 70 hours on the greens, including several sandwiched between the commemoration of World War II in Hawaii and budget politicking in California.
Between two days of appearances in Monterey and Fresno, he lived along the seaside links of Pebble Beach.


When Benefit Packages Clash
LAST year's merger of two mutual fund companies, Houston's American Capital Management Research and Chicago's Van Kampen Merritt, was a joining of equals in terms of assets.
But when it came to employee benefits, the inequalities were glaring.
American Capital offered life insurance equal to one year's salary; Van Kampen offered seven times salary.
American Capital employees had to pay large shares of their medical bills if they did not use the doctors in the company's health maintenance organization; Van Kampen picked up much of the cost of any doctors employees chose.
As for Van Kampen's pension and profit-sharing plans, they were more generous than American's, too.


A Longtime Stock Watcher Says It's Not Over Yet
ROBERT FARRELL has been watching the stock market for Merrill Lynch for 38 years, through bull markets and bear markets, and now has the title of senior investment adviser.
He sees plenty of signs of excess in the current bull market, but doesn't think the end is nigh.
Computer technology stocks may be near the end of their run, but biotech stocks look interesting.
Why?
Read on.
FLOYD NORRIS Q. Where do we go from here?


Jennifer L. Klein, Todd D. Stern
Jennifer Lynn Klein, a senior policy analyst on the Domestic Policy Council and in the office of the First Lady, is to be married today in Brooklyn to Todd David Stern, an assistant to the President and the staff secretary at the White House.
Rabbi Edward Schecter is to perform the ceremony at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Ms.
Klein, 30, graduated from Brown University, and received her law degree from Columbia University.
She is the daughter of Carol and Allen Klein of Stamford, Conn.
Her father is the senior tax advisor at Schlumberger Limited, the oil services company in New York.
Her mother is an interior designer in New York.


3 Other R's: Rested, Restive, Ready
ON THEIR FIRST DAY of school, they hugged, squealed, touched each other's tans.
They wore sundresses, shorts, T-shirts and running shoes without socks.
In the auditorium, they passed notes, chewed gum and kept talking as the principal, Martin D. Mayerson, droned on about the new schedule, the meaning of the bells and why it was so unfair for them to come late or leave early.
They groaned and tickled each other.
School can be such fun before the pupils arrive.
The teachers of Stephen A. Halsey Junior High School 157, Queens, will never again look as good this year as they did last Tuesday, their bodies relaxed and their passions renewed.
For most, their public school teaching careers began as more of a mission than a job, and, despite what they describe as the demoralizing experience of working for the city, it is still a mission for many of them, at least inside the classroom.
This year, the teachers of Halsey will be worrying about the mayor's budget cuts, a new United Federation of Teachers' contract, and the school board elections.


Hearing Allows Residents to Vent Against Complex
In the latest challenge to Queens West, the Long Island City waterfront development, local residents offered ominous predictions of their neighborhood's demise at a public hearing on Wednesday night.
The hearing, at the Con Edison Learning Center on Vernon Boulevard, was required for Queens West to exercise its power of eminent domain as an arm of the Empire State Development Corporation over land involved in the first phase of construction.


The Bottom Line: A Balancing Act
Here is how 4 community school districts in Brooklyn plan to achieve some of the savings needed to cope with budget cuts as well as with increases in teacher salaries and student population.
Some districts are cutting the number of teachers, even as the number of students rises.
Others are expected to keep the same number of teachers as last year or get a few more.
But even in those districts, the number of teaching positions relative to student population may drop.
This will be reflected in larger average class sizes.
Class sizes are in flux because enrollment and transfers continue through most of September.
DISTRICT 13  Number of schools 18 elementary, 3 intermediate, 1 junior high Number of students 15,700; more than last year Number of teachers 748 teachers; unchanged.
Number of teachers 1,200; 33 fewer than last year.


Baseball Wild Card Is Marketing Wisdom
To the Editor:
Re "Virtual Baseball" (editorial, Sept. 4), railing against the new wild card races, in which one second-place team in each league will qualify for the playoffs:


Q. &amp; A.
Paying Interest On Interest  Q What is meant by negative amortization?
Under what types of purchase money formats will it occur? . . .
Erica W. Potts, Manhattan.
A Edward T. Braverman, a Manhattan real estate lawyer, said that a negative amortization mortgage is one on which the required monthly payment is less than what would normally result from the actual interest rate being charged.
The difference is added to the loan, thereby increasing the principal balance by the amount of unpaid interest, until a predetermined ceiling has been reached.


Setting Record Straight: The Original Bombalurina
To the Editor:
As one of the casting directors of the original "Cats" and "Les Miserables," I would like to point out that contrary to "The Endurance Tony" (July 23), Donna King, not Marlene Danielle, originated the role of Bombalurina.
While Ms.
Danielle has been with "Cats" since its opening, she began as an understudy and then played Demeter before replacing Ms.
King.
J.
C.
Sheets was in rehearsal for the first national company of "Les Miserables" when he was whisked off to join the Australian cast of the show.
He joined the Broadway company in mid-1988.
ANDREW ZERMAN  Midtown


Missing the Old Neighborhood
TOMMY NARDONE, the crusty owner and cook of the old Brown Derby restaurant, used to dismiss whatever fears customers might have about parking in his dingy corner of the North Inlet.
He would assure them that Atlantic City would bloom again, with or without casinos.
For two decades, Mr.
Nardone, one of the few city residents to vote against legalized casino gambling, served up big portions of veal and spaghetti.
The Brown Derby, one of the more successful of the city's dozen or so mom-and-pop Italian restaurants, had the singular distinction of being on an ocean-front street in Atlantic City's worst neighhorhood.
"They used to say, 'If you want to find the Brown Derby, you'd better pack a gun,' " Mr.
Nardone said.


Pataki Unveils New Rules To Fight Welfare Fraud
Gov.
George E. Pataki said today that the state would move more quickly to cut benefits to people suspected of collecting welfare from more than one place.
The initiative, announced here on a swing through the Buffalo area, is the latest in a series of measures the Republican administration says are aimed at reducing welfare costs by aggressively ferreting out fraud.
Advocates for welfare recipients charge, however, that the measures -- including the one announced today -- push deserving recipients off welfare rolls by creating too many bureaucratic hurdles.


Coast Guard to Review Cruise Ship Safety
The Coast Guard has created a Cruise Ship Safety Review Task Force following four incidents on ships this summer: the grounding of the Royal Majesty off Nantucket and the Star Princess in Alaska, and fires aboard the Carnival Line's Celebration and Regency's Regent Star.
The task force will examine the standards set by the International Maritime Organization to be sure there are no safety gaps, and will go over the recent incidents to see what lessons can be learned, according to Capt.
Brian Basel, the head of the task force.
Also, he said, special inspectors will accompany some of the regular Coast Guard inspectors on their rounds to see if a consistent job is being done in all 15 ports where cruise vessels call.


TELEVISION
Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the months ahead.
As usual, programs change, some events are sold out, and some have not yet scheduled locations or exact opening dates.
Unless indicated, all dates listed are for openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone numbers have a 212 area code.
Addresses for locations in New York City cited more than once appear at the bottom of page 68.
NEW SERIES  ABC
"THE DREW CAREY SHOW" -- A ferociously funny stand-up comic from Cleveland named Drew Carey becomes Drew, an assistant personnel manager for a Cleveland department store who hangs out with his high school buddies and pursues happiness.
Perhaps an effort to be a blue-collar, Midwestern "Seinfeld." Of course it's a long way from Cleveland to Manhattan.
Wednesdays at 8:30, starting Wed.


Last-Ditch Field Goal Redeems Penn State
This final drive, compared with so many in Penn State's perfect season a year ago, was in slow motion, with stops and starts and imperfections.
But if the Nittany Lions can take another undefeated record back to the Rose Bowl, this drive may turn out to be as significant as the swift scores that are now part of football history.
Brett Conway's 39-yard field goal with four seconds to play, at the end of a harrowing 14-play journey, allowed the Nittany Lions to escape with a 24-23 victory over Texas Tech this afternoon.


At the Patient's Expense?
THE GIRL WHO DIED TWICE  Every Patient's Nightmare: The Libby Zion Case  and the Hidden Hazards of Hospitals.
By Natalie Robins.
Illustrated. 350 pp.
New York:  Delacorte Press. $22.95.


Adrift in Amsterdam
THE ANATOMY LESSON  By John David Morley.
Illustrated. 184 pp.
New York: St.
Martin's Press. $21.95.


Don't Pair Sex and Violence
To the Editor:
In her article "Americans Despair of Popular Culture"  [ Aug. 20 ]  Elizabeth Kolbert emphasizes the depiction of sex and violence on television as the major cause of the public's negative view of American popular culture.


The Decline of the Nice-Guy Quotient
CONTRARY to conventional wisdom, nice guys do finish first.
The trouble is, nice guys are harder and harder to find.
Amid the agonizing over standardized intelligence tests comes a new problem to worry about.
Psychologists seeking a broader measure of intelligence, one that accounts for the personality traits that seem to predict success better than IQ alone, have discovered that a newly minted virtue they call "emotional intelligence" is declining as well.


Passion Set in Stone
A PSYCHIATRIST COULD DO nothing to solve this city's problems -- Jerusalem has no subconscious at all," Yehuda Amichai, Israel's most revered poet, remarked recently. "Everything is out in the open, even the infighting."
It was a sunny, intensely hot morning earlier this summer, and Amichai was sitting in his small cottage in Yemin Moshe, an exquisite neighborhood of 19th-century stone houses set along flower-bedecked walkways, not far from the center of Jerusalem.
"Where else do you see Jews dressed like 19th-century Russians and Arabs dressed like Arabs and people in modern dress, all at each other?" he continued.
"You could say that this city is an open madhouse. But its great accomplishment is that it has succeeded in not being a museum. It is heavenly and earthly together, and that is what will sustain it -- the real life."


More to the Point
To the Editor:
For years, preschool teachers have been less concerned with what is shown on television than what children are not doing when they are watching television.
CLEO ROGERS  Burbank, Calif.


No Headline
"People are wondering what Forrest Gump Colin Powell stands for. Well, they're about to find out, as I deal with the various issues that are out there and I become a public figure again." -- COLIN L. POWELL  [ 25:3 ]


A Grim Oversight
To the Editor:
In his article "In Music, Though, There Were No Victories"  [ Aug. 20 ] , Alex Ross is right to take exception to Benjamin Britten's "War Requiem" as "sadly inappropriate to the circumstances of World War II," but for reasons not stated.
Mr.
Ross takes no notice of the criticism that Britten considers only the British, German and Soviet victims of the war and ignores the six million Jews, among others, killed in the Holocaust.


Toxic Business
A CIVIL ACTION  By Jonathan Harr. 500 pp. New York:  Random House. $25.


Brooklyn Community Board Meetings
DISTRICT 1 Greenpoint, Williamsburg; second Tuesday of month; next meeting, Sept. 12, 7 P.M.; 211 Ainslee Street, corner of Manhattan Avenue; (718) 389-0009.
DISTRICT 2 Fort Greene, Brooklyn Heights; second Wednesday of month; next meeting Sept. 13, 6 P.M.; Brooklyn Union Gas Company, One Metrotech Center, off Myrtle Avenue; (718) 596-5410.
DISTRICT 3 Bedford-Stuyvesant; first Monday of month; next Sept. 11, 7 P.M., 1368 Fulton Street (basement); (718) 622-6601.
DISTRICT 4 Bushwick; 3d Wednesday of month; next Sept. 20, 6:30 P.M., Hope Garden Center, 195 Linden St.; (718) 628-8400.
DISTRICT 5 East New York.
Next meeting Sept. 27, 7:30 P.M.; I.S. 302, 350 Linwood St. (tentative); (718) 498-5711.
DISTRICT 6 Park Slope; second Wednesday of month; next meeting Sept. 13, 6:30 P.M., Methodist Hospital auditorium, 506 Sixth Street; (718) 643-3027.
DISTRICT 7 Sunset Park; third Wednesday of month; next Sept. 20, 6 P.M., Marien Heim Residence, 4520 Fourth Avenue; (718) 854-0003.
DISTRICT 8 Crown Heights; second Thursday of month; next meeting Sept. 14, 7:30 P.M.; Interfaith Hospital, 555 Prospect Place, off Classon Avenue; (718) 467-5574.
DISTRICT 9 Crown Heights, Prospect-Lefferts Gardens, Wingate.
Next meeting Sept. 19, 7 P.M., Atwell J.H.S., 400 Empire Boulevard; (718) 778-9279.
DISTRICT 10 Bay Ridge, Dyker Heights; 3d Monday of month; next Sept. 18, 7:30 P.M., St.
Mary's Church, 192 81st St.; (718) 745-6827.
DISTRICT 11 Bensonhurst; next meeting Oct. 12, 7:30 P.M., Haym Salomon Home, 2300 Cropsey Avenue; (718) 266-8800.
DISTRICT 12 Borough Park.
Next meeting Sept. 19, 7:45 P.M., Amico Senior Center, 5901 13th Avenue; (718) 851-0800.
DISTRICT 13 Coney Island, Brighton Beach.
Next meeting Sept. 27, 7:30 P.M., Coney Island Hospital, 2601 Ocean Parkway; (718) 266-3001.
DISTRICT 14 Flatbush, Midwood; second Monday of month; next meeting Sept. 11, 7 P.M., P.S. 249, Caton Avenue and Marlboough Road; (718) 859-6357.
DISTRICT 15 Manhattan Beach, Sheepshead Bay, Gravesend.
Next meeting, Sept. 19, 7 P.M.; Kingsboro College 2001 Oriental Boulevard, faculty lounge; (718) 332-3008.
DISTRICT 16 Brownsville, Ocean Hill; third Tuesday of month; next meeting Sept. 26, 7 P.M., 216 Rockaway Avenue; (718) 385-0323.
DISTRICT 17 East Flatbush; third Wednesday of month; next meeting Sept. 20, 7 P.M., SUNY Health Science Center, 395 Lenox Road; (718) 467-3536.
DISTRICT 18 Canarsie, Marine Park.
Next Sept. 20, 8 P.M., Kings Plaza Community Room, Flatbush and Avenue V; (718) 241-0422.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Over the River And to the . . .
Driving Range Tennisport, a tennis club on the East River in Long Island City, Queens, where the annual fee is $2,800, is getting a next-door neighbor: Golfport, a driving range with no membership fee and where a bucket of balls will cost $5.


State-of-the-Art Glitz in Times Sq.
The signs of the future are already here.
Newly installed in -- where else? -- Times Square, where an unusual 1986 zoning law preserves the neighborhood's famed glitz and glow, they are bigger, brighter and more colorful than ever, sporting the latest in lighting and computer technology.


Susan Dunnington and W. C. Young
Susan Elizabeth Dunnington, a daughter of Ann and George Dunnington Jr. of Mystic, Conn., was married yesterday to William Cutler Young, the son of Patricia and Leslie Young of Greenwich, Conn.
Kimberly Gaffett, the second warden of New Shoreham, R.I., performed the ceremony at the Sullivan House, an inn on Block Island, R.I.
Ms.
Dunnington, 32, who is keeping her name, is an office manager at Boyajian, a specialty foods company in Newton, Mass.
She graduated from Connecticut College.
Her father is the director of administrative services at Mitchell College in New London, and her mother is a registered nurse and an H.I.V. counselor there at Connecticut College.


Martha McGuinness, David Williams
Martha McGuinness, a daughter of Cornelia and Dr.
William G. McGuinness of Huntington, L.I., was married there yesterday to David Brewster Williams, a son of Benjamin J. Williams of Boston and the late Natica Righter Williams.
Msgr.
James B. Richter, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Church.
Ms.
McGuinness, 29, who is keeping her name, is a freelance fashion and beauty reporter in New York.
She graduated from Barnard College.
Her father retired as an obstetrician and gynecologist in Rockville Centre, L.I.
Her mother retired as a transportation planner for Nassau County in Mineola, L.I.


New York City
In his Depression-era guidebook "New York: The Wonder City," W. Parker Chase looked ahead, and guessed wrong.
"The East River will have been filled in" by the 1980's, he wrote, and "restaurants, cafes and dining places generally will probably be passe. Meals will largely consist of various pellets, according to the taste and hunger of the masses."
Fortunately, he did not fantasize about the 90's.


A. P. Heminway, J. B. Anderson Jr.
Alexandra Phelps Heminway, a former consultant at the Travelogue travel agency in Washington, was married yesterday to John Bayard Anderson Jr., a financial analyst in the treasurer's office of the Federal National Mortgage Association in Washington.
The Very Rev.
Malcolm Eckel performed the ceremony at St.
Ann's Episcopal Church in Kennebunkport, Me.
Mrs.
Anderson, 32, graduated from New England College.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Willard Sands Heminway of Greenwich, Conn.
Her father, who is retired, owned the Heminway &amp; Bartlett Manufacturing Company in Greenwich.


Tomatoes Add Distinctly Summer Variety
It's that time of year again, when everyone, it seems, is trying to unload tomatoes.
After paying high prices all winter for those imported Dutch hothouse varieties that come on the vine, you can now harvest your own tomatoes or get them by the bushel for practically nothing at a farmers market.


Sept. 3-9: Whitewater; A Bump in the Road For the Special Prosecutor
Kenneth W. Starr, the Whitewater independent counsel, had a setback last week when a Federal judge in Little Rock threw out one of two indictments against Gov.
Jim Guy Tucker of Arkansas.
The ruling will delay prosecution of the Governor but doesn't leave him in the clear; Judge Henry Woods found only that Mr.
Starr exceeded his authority when he obtained an indictment that said Mr.
Tucker and two associates obtained a bank loan under false pretenses for use by a Texas cable television company, and that they schemed to avoid capital gains taxes in selling the business.
Mr.
Starr had been supported in court by the Justice Department, which wrote his charter, and he announced that he would appeal the decision.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


L. I. VINES
Domaine Wolffer Sagpond Vineyards, chardonnay reserve, Sagaponack, 1993. About $15.
Unlike some jack-in-the-box California chardonnay reserves -- uncork them and the flavor jumps out -- Sagpond's needs time to get ready for dinner.
Open it 60 to 75 minutes in advance and let it breathe.
The results can be rewarding.


IMMIGRANTS IN, NATIVE WHITES OUT
I read "Immigrants In, Native Whites Out" (by William H. Frey and Jonathan Tilove, Aug. 20) with interest and was shocked to realize that we have become a nation of runners away rather than standers and fighters.
WALTER KEHR New York


The Memories of a Comfort Woman
WEARING a skirt that covered her ankles and a Korean-style linen shirt, the old woman sat on a bamboo floor mat in her studio apartment in central Queens and told her story slowly.
At first she was calm as she methodically peeled apples, apple pears and Korean white-fleshed peaches for the visitors.
Her figure was erect, her eyes cast down, her ageless face stoic.
But as she continued, her shoulders slumped toward her knees, and she curled up like a ball.
"I'm just waiting to die," the woman, D. Kim, said.


Schools Learn to Live with Less
But just below the surface, other services are suffering, said Superintendent James Mazza.
The DOME Alternative School, which had five teachers assigned to 30 students at risk of dropping out, was abolished.
Six of 17 drug and alcohol abuse prevention jobs were cut.
Special music performances from Lincoln Center were eliminated, at least for now.
Three after-school centers were cut, and extended school hours are being curtailed.
Two teacher-training centers closed.
Special education also lost two of five language coordinators and its one industrial arts post.
"It's the first time in my memory," Mr.
Mazza said, "that special ed has been cut." B.L.


A Secret Cold War Bunker Sees the Light
Visitors to Germany now have the opportunity to see an extraordinary relic of the cold war: the underground bunker from which East Germany's Defense minister was meant to direct his troops in case of a nuclear war.
The bunker's very existence was for many years a tightly guarded secret.


Good Seats? The Parkway Has Them!
THE man was in his late 50's, full-dress Atlantic City: tasseled loafers, open-neck silk shirt, a gold neck chain big enough to lash a boat with.
The scalper fell in beside him.


Sports of The Times; Wild Card in the Deck Turns Out to Be Joker
IN its season of gloom, baseball desperately needed the glow that surrounded Cal Ripken's 2,131st consecutive game.
As the Baltimore shortstop circled Oriole Park to slap maybe 2,131 fingers last Wednesday night, he had to touch the hearts of even those fans who still felt betrayed by the strike that canceled last year's World Series.
Maybe baseball isn't so greedy after all.
Not even a shortstop with a six-year, $30 million contract.


Angela Cochran, Campbell Farrell
Angela Drayton Lawrance Cochran, a daughter of Susan Phipps Cochran of Palm Beach, Fla., and the late John Cochran, was married yesterday to Campbell James Farrell, a son of Sue and Robert Farrell of Auckland, New Zealand.
The Rev.
John Noonan, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the bride's house in Haiku, Maui, Hawaii.
The bride, 30, is a professional wind surfer.
Her father was a photographer, author and skeet and trap range designer, based in Early Branch, S.C.
Her mother is a private investor.


JAZZ
Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the months ahead.
As usual, programs change, some events are sold out, and some have not yet scheduled locations or exact opening dates.
Unless indicated, all dates listed are for openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone numbers have a 212 area code.
Addresses for locations in New York City cited more than once appear at the bottom of page 68.
September
CLARK TERRY -- This trumpeter, fluglehornist and singer is a rhythmic and harmonic virtuoso who, not coincidentally, is also one of the few profoundly distinct soloists playing jazz.
Tonight.
Village Vanguard.


Placing the Blame For Retirement Worries
To the Editor:
If retirees have cause to worry about their future security ("Retirement's Worried Face," July 30) it's because of the Government's greed for tax money.


ALSO INSIDE
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 2 Virtually a neighborhood: A ground-level view of the "state of mind" known as Silicon Alley.
INSIDE QUEENS 3 An elderly woman in Queens lives with painful memories of the Japanese occupation in Korea.
MOVIE CLOCK 20 What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 21 A beerfest in Fulton Ferry; an Arab festival at the Brooklyn Museum; a Jewish festival on the Lower East Side.
GOOD EATING 22 Lincoln Center special: classic French cuisine at Cafe des Artists; confident Italian cooking at Gabriel's.
SOAPBOX 23 A towing story to boggle the mind and wreck the nerves.
And letters.


A Teaching Experiment From the 1970's May Hold Lessons for the Future
In the 1970's, while other teen-agers studied algebra and earth science, Lisa Lehman took classes in Russian literature and gourmet cooking.
While they hunched over wooden desks in standard classrooms, she sat cross-legged on her teacher's living-room floor.
And while their instructors were certified by the state, most of hers were volunteers: college professors, artists, ministers and others who lacked education degrees but offered the knowledge drawn from their own careers.
Now Lisa Lehman Trager, she was among 150 teen-agers who attended the Leonia Alternative High School, a state-financed program for students who were unhappy at the local high school.
Last weekend, alumni met for the first time since 1976, when the school closed after losing a lawsuit filed by the local teachers' union, which had protested its use of uncertified instructors.


Second Spring in the Secret Garden
A JOYFUL bustle filled the ancient halls of Misselthwaite Manor, a scurrying of servants not seen since the old master was alive.
Many years had passed: Master Colin had come down from Trinity, Miss Mary had had her year in Paris and her London season, and -- joy upon joy -- the childhood affection of the cousins had been transmuted into something more profound.
To the rejoicing of all the tenants of the great Yorkshire estate, the two had fallen in love and married.
After years of rambling on the Continent, they were coming back to Misselthwaite.
"Happen we'll see some young ones on the way," thought Martha Sowerby, once a spirited young chambermaid, now majestic housekeeper to all of Missel thwaite and wife to Withers, the new butler.
"Better give the nursery a good turning out. Oh, if old Ben Weatherstaff was alive! And whatever will Dickon say?"


Republicans Aren't Cutting Medicare Spending
To the Editor:
"Congress Returns" (editorial, Sept. 6) states that Republicans are "cutting Medicare by about 25 percent." Under the Republican reform proposal to insure that the program remains solvent, Medicare spending over the next seven years increases.


INSIDE
INVESTING IT /Page 3  Merrill Lynch's Robert Farrell sees plenty of excess in today's bull market.
But he doesn't think the end is upon us.
By Floyd Norris.
SPENDING IT /Page 6  Is that car-leasing deal really as good as it sounds?
Now there's a new tool to help the consumer find out.
By Louise Nameth.
EARNING IT /Page 9  If you're proud of that thingamajig you invented, just wait till you apply for a patent.
Minding Your Business, by Laura Pedersen.
VOICES /Page 12  Why are all those older white men sitting around that table?
The case for diversity on the board.
By James M. Citrin.


ON THE TOWNS
An opinionated guide to cultural and recreational goings-on around the state this week.
To submit items for consideration, write to On the Towns, Sunday New Jersey Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036, or send a fax to (212) 556-7219.
MUSIC ALL SAINTS EPISCOPAL CHURCH, HOBOKEN "For the Birds," a concert featuring Meredith Borden, soprano; Andrew Bolotowsky, flutist; Joshua Pierce, pianist, and Jon Catler, guitarist.
Today at 5 P.M.
Admission: $5. 707 Washington Street, Hoboken. (201) 659-1219.
NEW JERSEY POPS SYMPHONY ORCHESTRA A program of classical works, Broadway show tunes, standards and patriotic music, directed by Michael Buglio.
Thursday at 9 P.M.
Our Lady of Lourdes Church, 304 Central Avenue, Mountainside.
Free. (201) 744-1700, extension 52.
PHILHARMONIC ORCHESTRA OF NEW JERSEY Under the direction of George Marriner Maull, the orchestra presents its first concert of the 1995-96 season, featuring Mozart's Overture from "The Marriage of Figaro" and Beethoven's Symphony No. 7 in A major.
Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $20-$30.
Edward Nash Theater at Raritan Valley Community College, North Branch. (908) 356-6165.
SOCLAIR MUSIC FESTIVAL The chamber music concert series closes with Yuval Waldman, violinist, who will perform Vivaldi's "Four Seasons," accompanied by Edward Brewer on harpsichord and the Soclair Ensemble.
Today at 4 P.M.
Soclair Brooks Farm, 19 Haytown Road, Lebanon. (908) 236-6476.
TURNING POINT Maria Muldaur.
Wednesday at 7:30 and 10 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
Ellis Paul.
Thursday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $8.
Willie Nile and Darden Smith.
Friday at 9 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
Lucky 7.
Saturday at 10 P.M.
Tickets: $10.
Kenny Rankin.
Next Sunday at 5:30 and 8:30 P.M.
Tickets: $17.50. 468 Piermont Avenue, Piermont, N.Y. (914) 359-1089.
WATCHUNG ARTS CENTER The Jazz Series opens with Rio Clemente.
Friday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $10. 18 Stirling Road, Watchung. (908) 753-0190.
WEST ESSEX HOSPICE The Orchestra of St.
Peter by the Sea gives a concert to benefit the West Essex Hospice.
Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25.
Notre Dame Church, 358 Central Avenue, North Caldwell. (201) 857-7300.
WILLIAM PATERSON COLLEGE The 1995-96 Midday Artists Series opens with Gary Kirkpatrick, pianist.
Thursday at 12:30 P.M.
Tickets: $3.
Shea Center for Performing Arts on campus, 300 Pompton Road, Wayne. (201) 595-2371.
THEATER BERGEN COUNTY PLAYERS The community theater group begins its 63d season with the Stephen Sondheim-James Lapine musical "Into the Woods." Friday and Saturday at 8:30 P.M., next Sunday at 2 P.M., Sept. 22-24 and Sept. 28-Oct. 1.
The Little Firehouse Theater, 298 Kinderkamack Road, Oradell. (201) 261-4200.
CIRCLE PLAYHOUSE The Circle Players present "Lost in Yonkers," by Neil Simon; directed by Michael Monaco.
Friday and Saturday at 8:30 P.M., next Sunday at 2 P.M. and Sept. 22-23 and 29-30.
Tickets: $11. 416 Victoria Avenue, Piscataway. (908) 968-7555.
ELIZABETH PLAYHOUSE "End of Summer." Starts Friday.
Friday and Saturday at 7:30 P.M. and Sunday at 2 P.M.
Through Oct. 15.
Tickets: $8. 1100 East Jersey Street, Elizabeth. (908) 355-0077.
NEW JERSEY SHAKESPEARE FESTIVAL "Artists and Admirers," by Alexander Ostrovsky; directed by Bonnie J. Monte.
Today at 2 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $16-$30.
Bowne Theater at Drew University, 36 Madison Avenue, Madison. (201) 408-5600.
PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE "Nine" explores the life and libido of an Italian film director and the women encircling his life and imagination.
Wednesday and Friday at 8 P.M., Thursday at 2 and 8 P.M., Saturday and Sunday at 3 and 8 P.M.
Through Oct. 15.
Tickets: $31-$46.
Brookside Drive, Millburn. (201) 376-4343.
RITZ THEATER "Ten Little Indians," by Agatha Christie.
Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. and Sunday at 2 P.M.
Through Oct. 7.
Tickets: $12-$14. 915 White House Pike, Oaklyn. (609) 858-5230.
ROOSEVELT PARK AMPHITHEATER The Middlesex County Department of Parks and Recreation concludes the 1995 Plays-in-the-Park series with "Dance-in-the-Park 4." Thursday through Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $3.
One block south of the Menlo Park Shopping Mall, off Route 1, Edison. (908) 548-2884.
SOMERSET VALLEY PLAYHOUSE "Nunsense," the musical comedy by Dan Googin, presented by the Somerset Valley Players.
Directed by Linda Giordano.
Tonight at 7, Friday and Saturday at 8:30 P.M. and next Sunday at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $15. (908) 369-7469.
MUSEUMS AND GALLERIES ART FORMS A new group show featuring "Ceramic Pieces," by Steffanie Samuels and Arthur Gould; "Functional Metalwork," by Mark Haines, and "Art Objects," by Dan Cuthbert.
Through Sept. 30.
Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M., and Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. 16 Monmouth Street, Red Bank. (908) 530-4330.
BERGEN MUSEUM OF ART AND SCIENCE "The Spinning Face of Gravity: Tops by Joe Van Putton," a series of giant tops.
Through today.
"Kenneth Licht: 10 Years of Art Boxes" displays 85 boxes filled with collages and collections of objects.
Through the end of summer.
Tuesday through Saturday, 9:30 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Suggested admission: adults, $2.50; children, $1. 327 East Ridgewood Avenue, Paramus. (201) 265-1248.
GROUNDS FOR SCULPTURE "Spring-Summer 1995 Exhibition," with recent works by James Dinerstein, Jesse Moore and Yuyu Yang.
Through Sept. 30.
Tuesday through Thursday by appointment, and Friday through Sunday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. 18 Fairgrounds Road, Hamilton. (609) 586-0616.
HISTORICAL SOCIETY OF ROCKLAND COUNTY Through objects, stories and photographs, "Hidden Children: The Youngest Survivors of the Holocaust" chronicles the histories of 17 children who escaped Nazi persecution in sanctuaries from convents and farms to underground bunkers.
Through Nov. 12.
Tuesday through Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Suggested donation: $3. 20 Zukor Road, New City, N.Y. (914) 634-9629.
HUNTERDON ART CENTER "The Fine Art of Illustration," original art of the greatest illustrators past and present, features the work of Norman Rockwell and Charles Dana Gibson to Bernie Fuchs, Milton Glaser and Joseph Bowler Jr.
Through Oct. 22.
Wednesday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. 7 Lower Center Street, Clinton. (908) 735-8415.
JERSEY CITY MUSEUM "Albizu Lives," a visual commemoration.
Through Saturday.
Tuesday, Thursday, Friday, 10:30 A.M. to 5 P.M., and Wednesday, 10:30 A.M. to 8 P.M. 472 Jersey Avenue, Jersey City. (201) 547-4514.
LENA DI GANGI GALLERY Bill Block displays his reverse glass paintings.
Through Sept. 30.
Tuesday through Friday, 1 to 6 P.M., and Saturday, 1 to 4 P.M. 744 McBride Avenue, West Paterson. (201) 345-1210.
LONG BEACH ISLAND FOUNDATION OF ARTS AND SCIENCE "Island Invitational Art Opening," a retrospective of artists who live or have lived on Long Beach Island.
Through Sept. 30.
Monday through Saturday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M., and Sunday, noon to 4 P.M.
Free. 120 Long Beach Boulevard, Loveladies. (609) 494-3169.
LOUIS ARMSTRONG EXHIBITION Paintings, collages, drawings and collages illuminating the life and music of Louis Armstrong.
The show, subtitled "A Cultural Legacy," is running at two Camden locations through Oct. 7: the Walt Whitman Cultural Arts Center, 2d and Cooper Streets, Monday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. (609-964-8300), and the Stedman Art Gallery, on the campus of Rutgers University, Monday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. (609-225-6245).
MONTCLAIR ART MUSEUM "Still Life Works From the Collection" offers 13 paintings by American artists ranging in style from 19th-century realism to 20th-century modernism.
Through September.
"Elizabeth Berdann," a self-titled installation featuring portraits of elderly women in a nursing home.
Through Oct. 1."Affinities and Influences: Native American Art and American Modernism." Through Oct. 1.
Wednesday through Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Admission: $4, or $3 for the elderly and students with ID. 3 South Mountain Avenue, Montclair. (201) 746-5555.
MORRIS MUSEUM The New Jersey Fine Arts Annual features 26 visual artists and crafts people throughout the state and their works in sculpture, photography, textiles, painting and mixed media.
Through September.
"Albert Green: The Celebration of a Master Potter," a posthumous retrospective.
Through Oct. 8.
Reception next Sunday, 2 to 5 P.M.
Monday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., and Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Admission: $4; $2 for students and the elderly. 6 Normandy Heights Road, Morristown. (201) 538-0454.
NEWARK MUSEUM "New Jersey Arts Annual: Celebrating Diversity in Crafts" takes a look at traditional and modern works in the state.
Through Oct. 15.
"American Art Pottery: An Uneasy Evolution, 1880-1930." Through Oct. 22.
"Astronauts: The Star Travelers," photographs of the Apollo XI flight.
Through Dec. 31.
Wednesday through Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 49 Washington Street, Newark. (201) 596-6550.
NEW JERSEY CENTER FOR VISUAL ARTS "The Creative Process: Drawings by Sculptors," featuring the works of Roy Crosse, Robin Hill and John Van Alstine.
Through Oct. 22.
Opening reception Friday, 6 to 8 P.M.
Monday through Friday, noon to 4 P.M., and Saturday and Sunday, 2 to 4 P.M. 68 Elm Street, Summit. (908) 273-9121.
NEW JERSEY STATE MUSEUM "From Folk Art to Abstraction," the works of 20 artists.
"Baskets and Brooms: Delaware Adaptation to European Contact," wood splint baskets made by the Delaware Indians from the 18th to the early 20th century.
"Birds by Edward Marshall Boehm," more than 40 porcelain figures depicting birds in their natural habitats.
Opens Saturday.
Through Oct. 22.
Tuesday through Saturday, 9 A.M. to 4:45 P.M., and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 205 West State Street, Trenton. (609) 292-6308.
NOYES MUSEUM "Drawing Outside the Lines: Works on Paper by Outsider Artists." Drawings in pencil, crayon and other media by Eddie Arning, Minnie Evans, Bill Traylor and Martin Ramirez.
Through next Sunday.
Wednesday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Admission: $3; the elderly, $1.50; students and children under 18, 50 cents; free on Fridays.
Lily Lake Road, Oceanville. (609) 652-8848.
PATERSON MUSEUM "Now and Then: Sculptures and Paintings by Joe Ruffilo." Through Sept. 30.
Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, 12:30 to 4:30 P.M. 2 Market Street, Paterson. (201) 881-3874.
PATERSON PUBLIC LIBRARY "Imagenes Contra el SIDA/Images Against AIDS," a series of silk-screen prints created by 36 Latino artists to heighten awareness of the disease.
Through Sept. 30.
Monday through Thursday, 9 A.M. to 8 P.M., and Friday and Saturday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. 250 Broadway, Paterson. (201) 948-5200.
PIERMONT FINE ARTS GALLERY "Around the World in 18 Days" presents paintings, sculpture, ceramics, prints, drawings and collage inspired by places near and far.
Through today.
Recent paintings by Ludlow Smethurst open Thursday.
Through Oct. 1.
Opening reception next Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Thursday and Sunday, 1 to 6 P.M., and Friday and Saturday, 1 to 9 P.M. 218 Ash Street, Piermont, N.Y. (914) 398-1907.
PRINTMAKING COUNCIL OF NEW JERSEY "Dimension Dementia: Prints Pushed Into Three Dimensions." Through Oct. 7.
"Award Show: Best-in-Show Winners From the 21st Juried Members Exhibit." Through Friday.
Wednesday through Friday, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M., and Saturday 1 to 4 P.M. 440 River Road, North Branch. (908) 725-2110.
RARITAN VALLEY COMMUNITY COLLEGE "Observer Highway" features paintings and drawings by Serena Bocchino.
Through Sept. 28.
Monday through Friday, 10 to 6 P.M.
Route 22 West, Somerville. (908) 218-8876.
RINGWOOD MANOR STATE PARK "First Annual Expo" features three of the best works of active members of the Ringwood Manor Association of the Arts.
Today, 1 to 4:30 P.M.
Sloatsburg Road, Ringwood. (201) 962-7031.
STONY BROOK GALLERY "Farms and Farming in New Jersey," a juried photography exhibition.
Through Oct. 21.
Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 31 Titus Mill Road, Pennington. (609) 737-3735.
SWAIN GALLERIES "Recent Paintings," by Richard Nagrodsky, incorporates elaborate borders within or on mats of boldly sculptural gouaches of flowers and vegetables.
Through Oct. 6.
Monday through Friday, 9:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M. and Saturday, 9:30 A.M. to 4 P.M. 703 Watchung Avenue, Planfield. (908) 756-1707.
TRENTON ARTISTS WORKSHOP ASSOCIATION "Trenton Takes: 24 Hours in the City," a photo documentary featuring the works of 32 regional photographers.
Through Oct. 8.
Tuesday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 3 P.M., and Sunday, 2 to 4 P.M. (609) 989-3632.
UNTITLED (#130) LTD Ginger Schmidt displays her furniture created primarily around animal themes.
Through next Sunday.
Thursday and Friday, 5:30 to 8:30 P.M.; Saturday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M., and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 130 Ryerson Avenue, Wayne. (201) 633-6767.
WATCHUNG ARTS CENTER "Annual Member Show." Through Sept. 30.
Monday through Saturday, 1 to 4 P.M. 18 Stirling Road, Watchung. (908) 753-0190.
ZIMMERLI ART MUSEUM "Art for Children" presents recent acquisitions to the Rutgers Collection of Original Illustrations for Children's Literature.
The exhibition features works from William Pene du Bois's "Otto at Sea," Ginnie Hofmann's "Who Wants an Old Teddy Bear" and Lynn Curlee's "Horses With Wings." Through March 1996.
Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Rutgers, corner of George and Hamilton Streets, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7237.
SPOKEN WORD ENGLEWOOD PUBLIC LIBRARY Dr.
Will Lee, an English professor at Yeshiva University, presents a lecture, "Historic Preservation in Englewood: a News Bulletin With Slides." Tuesday at 7:30 P.M.
Free.
The Wednesday Evening Books Discussion Group will focus on Vassily Aksyonov's 1994 novel "Generations of Winter." Wednesday at 7:30 P.M.
Free. 31 Engle Street, Englewood. (201) 568-2215.
MORRIS COUNTY HISTORICAL SOCIETY Elizabeth Brown, a fashion historian and costume collector, discusses "Weddings Through Time." The talk will be illustrated wedding dresses and accessories from her collection.
Today at 2 P.M.
Free.
Morris County Cultural Center, 300 Mendham Road, Morristown. (201) 267-3465.
NEWARK MUSEUM Pepon Osorio gives a slide presentation about his work on "Project 5: Pepon Osorio -- Badge of Honor," an exhibition on absent fathers, opening at the museum on Friday.
Mr.
Osorio's presentation is on Thursday from 4:30 to 5:30 P.M. 49 Washington Street, Newark. (201) 596-6550.
PIERMONT FINE ARTS GALLERY Mel Stabin, watercolorist, will conduct "Watercolor Demonstration for the World Traveler," using sketches from his recent trip to Santorini, Greece.
Today at 5 P.M.
Free. 218 Ash Street, Piermont, N.Y. (914) 398-1907.
RAMAPO COLLEGE OF NEW JERSEY The Fall Master Lecture Series presents "Clash of Civilizations or Global Village? The United Nations and a Changing World," a weekly lecture and discussion session.
Wednesdays, 9 A.M. to 10:40 A.M.
Through Dec. 13.
Free.
Student Center, 219. 505 Ramapo Valley Road, Mahwah. (201) 529-7602.
SKYLANDS ASSOCIATION George M. Aronson, a photographer who specializes in nature, scenic and landscape photography, presents "Sterling Forest: Threatened Bi-State Oasis." Today at 3 P.M.
Free, but donations are welcomed.
The Carriage House at Skylands, Ringwood State Park, Morris Road, Ringwood. (201) 962-9534.
SOMERSET MEDICAL CENTER "Making Your Wishes Known About Advance Directives," a free program on living wills.
Tuesday at 10 A.M.
"Brain at Risk: Understanding and Preventing Strokes." Thursday at 7 P.M.
Both programs are free and feature Dorothy L. Zufall. 110 Rehill Avenue, Somerville. (908) 685-2827.
SOUTHERN OCEAN COUNTY HOSPITAL "130/ 80 -- What Does It Mean?" will show what blood pressure is and what the numbers mean.
Tomorrow at 2 P.M.
"Understanding Fat" focuses on the different kinds of fats and will show how diets can be improved.
Wednesday at 2 P.M.
"Intro to Yoga" will help participants determine if yoga is the right exercise program for them.
Thursday at 7 P.M.
All programs are free.
The Conference Center, 1140 Route 72 West, Manahawkin. (609) 978-8999.
WAYNE PUBLIC LIBRARY Jim Woods, a professor at Montclair State University, will lecture on the Vikings.
Wednesday at 7:30 P.M.
Free. 12 Nellis Drive, Wayne. (201) 694-4272.
FOR CHILDREN LIBERTY SCIENCE CENTER Visitors have their choice of two films that will take them on a journey into the far reaches of outer space or to the murky depths of the sea.
"Destiny in Space," narrated by Leonard Nimoy, gives viewers a look outside the Earth with film from nine space shuttle missions.
Daily, noon and 2 P.M.
"The Living Sea," narrated by Meryl Streep, with original music by Sting, sends you into an underwater world with exotic sea creatures.
Daily, 10 and 11 A.M. and 1, 3 and 4 P.M.
Admission: $7 for adults; $6 for students and the elderly; $5 for children under 12. 251 Phillip Street, Jersey City. (201) 451-0006, extension 295.
NEWARK MUSEUM Mr.
Star Hustler shares the power of knowledge as he teaches about galaxies, stars and nebulae in "The Power." Today at 1 and 3 P.M.
Through October.
Learn African myths and legends behind the constellations in "African Skies." Today at 2 and 4 P.M.
Through October.
Admission: $2; children under 12, $1. 49 Washington Street, Newark. (201) 596-6550.
RARITAN VALLEY COMMUNITY COLLEGE The 10th annual Sunday Sampler Children's Theater series begins with a Theaterworks/ USA presentation of "Babar's Birthday." Next Sunday at 1, 3:30 and 6 P.M.
Tickets: $6.
Route 28 and Lamington Road, North Branch. (908) 725-3420.
STUDIO PLAYERS "House at Pooh Corner," a play adaptation of the children's story by A. A. Milne.
Saturday at 1:30, 3:30 and 5:30 P.M.
Tickets: $5. 14 Alvin Place, Upper Montclair. (201) 744-9752.
ETC.
"DARING TO BE DIFFERENT" FILM SERIES This Fifth Annual Silver Screen Bistro Series begins.
The movies to be shown are "Go Fish," "Boys Life," "Complaints of a Dutiful Daughter," "Strawberry and Chocolate," "The Sum of Us" and "A Litany for Survival: The Life and Word of Audre Lord." The films focus on gay life styles and issues.
Show times are Fridays at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $6, or $5 for students and the elderly.
Unitarian Church of Montclair, 67 Church Street, Montclair. (201) 744-0076.
FOR FILM LOVERS Moviegoers have two options if they want a sneak peek at a horde of new films and the chance to speak to some of the creative talents behind them.
"Sneak Preview Symposium" offers viewers a six-week subscription for $115 or 12 weeks for $198.
Mondays, beginning Sept. 18 at the AMC Headquarters Ten Theater in Morristown. (201-228-4424, extension 544) or Tuesdays, beginning Sept. 19, at Hazlet Multiplex Cinemas in Hazlet (908-571-3483).
"Coming Attractions" offers a four-week subscription for $129 or eight weeks for $199, each with a $20 registration charge.
Mondays, beginning Oct. 2, at Sony Theater Meadows Six in Secaucus. (908) 934-5699.
FOCUS AND SHOOT The Second Sunday Camera Show and Sale features new, used and antique cameras, lenses, darkroom and studio equipment, accessories, photographic books and memorabilia.
Today, 9 A.M. to 2 P.M.
Admission: $4.
Firemen's Hall, Parish Drive and Route 23 and 202, Wayne. (201) 838-4301.
GERMAN FESTIVAL The 22d Annual German Heritage Festival will feature cultural exhibitions, food, music, traditional German folk dancing and a soccer tournament.
The stage show will star Edith Brock, with additional performances by more than 10 choirs.
Today, starting at 9:30 A.M.
General admission: $3.
Admission for the show: $12-$18.
The Ukrainian Festival will be held on Sept. 23.
Exit 16 and the Garden State Parkway, Holmdel. (908) 442-9200.
MURDER TO GO "Murderous Crossings," an interactive wedding and Agatha Christie-style mystery that challenges the audience to solve "whodunit." Saturdays, 8 P.M.
Through Sept. 30.
Il Giardino Restaurant, Cedar Knolls.
"Killing Mr. Withers," an Alfred Hitchcock-style comic mystery thriller set in the 1950's.
Saturdays, 8 P.M.
Through Dec. 30.
Woodbridge Sheraton, Woodbridge.
The $42 ticket price includes a four-course meal. (201) 301-0562.
NEW JERSEY FILM FESTIVAL "Ballot Measure 9," Thursday, ". . . And the Earth Did Not Swallow Him," Friday, and "Los Olvidados," Saturday.
The films are shown on Thursdays at Art History Hall, Room 200; Fridays at Scott Hall, Room 123, and Saturdays at Milledoler Hall, Room 100.
All on the campus of Rutgers University, New Brunswick.
Showtime is 7 P.M.
Tickets: $4-$7. (908) 932-8482.
ROCKAWAY TOWNSQUARE "Making a Difference: One Square at a Time" exhibits 24 quilts made by artisans in the area for children with H.I.V. or AIDS.
Through Sept. 24.
Monday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 9:30 P.M., and Sunday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Route 80 and Mount Hope Avenue, Rockaway. (201) 361-4070.


After Protest, a Reprieve In Mexico Building Plan
Environmental authorities have ordered a temporary halt to construction work on a golf course and industrial park planned for an ecological reserve in Tepoztlan, a village near the capital where residents had occupied the town hall in a protest.
Mexico's Attorney General for the Environment, Antonio Azuela de la Cueva, said in a news conference late Friday that Grupo KS, the Mexican corporation financing the Tepoztlan project, had violated zoning and environmental restrictions.


ALSO INSIDE
LOOKING BACK 3 An elderly woman in Queens lives with painful memories of the Japanese occupation in Korea.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 Virtually a neighborhood: A ground-level view of the "state of mind" known as Silicon Alley.
MOVIE CLOCK 16  What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD  17 A beerfest in Fulton Ferry; an Arab festival at the Brooklyn Museum; a Jewish festival on the Lower East Side.
GOOD EATING 18 Lincoln Center special: classic French cuisine at Cafe des Artists; confident Italian cooking at Gabriel's.
SOAPBOX 19 A towing story to boggle the mind and wreck the nerves.
And letters.


Culinary Overtures Near Lincoln Center
CAFE DES ARTISTES ***  (212) 877-3500; 1 West 67th Street; $$$; all major credit cards
The opulence and charm of its Old World setting, Howard Chandler Christy's famous murals of frolicking nymphs and some of the best classic French cooking around continue to make Cafe des Artistes a favorite among New Yorkers.
To begin there are steamed asparagus vinaigrette; a fragrant fricassee of wild mushrooms seasoned with fresh herbs; brandade de morue, the garlicky codfish puree gratinee, and smoked swordfish and a side of potato salad drizzled with pumpkin-seed dressing.
Beguiling main courses include the rich potted duck confit; rosemary-roasted baby chicken with bitter greens; sauteed calf's liver with sweet onions and bacon, and the enticing pot-au-feu. (Review: 4/6/90; article: 1/17/92)  CAFE LUXEMBOURG **  (212) 873-7411; 200 West 70th Street; $$$; all major credit cards
Distinguished in the Lincoln Center neighborhood for consistently providing enticing French-American fare in a lively ambiance, this Art Deco cafe is stylishly outfitted in tile, terrazzo and other brasserie-style furnishings.
The menu offers appetizers of smoked trout flavored with lemon and dill, fried baby artichokes with black olive tapenade, steamed mussels in a broth spiced with jalapeno, and a salad of watercress and endive with goat cheese and beets tossed in a honey-mustard vinaigrette.
Some of the most popular entrees are the New York strip steak with french fries; herb-roasted chicken with mashed potatoes; grilled tuna topped with a tomato, ginger, basil and oil concoction, and grilled leg of lamb with rosemary jus, steamed potatoes and string beans. (Review: 1/10/92; revisited: 9/2/95)  GABRIEL'S BAR AND RESTAURANT **  (212) 956-4600; 11 West 60th Street; $$$; all major credit cards
From the gracious greeting of Gabriel Aiello, the host and owner, to the seductive Italian cooking of a talented kitchen team, it is easy to understand why this restaurant is so popular among Lincoln Center patrons and neighborhood residents alike.
For starters there is a spicy white-wine-based mussel soup; wood-grilled portobello and shiitake mushrooms with toasted garlic vinaigrette; grilled boar sausage paired with a lima bean salad, and sea scallops marinated in olive oil, rosemary, saffron and sage, served on a bed of bibb lettuce.
The alluring dining room's well-scrubbed country-French look makes it seem simultaneously rustic and well-bred.
A tapestry in the front, fabric-covered walls in the back, and plates and decorative roosters hung in prominent places add to the charm.
The food is mostly Mediterranean.
The enticing menu has appetizers of grilled octopus with a salad of chicory, potato and fennel in lemon-pepper dressing; seared peppered foie gras with port wine sauce and ginger-and-peach coulis, and arugula, chanterelles and corn salad with pancetta and goat cheese.
Entrees include grilled hanger steak with a red-wine sauce and polenta cake; pan-roasted lobster in a lobster broth served with basil ravioli, and loin of lamb flavored with Moroccan spices paired with vegetable couscous and minted yogurt. (Review: 12/17/93)  SCALETTA *  (212) 769-9191; 50 West 77th Street; $$; all major credit cards
With its peaceful gardenlike setting and satisfying northern Italian fare, this spacious and comfortable establishment caters mostly to a neighborhood clientele.
Lightly breaded baked clams, prosciutto and melon or the medley of sauteed artichokes and mushrooms in olive oil and garlic can make pleasant starters.
Among the pastas are penne Scaletta with tomatoes, peas, mushrooms and prosciutto; spaghettini Bolognese, and rigatoni tossed with garlic and broccoli.
Entrees include sauteed chicken breast in a creamy mushroom and Cognac sauce; broiled veal chop; breaded veal chop topped with tomato sauce and Parmesan cheese; broiled sirloin steak, and sauteed shrimp served with tomato sauce. (Review: 6/14/91; revisited: 3/15/94)  SFUZZI *  (212) 873-3700; 58 West 65th Street; $$$; all major credit cards
This sprawling trattoria's decor of weathered columns and arty lighting suggests ancient Rome.
The food is better than the raucous atmosphere might lead you to believe.
Current starters include grilled shrimp with a pesto of sun-dried tomatoes and white bean salad; potato-leek soup with roasted garlic and arugula pesto; fried calamari with garlic aioli or spicy marinara sauce, and crab meat and vegetable salad seasoned with a lemon-chive vinaigrette.
Among the main courses are grilled salmon with basil-citrus sauce, accompanied by roasted potatoes and green beans; wild mushroom and asparagus ravioli in a thyme-flavored broth and topped with Parmesan; grilled chicken breast with a lemony rosemary sauce, served with roasted sweet peppers, onions and potatoes; and sauteed veal in a white wine sauce with fettucine and broccoli rape. (Review: 4/16/93)  VINCE &amp; EDDIE'S *  (212) 721-0068; 70 West 68th Street; $$; all major credit cards
Done in a pastel-toned farmhouse motif and decorated with antiques, this popular spot near Lincoln Center serves pleasing, homey American fare at reasonable prices.
One might start with a plate of fried calamari and its cilantro-lime dipping sauce, salmon gravlax on a bed of arugula with a mustard-dill sauce, warm herbed goat cheese on a mound of field greens, or a hearty lamb and barley soup.
Some of the main courses include grilled hanger steak with french fries; braised lamb shank served with cherry sauce and a turnip puree; grilled salmon with broccoli and a fricassee of wild mushrooms; roast chicken with lentils and sauteed spinach; grilled quail, which has been wrapped in bacon, accompanied by sweet-potato fries, and tuna in a coriander crust with a ragout of vegetables. (Review: 12/21/90) Bistro Coziness  LA BOITE EN BOIS *  (212) 874-2705; 75 West 68th Street; $$; no credit cards
Pleasing, affordable bistro fare is offered here in a cozy brick-and-wood dining room.
The menu includes appetizers like goat cheese ravioli with tomato coulis; smoked salmon with the traditional onions, lemon and capers, and frisee and endive salad with Roquefort dressing.
Among the entrees are grilled snapper with sweet roasted peppers; seared monkfish ringed by a lobster sauce; steak with a peppercorn sauce; roast salmon coated with a honey-mustard glaze, and calf's liver topped with grilled onions. (Review: 1/13/89; revisited: 1/5/94) Summaries of reviews use the star system; others are culled from articles (indicated by +), the $25 and Under column (++) and Diner's Journal (


Foreign Affairs; My Fellow Immigrants
Last week Senator Bob Dole told an American Legion convention that "ethnic separatism" was threatening American unity, and he called for making English our official language.
These are valid issues.
Unfortunately, Senator Dole has suddenly raised them not to unite the country but to divide it -- to play on the patriotism of the American Legion and the fear of new immigrants.
But give Mr.
Dole credit.
If he was looking for a hot-button issue to revive his campaign, he found it.
I discovered this for myself two years ago when I was asked to give a speech to a teachers' convention in Miami on what I had learned about multiculturalism from living in Beirut.
I explained that watching Lebanon, a multiethnic society, unravel had instilled in me two very strong beliefs: one was the importance of the American public school system.
In Lebanon, Christians, Sunnis and Shiites tended to go to their own schools, and it made their society that much easier to fracture when the strains came.
It is the public school system in America that helps insure that out of many we remain one.


Word for Word/William M. Kunstler; May It Displease the Court: Quotations of a Radical Lawyer
WHEN William M. Kunstler died of heart failure last week, it was a bit of a shock to realize that he was 76 years old.
He had the energy of a man much younger, and he seems never to have wondered if the times had passed him by.
The radical lawyer was a man of contradictions.
This man-child of the '60's could talk like a legal scholar one day and an aging hippie the next.
He had elements of both.


Council Vote
The City Council voted Wednesday to allow the Fire Department to begin a pilot program to deactivate fire-alarm boxes for 45 days in approximately half of Brooklyn, and portions of Queens, Manhattan and the Bronx.
The program is scheduled to begin Nov. 1.
A yes vote was to approve the measure.
It passed 26 to 21, with 4 members not voting.
Manhattan  Duane (D-L) . . . No  Eldridge (D-L)
Not Voting  Eristoff (R-L) . . .
Yes  Fields (D-L) . . .
No  Freed (D-L) . . .
Yes  Linares (D-L) . . .
No  Michels (D-L) . . .
No  Millard (R-L) . . .
Yes  Pagan (D-L) . . .
Yes  Powell (D-L) . . .
No  Bronx  Cruz (D) . . .
Not Voting  DeMarco (D-C) . . .
Yes  Eisland (D-L) . . .
Yes  Foster (D-L) . . .
No  Rivera (D-L) . . .
Yes  Rosado (D) . . .
No  Ruiz (D-L) . . .
No  Warden (D-L) . . .
Yes  Queens  Abel (R-C) . . .
Yes  Harrison (D-L) . . .
No  Koslowitz (D) . . .
Yes  Leffler (D-L) . . .
Yes  Marshall (D-L) . . .
No  McCaffrey (D-L) . . .
Yes  Ognibene (R-C) . . .
Yes  Povman (D) . . .
Yes  Sabini (D-L) . . .
Yes  Spigner (D-L) . . .
Yes  Stabile (R-C) . . .
Yes  Vallone (D) . . .
Yes  Watkins (D-L) . . .
No  White (D) . . .
Not Voting  Brooklyn  Albanese (D-L) . . .
No  Berman (D) . . .
Yes  Clarke (D-L) . . .
No  Dear (D) . . .
Yes  DiBrienza (D-L) . . .
No  Fisher (D-L) . . .
Yes  Henry (D) . . .
No  Lasher (D) . . .
Yes  Malave-Dilan (D) . . .
Yes  McCabe (D) . . .
No  Pinkett (D-L) . . .
No  Robinson (D)
Not Voting  Robles (D-L) . . .
Yes  Weiner (D) . . .
Yes  Williams (D) . . .
No  Wooten (D) . . .
No  Staten Island  Fossella (R-C) . . .
No  Fusco (R-C) . . .
No  O'Donovan (D-C) . . .
Yes


Bookshelf
ONE NIGHT: A Story From the Desert.
By Cristina Kessler.
Illustrated by Ian Schoenherr.
Philomel. $15.95. (Ages 5 to 9) Muhamad, an 8-year-old Tuareg boy in Niger, may someday be "a true camel man," but right now he is learning to herd goats, and learning well.
He and his small herd stay out in the desert all night attending a she-goat in labor.
Hot golden light intensifies the illustrations and complements the proud story of a contemporary nomad's education.
MISS SPIDER'S WEDDING.
Written and illustrated by David Kirk.
Callaway/Scholastic. $15.95. (Ages 5 to 8) A romantic sequel of sorts to "Miss Spider's Tea Party," with even more gleaming and lush illustrations.


Gladys Dorman, Education Panelist And Lawyer, 84
Gladys M. Dorman, a lawyer who served 20 years on the New York City Board of Higher Education, died on Thursday at her home in Bal Harbour, Fla.
She was 84.
As a girl growing up in Flatbush, Miss Dorman, who continued to use her maiden name throughout her professional career, became well acquainted with the law.


Rebecca Lubove, Gary Lee Sender
Rebecca Elizabeth Lubove, the daughter of Carole Klein of Pittsburgh and the late Dr.
Roy Lubove, was married yesterday evening to Gary Lee Sender, a son of Inga Siegel of Erie, Pa., and the late Julius Sender.
Rabbi David Levy officiated at the Concordia Club in Pittsburgh.
Mrs.
Sender, 30, is a chief development officer at the American Federation of Arts in New York.
She graduated from Wesleyan University and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pittsburgh.
Her father was a professor of social welfare history at Pitt.
Her mother is the president of Rainbow Mills, a textile manufacturer in Pittsburgh of which the bride's stepfather, Stanley Klein, is the vice president.


Look, Up In The Sky


Down Goes Frazier, But Huskers Still Roll
Nebraska 50, Michigan State 10
Just like last year, Lawrence Phillips and Brook Berringer came to the rescue for Nebraska yesterday after the starting quarterback, Tommie Frazier, was hurt at East Lansing, Mich.


Rebecca Burkey, Craig Allardyce
Rebecca Lizbeth Burkey, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Rick Burkey of Mohnton, Pa., was married yesterday to Craig Armstrong Allardyce, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fred A. Allardyce of New York.
The Rev.
Arthur L. Rettew, a United Methodist minister, performed the ceremony at the Memorial Church of the Holy Cross in Reading, Pa.
The couple, both 25, graduated from Bucknell University.
They work at Chemical Bank in New York, Mrs.
Allardyce as a commercial lending officer and Mr.
Allardyce as a production supervisor.


U.S. Has Evolved Beyond Tribal Conflicts
To the Editor:
Re "Ethnic Cleansing Didn't Start in Bosnia" by Kenneth C. Davis (Week in Review, Sept. 3):


Reporter's Notebook; First Lady in Mongolia: Mare's Milk and Politics
In this non-urban capital, where cows and pigs freely roam the streets, few of the inner-city problems so familiar to Americans are readily evident to visitors like Hillary Rodham Clinton, who stopped here on her way home from China.
Yet in the last few years, as Mongolia plunged into economic difficulties due to the sudden disappearance of economic aid from Russia and an inflation rate that reached 400 percent, a new crisis has emerged in Ulan Bator: street children.


Jocelyn A. Awad, Randall B. Evans
Jocelyn Ann Awad, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Phillip P. Awad of Weston, Mass., was married there on Thursday to Dr.
Randall Brian Evans, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
W.
Doyle Evans of Los Alamos, N.M.
The Rev.
Dr.
Thomas D. Wintle officiated at the First Parish Unitarian Church.
Mrs.
Evans, 36, is a social worker in the thoracic surgery division of Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, where Dr.
Evans, 32, is a fellow in pulmonary medicine.


Corrections
An article in the Neighborhood Report last Sunday about Frederic S. Papert, the promoter of the proposed 42d Street trolley, referred incorrectly to his wife, Diane, who originated the idea.
She is not deceased.


Indians' Lost Years Took Their Toll on Faithful
In the 40 years between the Cleveland Indians' American League pennant in 1954 and their A.L.
Central championship this season, 700 players performed for them without playing on a team that finished in first place.
"The first two, three, four years in the big leagues you don't really recognize it or realize it," said Sam McDowell, who was one of those 700.
"So I didn't think about it until the third or fourth year in the big leagues. But then when you do think about it, you look around and see other teams winning. I was angry about it. It's easy to say it was frustrating, but it was more than that. It was anger. I had a lot of anger in me. I didn't know who to blame."


Volunteers to Take On Cleaning Up the Coast
ON the shores of Long Island Sound, the Hudson River, the Atlantic Ocean and New York's streams, lakes, rivers and ponds, thousands of volunteers led by beach captains from local environmental organizations will gather next Saturday and Sunday to clean the shores and document the litter they collect.
The event is the ninth yearly International Coastal Cleanup, coordinated by the American Littoral Society in cooperation with the Center for Marine Conservation, State Department of Environmental Conservation and Clean Up the World based in Newport, R.I.
The beach cleanup effort needs people who want to make a difference, said Barbara Cohen, of the New York chapter of the Littoral Society.


Time Shares: New Players Seek to Create A New Image
BRUCE HESSE is knowledgeable about money matters.
He is a certified public accountant and a finance manager for Johnson &amp; Johnson, the huge pharmaceutical concern in New Brunswick, N.J.
His background, perhaps, explains the raised eyebrows he encounters when he tells friends and colleagues that three years ago he bought a two-bedroom "time share," in Palm Springs, Calif.
"Some people do think it's unusual," he said.
"But I looked at it as purchasing vacation time in the future, and I weighed what a first-class hotel room would cost me over the next 30 years.


On Sunday; Flatiron Flair: Capitalism Grows Its Own
CAPITALISM looks frenzied these days: The bulls rage on Wall Street, corporations merge and shed jobs at the drop of a stock price, and every financial twitch triggers a response in another time zone.
As an antidote, consider the story of "How to Get a Husband" pajamas, or how the cowboy wallpaper got on the wall of the men's room at the Chat 'n Chew restaurant on East 16th Street, or how Mark Randall landed the design work for a gay and lesbian television news program.


Jennifer Zara, Timothy Cochrane
Jennifer Robins Zara and Timothy James Cochrane, examiners at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, are to be married today in Sheldon, S.C.
State Representative Billy Keyserling, a notary public in Beaufort, S.C., is to perform the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents, Wendy and Michael Zara Jr.
The bride, 29, is a supervising bank examiner, and the bridegroom, 36, is a senior examiner.
She graduated from Vassar College and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
He graduated from the State University College at Oswego, N.Y., and received an M.B.A. from Baruch College.


Global Warming Experts Call Human Role Likely
In an important shift of scientific judgment, experts advising the world's governments on climate change are saying for the first time that human activity is a likely cause of the warming of the global atmosphere.
While many climatologists have thought this to be the case, all but a few have held until now that the climate is so naturally variable that they could not be sure they were seeing a clear signal of the feared greenhouse effect -- the heating of the atmosphere because of the carbon dioxide released by burning coal, oil and wood.


Cassandra Tribble, Claude Johnson
Dr.
Cassandra Lynette Tribble, an anesthesiologist, and Claude Earl Johannes Johnson, the director of international licensing for the National Basketball Association, were married on Thursday on Martha's Vineyard.
The Rev.
Betty L. Thomas, an aunt of the bride, performed the nondenominational ceremony at Lagoon Pond in Oak Bluffs, Mass.
Dr.
Tribble, 32, is keeping her name.
Last month she completed a fellowship in pain management at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
She graduated cum laude from Howard University and received her medical degree from the University of Michigan.
She is a daughter of Sandra L. Lynch and Tobias A. Tribble Jr., both of Detroit.


Wild-Card Formula: Pettitte And Hitters
Andy Pettitte can't quite put his finger on it.
But he knows he likes Yankee Stadium.
And, so far, the spacious ball park has been nothing short of a haven for him.
Pitching beyond his 23 years of age in the middle of a playoff (all right, a wild-card) race, Pettitte continued his mastery at the stadium yesterday with a 9-1 victory over the Boston Red Sox.


The Child Who Wasn't There
STRANGE DISLOCATIONS  Childhood and the Idea of Human Interiority, 1780-1930.
By Carolyn Steedman. 254 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. $29.95.


Hey, Hey: Fat Albert Is Back
FAT ALBERT and the Junkyard Gang have returned, not as a Saturday morning cartoon series, but on T-shirts that have become a hot back-to-school item this fall.
The line of clothing -- T-shirts, baseball shirts and caps, and sweatshirts -- is produced by Scene Not Heard of Manhattan and seems not only to appeal to children but also to have a nostalgic appeal for adults.
The items range from $18 to $22.


E-Mail
The Week in Review's electronic mail address is review@nytimes.com


Thompson's Homer Is Doubly Timely
The question was beginning to annoy Ryan Thompson.
Normally open to any type of discussion when the subject is himself, Thompson was starting to wear that "Don't bug me" frown when asked about his home-run drought, which was nearing two months.
That question won't be asked anymore.
Thompson slammed a two-run homer over the left-field wall in the fifth inning and drove in three runs over all to help the Mets to a 6-5 victory over the Expos tonight at Olympic Stadium.


Corrections
A sketch with the Soapbox column last Sunday by Myra S. Goldstein, a public school teacher in the Bronx who chose to accept the Board of Education's recent offer of early retirement, carried an erroneous credit.
The illustrator was William Neeper.


Dry, Yes, but Nature Can Cope
GARDENERS in the Northeast will not soon forget the summer of '95 -- no rain, prolonged heat spells and high humidity.
Everything turned droopy, then brittle under the onslaught, even the weeds.
The most obvious evidence of the season's severity is the suburban lawn, which turned to straw.
But this is the least of the homeowner's worries.
The grass is simply dormant.
Deep-rooted, to depths of six feet and more, these plants should easily survive.


A 'Vulture' Looks Skyward
Thou shalt not covet trophy properties.
Thou shalt not buy at auction.
Thou shalt not own old, outdated office space.


Islander, Insurer and Business Maverick
THREE three decades ago, Robert S. Weiss of Stamford saw a little ad in the Sunday newspaper.
An island in Connecticut was for sale and he was intrigued.
He had spent more than four years in the Navy during the Korean conflict, part of that as the captain of a small landing craft, and thought an island would be delightful to have as a refuge from the trials of his fledgling insurance agency.
"I thought it might be be one of the Thimble Islands" south of Branford in Long Island Sound, he says today.
He was far off course.
The water wasn't even salt.


Corrections
A report in the Funds Watch column on Aug. 27, about bonds, misstated the relationship between prices and duration, a measure of interest-rate risk.
A bond with a duration of seven years loses 7 percent of its price when interest rates rise one percentage point; it does not gain 7 percent.


3 Branches Work Together To Make the Criminals Pay
To the Editor:
While I can't complain about an article that quotes me so extensively on New Jersey's special courts to collect fines and restitution from minor offenders (News and Topics, Sept. 3), I don't want to leave the impression that the program exists only because I thought of it.


The New World Order
First of all, I just want to say that seeing the movie "Clueless" has made me realize that this class is, like, relevant to my life?
That this could be, like, a vehicle?
I mean, Alicia Silverstone was the most popular girl in her school, and I think that's because when she stood up there in fron of her public-speaking class and took her turn, everybody got a good, long look at what she was wearing.
She had the coolest wardrobe!
Anyway.
O.K.
"The New World Order." So.
In Russia, you have the czars running the country, and they're overthrown by the peasants.
And in France, it's, like, the same story: the king is out.
And in a lot of other countries, too, the people take over and do away with the royalty.
"Off with their heads!" That kind of thing.
I mean, monarchy is over - the whole concept is, like, finished - and the aristocracy isn't doing too well, either, since they're like, part of the same system.


Deena Bernstein, Mark J. McCabe
Deena R. Bernstein, a lawyer for the Securities and Exchange Commission's enforcement division, is to be married today to Dr.
Mark J. McCabe, an economist for the Justice Department's antitrust division.
Senior Judge Hugh Bownes of the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit, in Boston, is to officiate at the Historic Car Barn in Washington.
The couple both work in Washington.


Now That the Children Are Gone, Author Finds the Writing Picks Up
SOMETIMES great projects can hatch out of an empty nest.
Jean Van Leeuwen, also known locally by her married name Jean Gavril, has proved this to be true.
The Gavril children have grown and moved to Boston, and Ms.
Van Leeuwen has filled the void by writing a torrent of children's books.
Before Elizabeth Gavril graduated from college this year, and David Gavril, the year before, their mother had written a slow and steady stream of 28 children's books in 28 years, selling about two million copies.
But she's picking up speed in her solitude.
For the first time in her career, she has two books appearing in a single publishing season.
She also has four more titles in different stages of readiness, waiting to be published after that.


Playing for Chess Crown, and Game's Future
Chess, as any top player knows, is a game of sacrifices.
A player will sacrifice position for pieces or the other way around, depending on instinct or calculation.
Two years ago, Gary Kasparov, the reigning world champion, made a bold sacrifice indeed, relinquishing his position at the apex of the chess establishment in an attempt to restructure it and win more attention for the game.
And now, though the internecine turf wars that characterize top-flight chess have not quieted, Mr.
Kasparov's gambit is on the verge of paying off.


Irish Get More Heartburn In Beating the Boilermakers
The maddening Notre Dame Fighting Irish gave Coach Lou Holtz his 200th career victory today, but a few more weeks like this, and they will give him an ulcer.
After a rare, traumatic loss to Northwestern last week, Notre Dame built a comfortable lead over Purdue today, lost it in a wild fourth-quarter flurry, then finally prevailed, 35-28, in a game that may help restore the flagging Irish confidence but will do nothing to calm Holtz's blood pressure.


BEST SELLERS: September 10, 1995
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
4
FROM POTTER'S FIELD, by Patricia Cornwell. (Scribner, $24.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta on the trail of a serial killer in Central Park.
2
2
9
BEACH MUSIC, by Pat Conroy. (Talese/Doubleday, $27.50.) An American living in Rome returns to South Carolina and tries to cope with his troubled past.
3
1
COMING HOME, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (Dunne/St. Martin's, $25.95.) A British woman comes of age during World War II.
4
3
7
MEMNOCH THE DEVIL, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The vampire Lestat is snatched from the world by a mysterious adversary who claims to be the Devil.
5
4
80
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
6
6
20
THE RAINMAKER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $25.95.) A young man barely out of law school tries to expose a corporation's multibillion-dollar scam.
7
5
7
LIGHTNING, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $24.95.) The happy marriage of a lawyer and her husband is suddenly changed after she gets a routine checkup.
8
7
161
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
9
12
2
STORMY WEATHER, by Carl Hiaasen. (Knopf, $24.) A hurricane sweeping across southern Florida leaves in its wake troubled tourists and con artists.
10
11
11
ROSE MADDER, by Stephen King. (Viking, $25.95.) Fleeing an abusive husband, a woman seeks happiness in a strange city by creating her own myth.
11
8
3
FOR THE ROSES, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $23.) A late-19th-century woman with a checkered past investigates her identity, resulting in romance.
12
10
64
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
13
9
4
BELGARATH THE SORCERER, by David and Leigh Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $25.95.) A fantasy about the start of a 7,000-year-long global conflict.
14
14
11
THE WITNESS, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $21.95.) A public defender who seems happy in her work and her marriage is plunged into a morass of bigotry and hate.
15
1
THE RETURN OF MERLIN, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $24.) A re-enactment of the Camelot legend in modern times, laced with spiritual messages.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
MY POINT ...
AND I DO HAVE ONE, by Ellen DeGeneres. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life and the pursuit of happiness by the television star and stand-up comedian.
2
1
9
TO RENEW AMERICA, by Newt Gingrich. (HarperCollins, $24.) The Speaker of the House describes his solutions to the country's problems. (+)
3
3
12
A GOOD WALK SPOILED, by John Feinstein. (Little, Brown, $23.95.) A sportswriter reports on the P.G.A.
Tour in 1993 and 1994. (+)
4
2
79
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
5
4
12
NEW PASSAGES, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $25.) How changing social conditions and longer life expectancies are affecting our lives.
6
6
15
SPONTANEOUS HEALING, by Andrew Weil. (Knopf, $23.) A physician explains the ways in which the body heals itself. (+)
7
7
7
SLEEPERS, by Lorenzo Carcaterra. (Ballantine, $23.) The true story, the narrator claims, of four boys in a reformatory and the revenge they later take.
8
9
5
MY OLD MAN AND THE SEA, by David Hays and Daniel Hays. (Algonquin, $19.95.) A sailing yarn about a father-and-son voyage from Connecticut around Cape Horn.
9
8
37
SISTERS.
Essays by Carol Saline.
Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of sisters.
10
5
5
BEYOND ALL REASON, by David Smith with Carol Calef. (Kensington, $18.95.) The former husband of Susan Smith, the woman convicted of killing their two sons, tells of their life together.
11
1
BUFFETT, by Roger Lowenstein. (Random House, $27.50.) The life of Warren Buffett and how he became one of the country's richest men.
12
12
2
DARK SUN, by Richard Rhodes. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $32.50.) How and why the hydrogen bomb was made.
13
10
2
IN THEIR NAME, edited by Clive Irving. (Random House, $25.) The Oklahoma City bombing: the stories of those it affected, told in words and pictures.
14
11
9
WHEN ELEPHANTS WEEP, by Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson and Susan McCarthy. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The emotional lives of animals.
15
13
15
DAVE BARRY'S COMPLETE GUIDE TO GUYS, by Dave Barry. (Random House, $21.) A humorist explains the strange ways of a species of males called "guys."
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
120
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Relationships. (+)
2
2
25
THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra. (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $14.) How to "generate wealth in all its forms." (+)
3
3
4
STOP AGING NOW! by Jean Carper. (HarperCollins, $24.) Ways to combat aging and resist disease. (+)
4
14
MARS AND VENUS IN THE BEDROOM, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $22.) Ways to maintain a long-term, passionate monogamous relationship. (+)
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Aug. 26, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk (*) indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
A dagger (+) indicates that some bookstores report receiving bulk orders for a book.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE BROTHERS: The Hidden World of Japan's Richest Family, by Lesley Downer. (Random House, $25.) How a poor country boy, starting in 1947, accumulated many, many billions of dollars, and how his reclusive offspring are doing; winkled out by a tenacious British journalist.
EDWIN HUBBLE: Mariner of the Nebulae, by Gale E. Christianson. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $27.50.) A readable, entertaining life of the brilliant astronomer whose work, fundamental to modern theories of the universe, never interfered with his self-promotion, pretension and vanity.
THE FIRST MAN, by Albert Camus. (Knopf, $23.) Camus's autobiographical novel, long suppressed by his family for fear of offending bloody-minded intellectuals, renders his deep attachment for the Algeria he grew up in and his refusal to choose violence; it appeared in France only last year.
FRIENDS IN HIGH PLACES: The Rise and Fall of Clark Clifford, by Douglas Frantz and David McKean. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) The authors, a reporter and a lawyer, see Mr.
Clifford's crash -- a criminal indictment after 50 years of smooth cruising at altitude in Washington -- as the inevitable end of such a career.
HIGH FIDELITY, by Nick Hornby. (Riverhead, $21.95.) Mr.
Hornby's charming, lively second book and first novel concerns Rob, a London record store owner who understands the world only as it fits the categories of pop culture.
I SING THE BODY ELECTRONIC: A Year With Microsoft on the Multimedia Frontier, by Fred Moody. (Viking, $23.95.) A Seattle reporter, granted unusual access, observes the working conditions and emotional states -- often extreme -- of a Microsoft team assigned to create a children's encyclopedia.
KONIN: A Quest, by Theo Richmond. (Pantheon, $27.50.) A British film maker's tactful, thoughtful re-creation, through documents and interviews, of his ancestors' town in Poland as it was before 1939, when German troops changed it forever.
ON GOLD MOUNTAIN, by Lisa See. (St. Martin's, $24.95.) An engaging, energetically researched account of Fong See, a shrewd immigrant who prospered in 19th-century California, and the biracial family he left behind him.
RL'S DREAM, by Walter Mosley. (Norton, $22.) This emphatic modern-day fable of nurturance and dying is a Deep South tale set in New York, inhabited by a black musician, his white lover and the ghost of a mythic blues singer.
VIRTUALLY NORMAL: An Argument About Homosexuality, by Andrew Sullivan. (Knopf, $22.) The author, who is the editor of The New Republic, reflects reasonably on society's dealings with the minority of which he is a member; he thinks society could do a lot better.
WRITING WAS EVERYTHING, by Alfred Kazin. (Harvard University, $17.95.) A grand old man's brief, passionate argument, stored with anecdote, against the supersession of books by texts and interpretation by deconstruction.


Rich and Richer
The host and hostess who choose to entertain simply rather than fret over every detail have not abandoned the wish to dazzle their guests, they have merely acceded to a higher principle.
That is, when the cook is liberated from the confines of the kitchen, and the barrier between host and guest is lifted, intimacy -- or at least an easygoing good time -- is all the more possible.
Which doesn't mean that the cook has to give up on all manner of culinary grandstanding.
There are many ways to distinguish a family meal from a special occasion, not the least of which is a well-placed flower, the reassuring nap of fine linen or the weight of good china.
Even more to the point, the cook can choose to showcase a single course, and in that way make the entire dinner seem out of the ordinary.


Sept. 3-9: Talk, Bomb, Talk; A Glimmer of Hope For a Way to End The Bosnian War
After 41 months of war in Bosnia, the parties to the conflict looked each other in the eye last week and acknowledged each other's existence.
Therein lies the growing, if fragile, hope for peace after weeks of hectic American diplomacy, accompanied by NATO bombing.
The Bosnian Serbs acknowledged the existence of Bosnia and Herzegovina and accepted that it would continue to exist within its present borders.
Two major concessions were apparently implicit in this.
The Serbs renounced the goals of an independent state in Bosnia or full union in a Greater Serbia.


Booking a Trip On the Internet
JUST a few months ago it was all but impossible for do-it-yourself travelers to make reservations on the Internet, or even find any meaningful information beyond an 800 telephone number to call.
Over the summer, however, some of the functions of travel agents' computerized reservations systems have been popping up on service providers' World Wide Web sites.


Take One Down, Pass It Around . . .
THERE will be Brooklyn Black Chocolate Stout, Bayrisch Gfrozen Eisbock and Dubuque Star Big Muddy Red, and drinkers who are actually familiar with these three esoteric brands of beer.
NY Beerfest 3 will take place next weekend in five tents along the Brooklyn Bridge Esplanade from the River Cafe to the Empire-Fulton Ferry State Park.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
FATHERALONG: A Meditation on Fathers and Sons, Race and Society By John Edgar Wideman.
Vintage, $12.
The author reflects on his upbringing in Pittsburgh and his relationships with the men in his family, relationships that helped define him as a black man and as a father.
This "is an impressive work," Mel Watkins said here last year, with scenes "illuminated by Mr. Wide man's keen eye and evocative prose."


Robert C. Ode, 79, Ex-Hostage Who Was Oldest Held in Iran
Robert C. Ode, the oldest of the 52 Americans held hostage for 444 days in Iran, died on Friday at a hospital in Sun City West, Ariz., the retirement community where he had lived since shortly after his release in 1981.
He was 79.
His wife, Rita, said the cause of death was pneumonia.


3 Other R's: Rested, Restive, Ready
ON THEIR FIRST DAY of school, they hugged, squealed, touched each other's tans.
They wore sundresses, shorts, T-shirts and running shoes without socks.
In the auditorium, they passed notes, chewed gum and kept talking as the principal, Martin D. Mayerson, droned on about the new schedule, the meaning of the bells and why it was so unfair for them to come late or leave early.
They groaned and tickled each other.
School can be such fun before the pupils arrive.
The teachers of Stephen A. Halsey Junior High School 157, Queens, will never again look as good this year as they did last Tuesday, their bodies relaxed and their passions renewed.
For most, their public school teaching careers began as more of a mission than a job, and, despite what they describe as the demoralizing experience of working for the city, it is still a mission for many of them, at least inside the classroom.
This year, the teachers of Halsey will be worrying about the mayor's budget cuts, a new United Federation of Teachers' contract, and the school board elections.


THE TROUBLE WITH WILDERNESS
I hope that those with an anti-environmental agenda don't glibly misinterpret the title of William Cronon's article "The Trouble With Wilderness" (Aug. 13) without reading to the end of it.
Cronon rightly points out the limitations of the wilderness trope that implies that some places "have" nature, while others do not.
The idea that nature only happens elsewhere, in "wilderness," disconnects us from our surroundings.
I saw this when I taught a class to Rutgers freshmen who were baffled when I asked them to describe the ecosystem in which they lived.
They didn't think that urban Newark, full of concrete sidewalks, broken glass and automobiles, had an ecosystem.
To them, as to many (including authors of biology textbooks), ecosystems belong in forests.


BOOKS IN BRIEF: FICTION
THE CHOIR  By Joanna Trollope. Random House, $22.
Although she's a descendant of the great 19th-century novelist, Joanna Trollope has a closer literary forebear in Barbara Pym, with whom she shares a fondness for depicting the vagaries of English life as expressed within the self-absorbed, often slightly nutty world of an institution like a church or a school.
"The Choir" has both: the King's School, regarded by local Socialists as a bastion of class privilege, and Aldminster cathedral, whose troupe of young male choristers is composed of students from King's.
The discovery that the cathedral requires expensive repairs prompts its smoothly authoritarian dean to propose discontinuing the choir.
He claims the money saved will pay for the necessary work, but the author makes clear there's another motive: to eliminate an aspect of cathedral life not entirely under his control.
As she follows the battle to save the choir, Ms.
Trollope deftly follows a quirky cast of characters, including the dean's overbearing wife and their troubled daughter, who fancies herself in love with the cathedral's brilliant, difficult organist.
Also on the scene is the unhappily married mother of the choir's best singer; the fact that she's the object of the organist's affections may well cost him his job.
An assortment of other staunchly British supporting characters are lifted above stereotype by the sharp individuality with which they are drawn.
The fate of the choir is never seriously in doubt (at least, not to the reader), but some truly nasty behavior by characters who are not simply villains -- and the realistically unpleasant consequences of that behavior -- save the novel from being just another exercise in There'll Always Be an England quaintness.
WENDY SMITH


Tiffany Sullivan, James L. Palmer
Tiffany Brooks Sullivan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Sullivan of Essex, Conn., was married there yesterday to James Lawrence Palmer, a son of Maxine Prisyon Warshaw of New York and Dr.
Martin S. Palmer of Goshen, N.Y.
The Rev.
Joshua Crowell, a United Church of Christ minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the home of the bride's maternal grandmother, Enid Brooks Warner.
The couple graduated from Rollins College.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-12  A NEW SHIFT ON GLOBAL WARMING  In a major shift, experts advising the world's governments on climate change are saying for the first time that human activity is a likely cause of global warming.  1


Margie Anderson, Christopher Lynch
Mary Margaret Anderson, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Gerald E. Anderson of Colorado Springs, was married yesterday to Christopher Shields Lynch, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerard R. Lynch of Chatham, N.J.
The Rev.
John Boehning officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
Mrs.
Lynch, 29, is known as Margie.
She is the national conference coordinator in corporate public relations at William M. Mercer, management consultants in New York.
She graduated from Randolph-Macon Woman's College.
Her father retired as a lieutenant colonel in the United States Army Corps of Engineers based in Lima, Peru.
Her mother, Belermina C. Anderson, is the president of Prontocom, a translation service in Colorado Springs.


South of Kilimanjaro
THE SMELL OF APPLES  By Mark Behr. 200 pp. New York: St. Martin's Press.


Schools' Bind: More Pupils, Less Money
From Bushwick to Bensonhurst, Brooklyn's 12 school districts are looking for ways to serve more students with less money.
District 32 in Bushwick, which expects to gain more than 200 students this year, lost 39 teachers over the summer to an early retirement program.
With the district facing a $2.5 million shortfall, Dr.
Robert Brasco, the deputy superintendent, said it would be impossible to replace all the retired teachers.
As a result, the average class size for fourth and fifth graders will rise to 34.


Village Corner Turns a Corner
Jim Smith's neighbors see the construction workers crawling over the former Village Corner, removing walls, installing French doors, ripping out the small kitchen that prepared burgers, soups and salads for jazz lovers who came to hear the late Lance Hayward play the piano.
And the neighbors are curious and, frankly, worried about who the next tenant will be.


Robbin Silverberg, Andras Borocz
SEVEN years ago, when Andras Borocz moved into a loft on Dobbin Street in Greenpoint, Brooklyn, he assumed very few people lived on his mostly industrial block.
Mr.
Borocz, who is 39 and grew up in Budapest, moved to New York in 1987.
He rented the Greenpoint loft so he could have more space to work on his sculptures, which he makes out of everything from loaves of bread to wine corks, eggs and logs.


Public Had Little Chance To Comment on Heliport
To the Editor:
It is discouraging to hear how far the Guadalcanal heliport plan has progressed with virtually no public forum or community input ("Fighting for Pier 84," Aug. 27).


With Fall, Apples off the Tree


Sports of The Times; The Champs Deserve Day Of Their Own
THEY were both stabbed in the back, if you stop to think about it.
Monica Seles was literally assaulted during a match while Steffi Graf was betrayed by the man she had trusted with her finances, her father.
Both of these great and resourceful players carried the aura of survivors yesterday.
Both women were so deserving of respect that the normally emotional crowd did not seem to know how to root.
Neither player could really lose, just by being able to perform in public after all that has gone on behind their backs.


Conservative Christian Group Ends Conference With a Dual Identity
Looking out with satisfaction at an audience of thousands of churchgoing, politically energized members of the Christian Coalition, Ralph Reed, the group's executive director, declared, "We have gained what we have always sought -- a place at the table."
In fact, the coalition, which ended its two-day conference here today, has reached a pinnacle of power in Republican politics, largely through Mr.
Reed's carefully constructed two-pronged strategy.
The group has broadened its base and won widespread backing from Republicans in Congress by toning down its oratory in recent years, emphasizing economic issues as much as social ones and even backing moderate Republican candidates.
At the same time, the coalition has continued to stir up the faithful in the grass roots with unfettered attacks on President Clinton, homosexuals and abortion rights leaders, through mailed fund-raising appeals.


F.Y.I.
Chirp, Chirp, Chirp Q.  There seems to be an abundance of small chirping birds in the city this summer.
They build nests on street lights and under air-conditioners, among other places.
What are these birds, and do they winter elsewhere?
And has this been an especially good bird season?
A.
That chirpy avian is the English, or house, sparrow (Passer domesticus), a common -- some say too common -- denizen of the city's nooks and crannies, according to "Birds of the New York Area," by John Bull (Harper and Row, 1964).
An immigrant from Europe, the house sparrow first showed up in Brooklyn in 1850 and multiplied like crazy.
By the 1890's, they were so prevalent that an early birder once counted 4,000 sparrows in a Central Park fountain.
Mr.
Bull writes that the birds declined in number during the 1910's, partly from the fumes from those new auto-things.
As for the rest of the birds of summer, Tom Burke, an veteran New York birder, said it was a "good but not unusual" season. (A savvy birder can spot up to 320 species inside the city limits and as many as 200 in Central Park alone.) Though exact numbers are hard to determine, the warm winter may have spared some less-hardy resident birds and their chicks and made for bigger flocks this summer, Mr.
Burke said.
Weather may also play a role in this fall's bird watching.
Mr.
Burke said the recent drought may cause birds to head south earlier, looking for better grub(s).
Tower Among the Trees Q.  Driving along the Major Deegan Expressway, just before the George Washington Bridge, I can see a tower in the distance high among the trees.
It has a strange pointed dome.
What is it?
A.
The imposing structure (above right) is the Highbridge Tower, an old watertower that as part of the Croton Aqueduct system used to help provide the city with its water.
The Croton system, which opened in 1842, brought water from a reservoir near Croton, N.Y., some 33 miles north of the city, via large iron pipes.
The 195-foot tower, topped by a 48-foot copper minaret, was built at 174th Street on the eastern bluffs above the city in 1872, according to documents from the Parks Department.
It contained a 47,000-gallon tank which, when filled, guaranteed constant water pressure for the burgeoning metropolis below.
It was in use until 1965 and from 1957 on contained a carillon that chimed daily over the local din.
In 1984, a deranged arsonist set the tower's belfry on fire and jumped to his death.
The tower underwent a $900,000 restoration in 1988, including a new copper belfry and weather vane.
Plans to open the top floors of the tower, as an observation point for visitors, were never realized.
The Parks Department has plans for a tour next spring, however.
For information, call (212) 408-0218.
A Subway Sleuth Q.  As a professor at Brooklyn College who commutes from Manhattan, I often find myself waiting at the Flatbush Avenue terminus of the IRT No. 2 and No. 5 trains.
My question: Why are the station's tracks numbered 2 and 3 rather than 1 and 2?
A friend believes that a track is hidden behind the station wall and used by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority for some mysterious purpose.
But if, as I suspect, there is no Track 1, why not?
A.
Contrary to both of your suspicions, there is a Track 1, and it's no secret.
Track 1, along with a fourth track, runs right down Eastern Parkway.
As the No. 2, 3, 4 and 5 IRT lines traverse northwest Brooklyn, they travel on four numbered tracks: Track 1, for southeast-bound local trains; Track 2, for southeast express trains; Track 3 for northwest-bound expresses and Track 4, for northwest locals.
When the tracks diverge at the Franklin Avenue station, the No. 2 and 5 lines use Tracks 2 and 3, while the 3 and 4 use Tracks 1 and 4.
That's why, at your stop, it looks like you're missing some numbers. JESSE McKINLEY


Elizabeth Parker, A. B. Browne 3d
Elizabeth Wright Parker, an underwriter with the Chubb Insurance Group in Washington, was married yesterday to Alexander Britton Browne 3d, a partner in McAllister-Browne, a real-estate investment company in Washington.
The Rev.
Robert W. Ihloff, the Episcopal Bishop-elect of Maryland, performed the ceremony at Grace Episcopal Church in Madison, N.J.
Mrs.
Browne, 34, graduated from Denison University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry G. Parker 3d of Madison.
The bride's father retired as the managing director of the Chubb Insurance Group in Warren, N.J.


Seeing a Misuse Of Academic Freedom
"College Defends Sex-Education Materials"  [ July 16 ]  relates that the doctrine of academic freedom is again being invoked by Dr.
Sean Fanelli, the president of Nassau Community College; Dr.
Joseph R. Dondero, chairman of the department of health, physical education and recreation, and Roslyn Udow, chairwoman of the board of trustees of the college, to justify the use of sexually explicit films and other materials in a course on human sexuality.
Again the people of Nassau County are going to bear the cost of litigation to protect a pseudoacademic freedom that runs contrary to the true meaning of academic freedom.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the months ahead.
As usual, programs change, some events are sold out, and some have not yet scheduled locations or exact opening dates.
Unless indicated, all dates listed are for openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone numbers have a 212 area code.
Addresses for locations in New York City cited more than once appear at the bottom of page 68.
September
SAN FRANCISCO SYMPHONY -- With the gala preliminaries out of the way, Michael Tilson Thomas, the new music director, gets serious for the subscribers with choral music by Charles Ives, Schoenberg's "Survivor From Warsaw" and Beethoven's Ninth Symphony.
Here's to a long marriage; it looks happy in prospect.
Wed. to Sat.
Davies Symphony Hall, San Francisco. (415-864-6000)


Broadway Babies Practice Their Do-Re-Mi's


BOOKS IN BRIEF: FICTION
VOLUPTE  The Sensual Man.
By Charles-Augustin Sainte-Beuve.
State University of New York, paper, $19.95.
In the early 1830's, when the French literary critic Charles-Augustin Sainte-Beuve set out to write what would turn out to be his only novel, he probably intended to create a book in which knowledgeable readers would recognize the outline of his affair with Victor Hugo's wife -- while also, of course, delighting in the political and psychological adventures of his lustful young hero, Amaury.
Yet what we discover in Marilyn Gaddis Rose's remarkable translation of "Volupte" is an irresistible amalgam of topics that seem to have leaped from contemporary talk shows.
Nasty feelings of superiority; the abuse of women; an obsession with sex, reform and salvation -- all these are to be found here, couched in an extravagant 19th-century discourse about addiction and recovery.
Sainte-Beuve's flowery prose also wraps itself around extended metaphors and exquisite descriptions of the French countryside.
Presented as a cautionary letter from Amaury (now a 60-year-old priest) to a young unnamed friend, "Volupte" describes Amaury's involvement in a monarchist plot against Napoleon, his ardent pursuit and psychological torture of three women of high pedigree, his fall into depravity with Parisian prostitutes and his final decision to join a seminary.
Tossing about rhetorical questions like "Can a man keep a flame burning in his breast without his clothes catching fire?," Amaury revels in depicting his "malign disposition" and "the foul gutter" he crosses when he gives in to lust.
His descriptions of his mental agony and his frequent admonitions "to keep doing battle" make him sound remarkably similar to that modern-day archetype, the recovering addict.
CHRISTINE SCHWARTZ HARTLEY


CRITIC'S CHOICES


At Funeral for Immigrant, Anger and Sorrow
As the church choir sang softly for her soul to rise safely to heaven, Gao Liqin lay in a simple blue wooden coffin in her finest attire: a white ruffled shirt and a frayed chocolate-colored wool coat.
Clutching a picture of his dead wife and weeping, D. M. Zhang, an immigrant from Fujian, China, sobbed uncontrollably yesterday at the Ng Fook Funeral Home in Chinatown.
In broken sentences and disjointed words, he asked aloud in Chinese: what had unleashed the wrath of fury of his wife's captors that they would kill her in such a brutal way?


Courts Should Curtail Abusive Fathers' Visits
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 8 news article on fathers who faithfully pay child support but feel they get little in return fails to mention reasons that, after a divorce, fathers can be cut off from their children altogether but must still pay child support.


Criminal Son Deeply Pains Good Family
Tommy Farmer, the first person to be charged and convicted under the Federal three-strikes law, is the son of a man of the cloth and the younger brother of a college professor -- two men who in separate interviews said they were struggling to understand how a member of a respected, intact family could have gone so wrong.
And they continue to wonder why the Federal judicial system thought it had anything to gain by putting him away for life.
Seventy-one-year-old James Farmer Sr., Tommy's father, is a retired machinist who worked most of his life at the John Deere tractor factory, served as an Army sergeant in World War II and is an ordained, part-time Baptist minister.
Tommy Farmer's older brother, James Jr., 45, holds a Ph.D. in psychology, is a professor at the University of Texas at Arlington and has written several books about troubled adolescents.


CHRONICLE
Literature is dead, and television killed it, KURT VONNEGUT says.
Mr.
Vonnegut, the author of "Slaughterhouse Five" and more than a dozen other novels, spoke at a gathering of artists and art lovers on Friday at the Mary Anderson Center for the Arts in New Albany, Ind.
"That's one reason I don't have much energy to write anymore," he said, the A.P. reported.


Apple Holds School Market, Despite Decline
At a time when Apple Computer Inc. is facing sharp attacks on many fronts, the maverick company is maintaining a secure foothold in one crucial arena: the $4 billion market for computer equipment and software in public schools.
In an annual survey of public schools being released this month to coincide with the start of the school year, Apple's share of computer sales to elementary and high schools was expected to climb from 46 percent of all educational computers bought last year to 58 percent of the total being bought in the 1995-96 school year.


Civil Court Nominees to Be Decided
Primary elections will be held tomorrow in New York City, with polls open from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M.
Voters will cast ballots for nominees for 15 Civil Court judgeships and for district leader and delegates and alternates to the judicial convention.
No primaries will be held in the Bronx or Staten Island.
Only 5 of the 15 Civil Court judgeships are contested in the Democratic primary.
There are no Republican candidates for judgeships.
The contests are:


Garrison Norton, 94, Assistant Secretary Of State and Navy
Garrison Norton, a former Assistant Secretary of State and Assistant Secretary of the Navy, died on Saturday at his home in Washington.
He was 94.
Mr.
Norton was an Assistant Secretary of State in charge of policies on international transportation and communications from 1947 to 1949.


Editorial Notebook; The Rodney King 'Soundtrack'
The principle of equal justice for all -- though still unrealized -- is the crucial pillar of democracy.
The Los Angeles Police Department, with its wanton brutality and antebellum attitudes on race, has shown more contempt for that principle than anyone since Bull Connor, the swaggering brute of Birmingham.
First came the L.A.P.D.'s savage, videotaped beating of Rodney King.
Now comes what black Angelenos are calling "the soundtrack" for the King beating -- the racist ramblings of Mark Fuhrman, retired policeman and pivotal witness in the O. J. Simpson trial.


In Primaries Tomorrow, Parties Will Try to Settle Feuds
Republicans and Democrats will try to settle bitter intraparty feuds in primaries tomorrow on Long Island and in Westchester County and Connecticut, hoping the fallout from the fights will not mar their chances of winning in November.
The squabbling among Long Island Democrats is no surprise to many voters in Nassau County, where some are trying to make primaries for five seats in the new County Legislature into a referendum on their party chairman, Stephen J. Sabbeth.


A Nuanced Production With Nature as Co-Star
Trees and river formed a haze of subtly variegated dark grays and greens as night fell here over the Delaware River.
A few reflected lights danced on the water.
Birds flew in formation across the slate-colored sky, and somewhere a dog barked.
As the audience settled in on a small apron of beach and an overlook, two white-painted heads and upper torsos were motionless in the water near the shore, holding branches between which was stretched a muslin canvas.
There was a timelessness to those figures, so still in the hubbub of the audience arriving to see "River," an outdoor piece by the Japanese modern dance choreographers Eiko and Koma.
And that sense of timelessness and silence persisted through a black-and-white film, projected on the muslin, of sharp-edged parts of bodies moving against a sharp black ground and reflected in the water's softer surface.
There was a timelessness, too, to the floating heads, the blur of underwater bodies and the simple props that appeared, disappeared into the dark night water and reappeared, along with the drifting sound of flute and shamisen music.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-11 CRUISE MISSILES AGAINST SERBS  NATO used cruise missiles against the Bosnian Serbs for the first time in its bombing campaign, trying to force the Serbs to end their defiance and withdraw their heavy weapons from around the capital.
A1  WOMAN'S RIGHT TO SAY NO  The world conference on women declared for the first time in a United Nations document that a woman has a right to make sexual decisions free of coercion or violence -- in effect, the right to say no.
A1  CONFERENCE KEPT FROM CHINESE  The world conference on women in Beijing is being sealed off from Chinese in a variety of ways, with many dissidents jailed, with tight security and with conference news reports tightly controlled.
A8  LOST HOPE IN LIBERIA  For many of those who have spent their youth as soldiers in Liberia's civil war, and who now face the prospect of the future without education or opportunities, peace does not hold out much hope.
A1  LOW POINT ON IRISH TALKS  News analysis: The Northern Ireland talks are at a low point, and whether they will pick up will depend on a willingness to compromise, but both sides are locked in on what they consider principle.
A6  NEW LOOK AT EUTHANASIA  After a decade in which euthanasia was permitted if terminally ill patients requested it, the Netherlands is taking stock of the experience and is deciding to tighten the rules.
A3  SLOW STORM RECOVERY  On the Caribbean islands hardest hit by Hurricane Luis, recovery is progressing slowly, with food scarce and power still off, and residents are finding some areas completely devastated.
A11  In Mexico, talks between the Government and the rebels.
A10  Hamburg Journal: Refugees adrift and afloat in Germany.
A4 NATIONAL A12-13, B9-12 A FIRST FOR 'THREE STRIKES'  Tommy Lee Farmer, the first person in the nation charged under a Federal law for repeat offenders, was sent to prison for life last month.
A1  Tommy Farmer's relatives search for the roots of crimes.
B11  The man who prosecuted Mr.
Farmer was once a crime victim.
B11  TORT REFORM IN PERIL  The legislation that raced through Congress aimed at overhauling the nation's civil litigation system is facing an uncertain future.
A1  TWO SIDES OF GANG LIFE  Random violence, disturbing as it is, represents only one side of a Hispanic gang culture that can also be family oriented.
A12  COPTER HELPS TO PUT OUT PAPER  As more than 1,500 striking newspaper workers and their supporters blockaded delivery trucks within a printing plant north of Detroit, helicopters carried out the combined Sunday newspaper.
A13  ROBERTSON HAS PRAISE FOR DOLE  Pat Robertson, head of the Christian Coalition, made it clear in an interview that he considered Senator Bob Dole quite acceptable as a Presidential candidate.
B9  PACKWOOD TELLS SIDE AGAIN  Senator Bob Packwood maintained in that he bore little responsibility for the actions that forced him to resign from the Senate last week in disgrace.
B10  BANISHMENT BACKFIRES  Two Indian teen-agers who were banished as punishment for a mugging actually have visited an Alaska town and have slept at relatives' homes.
B12  Cambridge Journal: Scholars were carried away by John Keats.
A12  A plane carrying parachutists hit a house in Virginia, killing 12.
A12 METRO DIGEST B1 REMAKING THE FACE OF BANKING  As bank branches have closed steadily over the last decade, nontraditional financial services like immigrant lending services and check-cashing businesses have been prospering in poorer neighborhoods to fill the void.
A1  Sports C1-10  Baseball: Mets take third straight from Expos.
C9  Yankees sweep Red Sox.
C9  Columns: Vecsey on the U.S.
Open.
C2 Rhoden on the Jets.
C4  Anderson on the Giants.
C5  Football: Giants waste lead and fall to Chiefs in overtime.
C1  Jets, too, fumble away a lead and lose in overtime.
C1  Raiders roll over Redskins.
C7  Dolphins win.
C7  Golf: Europeans snatch Walker Cup.
C3  Tennis: Sampras beats Agassi for U.S.
Open title.
C1  Business Digest D1  Obituaries D13  Jamie Whitten, longtime Congressman from Mississippi.
Benjamin Mazar, prominent historian and archeologist.
Robert Ode, oldest of hostages held by Iran.
Arts/Entertainment C11-16  Black film makers look beyond ghetto violence.
C11  Music: Annie Lennox.
C11  "Turandot." C13  Dance: Eiko and Koma in "River." C13  Books: "Hannah Arendt -- Martin Heidegger." C16  The Emmy awards.
C16  Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15  Editorials  Don't starve the Port Authority.
Ireland: Once more to the brink.
Brent Staples: The L.A.P.D.
Letters Anthony Lewis: What weakness brings.
Bob Herbert: Nafta's bubble bursts.
William Safire: Third-party madness.
Barbara Jordan: The Americanization ideal.
Bridge C13 Chronicle B12 Crossword C16


Industry Seeks Means to Filter Internet Content
More than a dozen leading software producers, publishers and on-line services are forming a consortium to create the technology standards needed to filter pornography and other questionable material from the Internet.
The standards initiative, called the Platform for Internet Content Selection, or PICS, is being formally announced today.
It is clearly the computer industry's effort to provide a private-sector alternative to Government censorship of the Internet, by allowing parents and schools to protect children from offensive material using specialized blocking software.


Dolphins Show Who's Boss In Foxboro
Bill Parcells has a real disdain for preseason prognosticators. Now we know why.
Many of the experts said the Patriots would challenge Miami for supremacy in the American Football Conference East this season.
Some even picked the Patriots to win the division.
That still might happen.
But this afternoon, under a cloudless blue sky at Foxboro Stadium, the Dolphins demonstrated why they are the team to be reckoned with in the A.F.C.
East.


Ulster Danger Point; Dublin Cancels Key Meeting With London Over British Demand That I.R.A. Disarm
The failure of the British and Irish Governments to hold a top-level meeting last week is the strongest indication yet that the peace effort in Northern Ireland is at a dangerous low point.
Whether the effort grinds to a halt or picks up again after a summer of deadlock and frayed nerves depends upon a willingness to compromise on the part of Sinn Fein, the political wing of the Irish Republican Army, and the British Government, or both.


The Americanization Ideal
Congress is considering legislation to curb illegal immigration and set priorities for legal admissions.
Several Presidential candidates have made immigration a keystone of their campaigns.
Newspapers carry immigration-related articles almost daily, in contrast to just a few years ago when hardly any appeared.
This attention is not misplaced.
Reform is needed in policies that permit the continued entry of hundreds of thousands of illegal aliens and blur distinctions between what is legal and beneficial and what is illegal and harmful.
The Commission on Immigration Reform issued a report last year on illegal immigration and will release its second report, on legal migrants, tomorrow.
These two reports outline a rational set of principles that will restore credibility to our policies while setting priorities for the future.


For Hispanic Gang Members, Family Ties Are Strong
In a city where the drive-by shooting has become almost commonplace, some Hispanic gangs have found a new way to shock: the walk-by shooting.
Yet this violence, disturbing as it is, represents only one side of a Hispanic gang culture that can also be remarkably warm hearted.


O'Meara Takes a Long Step Back With His Short Game
In the end, experience, composure and savvy were what won the Bell Canadian Open for Mark O'Meara today.
He one-putted from every corner of the north country, overtook Bob Lohr with a final-round 67 and then beat him with a par on the first hole of sudden death.
But for O'Meara, his 2d triumph of 1995 and the 10th of his career was a different sort of victory.
He completed his return to form on a bright, spectacular day at Glen Abbey Golf Club with something that has been missing from his repertory for a while: a short game to die for.


As Women Meet, China Bars Chinese
As the United Nations Fourth World Conference on Women was approaching, China's Ministry of Public Security made Wang Zhihong an irresistible offer.
She could have a rare, extended visit with her ailing husband, the pro-democracy dissident Chen Ziming, on one condition: that she enter Beijing No. 2 Prison, where he is serving a 13-year sentence.


Sports of The Times; A Lethal Combination: No Offensive Weapons And A Tired Defense
THE fumbled football kept bouncing this way and that, the way footballs do, but mostly it kept bouncing away from defensive back Maurice Douglass around the Giants' 10-yard line in overtime.
With it the game bounced away from the Giants, and the season already seems to be bouncing away too.


State Good for Working Mothers
A study to be released today, ranking the 100 best companies for working mothers, lists seven concerns in New Jersey.
One of them, Hoechst Celanese, a Somerville maker of chemicals and pharmaceuticals, has increased the proportion of women in all areas of its business by giving managers bonuses for reaching specific targets for advancing women, said Working Mother magazine, which compiled the list.


Debut for a Conservative Weekly
The Weekly Standard, the new conservative weekly, arrives at newsstands today, just 10 months after the Republican sweep that inspired it and a little ahead of George, the glossy new poli-tainment magazine edited by John F. Kennedy Jr.
In the inevitable comparisons between the two political magazines, The Standard is not going to win any prizes for sexiness: where George has a cover photo of Cindy Crawford exposing her midriff, The Standard has a cartoon of Newt Gingrich as a winged-tipped Rambo.
While George's editor, Mr.
Kennedy, is set to appear on the sitcom "Murphy Brown" later this month, the editors of The Standard have had to content themselves with air time on C-Span and "The MacNeil-Lehrer News Hour." And while George's first press run will be 500,000, The Standard's will be 100,000.


A certain sameness is characterizing network shows, and viewers hold the off button.
AS a new television season gets ready to begin, broadcast networks have never been more in demand, both by advertisers who want to buy into them and by corporate moguls who just plain want to buy them.
The reason: The networks remain the one way to reach a mass television audience.
And yet, as this new season of shows proves, no network really wants to reach a mass audience.
All of them want to reach pretty much the exact same viewer.


Humphries and Means Spark the Chargers
Chargers 14, Seahawks 10
The San Diego Chargers waited until the fourth quarter to save themselves from an embarrassing loss to the Seattle Seahawks.
Stan Humphries threw a 15-yard touchdown pass to Ronnie Harmon with 13 minutes 41 seconds left and Natrone Means returned from a jarring hit by Cortez Kennedy to complete a 115-yard game on 26 carries as the Chargers beat the Seahawks, 14-10, yesterday.


Freed Shooter Of Policeman Dies in Crash
After spending eight years in prison for shooting and paralyzing a police officer in Central Park in 1986, Shavod Jones, now 25, was released on parole last week.


Dutch Doctors to Tighten Rules on Mercy Killings
For more than a decade, while other countries have debated legalizing euthanasia, only the Netherlands has openly permitted inducing death for terminally ill patients who request it, provided strict guidelines are met.
As doctors here have helped thousands of patients end their lives, the country has been a closely watched testing ground on an issue that has generated sharp emotional debate the world over.
Technically, euthanasia is still not legal in the Netherlands.
But some Dutch doctors have practiced it knowing they will not be prosecuted.


How About a Few Rows Farther Back?


Yankees Annoy Red Sox, Keep Up With Mariners
The Yankees see the results on the scoreboard and know their season is still simmering.
They feel the intensity increasing with each victory and know their wild-card pursuit is still percolating.
They hear fans howling, the Red Sox muttering and the Mariners speculating and know they may be destined for a dramatic finish.
This is getting intriguing.
Darryl Strawberry, who has not groused about his scarce at-bats, strode to the plate in the first inning and whacked another early homer against the Red Sox.
Bernie Williams, waiting anxiously for his wife to give birth at any moment, rapped a crucial two-out, two-run double in the second off Erik Hanson to instantly put the Yankees in front by five runs.
Sterling Hitchcock, in his first start in 10 days, picked an opportune time to win a game after August for the first time in eight career starts.


Broadway Stars Step Out


Regents Exams Are Being Redesigned, for 'Portfolio' Answers
The New York Regents exams, the primary measure of high-school achievement for more than a century, are being overhauled for the first time since multiple-choice questions were introduced in 1923.
The changes, which officials expect to complete by the end of the decade, seek to make the tests a more reliable reflection of what students know.
Instead of multiple-choice questions, some exams being tested in pilot programs require long-term projects like poems, essays and memoirs collected over a year or scientific experiments performed over a week.


Taking In The Sites; Car Parking Areas Grow Around the Web
Like a Southern California used-car lot, the World Wide Web is bumper to bumper with sites dedicated to automobiles.
Hundreds of pages are dedicated to marques (the industry's term of art for its different brands) as diverse as Citroen and Kia, but some sites stand out better than a Humvee on the Garden State Parkway.
Dealer Net, owned by Reynolds &amp; Reynolds Information Systems, is a good way to window shop for a new car.
Checklists help assemble a menu of vehicles based on manufacturer, body style and price range.
A preponderance of the dealers that help sponsor the site are based in Washington State, but the information is useful almost anywhere, and the pictures give a good idea of what the car looks like inside and out.


For Today at Least, Sampras Is Better


Black Film Makers Are Looking Beyond Ghetto Violence
Black film makers, who have focused largely in recent years on the bleak and corrosive experiences of ghetto youths, are moving toward more expansive and mainstream themes with far greater appeal to wider audiences.
Like just about everything else in Hollywood, the change is driven mostly by economics.
And to some degree, black directors also yearn to explore new themes.
Film makers and studio executives say that the novelty of movies about young people killing each other in the slums has been exhausted and that audiences for such productions are dwindling.


Harrowing Brush With Subway Law
BRIAN H. MOODY and his mother, Mary, are not what you would call troublemakers.
He's a reserved business executive who carries the requisite briefcase and dresses so impeccably that his nickname in college was Dap (for Dapper).
His mother is active in her church and considers a senior citizens' bus trip a good time.
Neither has ever had a brush with the law -- until early this summer, when two New York City police officers arrested them for fare beating.
What happened then would boggle the mind even if they were guilty -- which, since all charges were dropped, they presumably were not.
But that relief came only after a humiliating ordeal that defies common sense: trips in prisoner vans, handcuffs, fingerprints, mug shots, leg chains -- and a night in jail.
Hard to believe.


Lions Are Willing to Live, and Let Live
To the Editor:
Re "Please Say It Isn't So, Simba: The Noble Lion Can Be a Coward" (Science Times, Sept. 5), about variations in behavior among lions:


Barings Trader Questions Monitoring by His Superiors
Nicholas W. Leeson, the young trader linked to the $1.36 billion in losses that brought down Barings P.L.C., said that in a single day he could make or lose more than $50 million, and that to his astonishment, his superiors in London kept funneling him money because they wanted to believe he would somehow come out a winner.
When the Kobe earthquake rocked the Japanese stock market and wiped out his investments early this year, he said, he made up stories and forged documents to convince Barings executives in London that his bets were covered and that there was little risk.


Mary M. Kaufman, 82, Lawyer; Cases Involved Communism
Mary M. Kaufman, a retired lawyer whose practice included cases involving Communism and Nazism, as well as defending the poor, died on Thursday at the Roosevelt division of the St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.
She was 82 and lived on the West Side of Manhattan.
Mrs.
Kaufman retired about 1980, after having worked in Manhattan for almost all her career.
Some of her other cases involved antiwar activities.
She practiced mainly without partners.


Broderbund Casts Itself as a Studio
Nestled in the parched hills of Marin County, just north of San Francisco, Broderbund Software Inc. doesn't conjure up visions of a Hollywood studio.
But Harry Wilker, the company's senior vice president and creative director, could easily pass for one of those high-powered studio moguls constantly on the prowl for that winning formula: a compelling idea and the talent to produce it.
Broderbund (pronounced BROOD-er-bund) -- a leader in the $1 billion consumer software market -- is competing with the likes of the Walt Disney Company and the Microsoft Corporation for animators, writers and producers to make electronic entertainment products.


City Opera's 'Turandot' Thinks Big in a Small Space
Twenty-four hours after opening night's hand-to-hand combat with "Mathis der Maler," the New York City Opera returned on Friday night to firmer, friendlier ground.
The Jonathan Eaton and Beni Montresor production of "Turandot" is pushing 20, but one hopes it will live a little longer.
It is hard to explain how Puccinian spectacle and breadth have been so well adapted to a smallish stage, but the bigness comes through, coherently and without crowding.
One possibility is that rather than attempt illusions of depth, Mr.
Montresor and Mr.
Eaton have deliberately pushed things closer to us.
Shallow spaces somehow make things and people look bigger and more immediate.
Steep stairways add altitude to the mix, height asserting authority.
The backlighted surfaces are splashed with dark, dusty Art Nouveau colors.
Scrims add an elusiveness suited to an Italian fantasy of far-off Cathay.


INSIDE
Changes in Regents Exam
New York State's Regents exams are being overhauled in an effort to gauge student achievement more accurately.
Page B1.
Two Sides to Gang Life
Random violence, disturbing as it is, represents only one side of a Hispanic gang culture that can also be family oriented.
Page A12.  'E.R.' Leads Emmys
NBC's hit hospital drama "E.R." won eight Emmys, but it lost to ABC's "N.Y.P.D. Blue" as best drama series.
Page C16.
A Couple of Collapses
The Giants led the Chiefs by 14 points and the Jets led the Colts by 21, but both New York teams lost in overtime.
SportsMonday, C1.


Jamie Whitten, Who Served 53 Years in House, Dies at 85
Jamie L. Whitten, a son of the Old South who made a smooth transition to the New South as a Democratic Congressman from Mississippi for 53 years -- the record for the longest service in the House of Representatives -- died Saturday in Oxford, Miss.
Mr.
Whitten, who was chairman of the powerful Appropriations Committee from 1979 to 1992, was 85.
Mr.
Whitten had been under treatment since the beginning of August for cardiac problems and kidney failure and was hospitalized on Sept. 4 at Oxford's Baptist Memorial Hospital-North Mississippi, in the heart of his old House district.


Ireland: Once More to the Brink
The peace process in Ireland has entered a dangerous stage.
Ten days ago, with a summit meeting planned between the Irish and British Prime Ministers, progress seemed possible.
The two Governments had arrived at a draft statement that did not mention the irksome issue of disarming the Irish Republican Army, the main obstacle to the all-party talks that could cement the shaky yearlong peace.
But it quickly became clear the issue was still raw and unresolved.
The Irish Government asserted that an unequivocal commitment by the I.R.A. not to resort to violence would be acceptable.
The British Government appeared divided, with its Northern Ireland Secretary, Sir Patrick Mayhew, saying some weapons would have to be surrendered before all-party talks could begin, and another senior official, Michael Ancram, saying the British Government had "never looked for the surrender of arms."


Privacy for computers? Clinton sets the stage for a debate on data encryption.
IN terms of its ability to raise the nation's blood pressure, the debate over data encryption has not yet reached the same levels as gun control.
But last week the Clinton Administration appeared to set the stage for an equally divisive debate over the degree to which businesses and individuals have the right to keep secrets when using telephones, computers and other forms of electronic communications.


Time Warner Chief Tries To Close Deal
With the negotiations for Time Warner Inc.'s purchase of Turner Broadcasting System Inc. apparently languishing and crucial momentum being lost, Time Warner's chairman, Gerald M. Levin, flew to Denver this weekend to meet with John C. Malone, the president of Tele-Communications Inc., and the man with a de facto veto over the deal.
There were no details yesterday about the meeting, but one person close to the discussion said that the talks between the two executives appeared to be a first step toward putting the negotiations back on track.
People close to Time Warner have said that Mr.
Malone has recently been shifting his demands and effectively moving the deal's finish line just beyond reach.


The Nuts and Bolts of Chess
The Intel World Chess Championship beginning today is the first time an entire world championship series of matches is being played in the United States since 1907.
In much of the world, chess has long been a spectator sport.
Many Eastern Europeans grow up watching it on television, along with soccer and hockey, though the latter sports may be more suited for instant replay.
Here's how to watch this event.
WHO: Gary Kasparov of Russia defends his title against Viswanathan Anand of India


Break for Life Insurers in Policy Sales
A committee of insurance regulators recommended on Saturday new rules for selling life insurance that are much less stringent than regulators' proposals of a year ago.
As such, the proposals are much more to the liking of the life insurance industry.
The proposed rules concern the use of sales material, known as "illustrations," which use columns of numbers to describe the investment performance of some policies, and to show how the investment can grow, or be withdrawn, or used to buy an increased death benefit.


A Prosecutor Who Has Felt the Pain of a Victim
Stephen J. Rapp is a United States Attorney who can sympathize with the plight of crime victims.
In the summer after his junior year at Harvard University, Mr.
Rapp was working in Washington as a researcher for then-Senator Birch Bayh of Indiana.
As Mr.
Rapp drove home one steamy night, he was accosted by a gunman who reached through the car's window and forced him to move over.
Two other gunmen also climbed in, and the three drove off, kidnapping Mr.
Rapp.


Cable Policy Lets Viewer Be the Censor
To the Editor:
Re "Big-Brother Cable? Maybe the Day Is Here" (letter, Sept. 5): Contrary to Wallace Collins's assertions, Time Warner Cable's policy on "indecent programming" has nothing to do with the four public access noncommercial channels.
The policy relates only to commercial leased-access programming carried on the basic service available to everyone who subscribes to cable.


CHRONICLE
The actress ROSIE PEREZ said it was an act of penance: a 10-kilometer walk in memory of a friend who died of AIDS.
Ms.
Perez, who starred in Spike Lee's "Do the Right Thing" and played Woody Harrelson's girlfriend in "White Men Can't Jump," participated yesterday in AIDS Walk Colorado, a fund-raiser for AIDS service agencies, The Associated Press reported.


Police Official's Son Is Tied to Auto Death
The 25-year-old son of an official of the Police Department's internal criminal investigations unit was charged with driving while intoxicated early Saturday after his car struck a pedestrian who was fatally injured on a Bronx highway, the police reported yesterday.
The police said the driver, William Casey, a son of Deputy Inspector William Casey, executive officer of the Bronx Internal Affairs Bureau of the Criminal Investigation Division, was driving northbound on the Major Deegan Expressway at 2:25 A.M. when his 1988 Pontiac hit an unidentified man who was crossing the highway on foot about 300 feet south of the West 233d Street exit.


It's Win One, Drop Some for Penn State and Paterno
So much for the Joe Paterno sympathy vote.
The notion that news media members and coaches would favor Paterno's Penn State Nittany Lions in this season's college football polls did not last until sweater weather.
Penn State's 24-23 escape against Texas Tech here on Saturday -- on Brett Conway's 39-yard field goal with four seconds to play -- led to a three-place drop in both polls.


A Subway Station Is Shuttered, the First in 33 Years
Brooklyn's Franklin Avenue Shuttle has long stood apart from the rest of the city's subways, in ways more often grim than glorious, and yesterday was no exception.
The shuttle's Dean Street station closed for business just after midnight, the first subway station shuttered since 1962.
The official causes of death, given by the Transit Authority, were paltry patronage and budget cuts.
The word on the streets of Bedford-Stuyvesant, however, was that the station died of official neglect.


Patents; The debate over high-definition TV formats is resolved with a system that provides both.
THANKS to revolutionary digital broadcasting technology invented a few years ago, home television sets will soon be able to function more like computers.
Choosing the broadcast format for high-definition television -- or HDTV -- has not been an easy process, however, because the television and computer industries have been at loggerheads over how the signal should be sent.
Each prefers the transmission system it already uses.
Now a professor of engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology has patented a format converter that will be standard equipment in every HDTV set sold in the United States.
With it, the new TV's will be able to receive either format for the broadcasts, which are to begin in less than two years.
The formats differ in the number of lines that make up the picture and the method of transmitting them.
The patented converter will switch between the two automatically.


Olivetti Plans Cuts in Jobs And Additional Share Issue
Seeking to develop fresh lines of business and to stanch hemorrhaging in its personal computer business, Olivetti S.p.A., Italy's unprofitable electronics giant, announced plans to raise $1.5 billion through an offer of fresh shares to investors.
At the same time, Olivetti said it was shedding "non-strategic assets," expecting to raise $250 million from their sale, and laying off as many as 5,000 employees as part of a cost-cutting program.


M.T.A. Chief Has Big Plans For Transit
To make up for shrinking city, state and Federal aid, E. Virgil Conway, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority chairman, has overseen the first cuts in transit service in two decades and has proposed raising subway and bus fares to $1.50.
Still, Mr.
Conway has pledged an $11.9 billion, five-year capital improvement plan to continue the ambitious rebuilding of the subways, buses and commuter railroads that has cost more than $20 billion since 1982.
And, he says, these capital improvements will be pulled off without any further service cuts or fare increases.
"I am certain that we can do it," he said in a recent interview, "but it's going to take a lot of energy on my part and thousands of other people's parts."


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:


Opportunity Knocks, Raiders Roll With It
The Oakland Raiders entered this game already nudging the upper echelon of the National Football League.
The Washington Redskins would learn in this matchup just where they stand after a couple of weeks.
It started innocently enough.
It was 3-0 Raiders after a quarter.
Early in the second quarter, Washington tied the game at 3-3.
It was still 3-3 at halftime and 6-6 early in the third quarter.
That was the score with 10 minutes 3 seconds left in the quarter.
And that was where things began crumbling for the Redskins.


Liberia's Teen-Age Soldiers Find Civil War Is Over but So Is Hope
Like many of his friends, Sgt.
Lawrence Moore got ensnared in Liberia's civil war without stopping to think too much about why.
With children all over the country enlisting in militias, when he was 15 it just seemed the thing to do.
With the war over, Sergeant Moore, who gives his age as 20 but whose timid face looks far younger, entered Monrovia, the capital, for the first time the other day.
He rode in from the bush with his idol and leader, the militia boss Charles Taylor, who came to assume a seat on a new ruling council.


Accounts
Continental General Tire, Akron, Ohio, a subsidiary of Continental A.G., to Meldrum &amp; Fewsmith Communications, Cleveland, to handle its account, previously at Eric Mower &amp; Associates, Syracuse.
The billings were estimated at $10 million.


Kunstler Worked To Win Respect of Police
To the Editor:
Bill Kunstler was the guy we cops loved to hate.
We called him everything from revolutionary to evil genius.
However, those of us who got to know him realized that he was a bundle of contradictions, and he actually wanted the cops he met to like and respect him.


Hearings on Juvenile Crime Law
The first of a series of hearings on proposals made by Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman to strengthen laws for juvenile offenders will be held today by the Senate Law and Public Safety Committee.
The committee will consider a bill to establish a Juvenile Justice Commission to revamp juvenile crime law and will hear testimony from Jane O'Shaughnessy, chief executive officer of Rebound, a successful rehabilitation program in Colorado.


Mets Just Keep Showing Their Mettle
If only it were June or July.
Then the Mets would really have something to be excited about.
There would be dreams of a pennant race, the playoffs and, heaven forbid, even a World Series.
But this is September, when the contenders have separated themselves from the pretenders and the Mets are still in last place in the National League East.
So they are trying to keep in perspective the excitement generated by a 31-24 record since the All-Star Game break.


WOMEN'S MEETING AGREES ON RIGHT TO SAY NO TO SEX
Asserting a woman's right to make sexual decisions free of coercion or violence, delegates to an international conference here agreed tonight to declare for the first time in a United Nations document that a woman has the right to say no.
With the Vatican acquiescing, a consensus of delegates from nations on every continent attending the Fourth World Conference on Women made what many considered to be their greatest stride yet, agreeing to expand the definition of human rights in their final document.


Mariners Sweep Royals
Mariners 5, Royals 4
Joey Cora's r.b.i. double in the eighth inning gave the Seattle Mariners a 5-4 victory over the visiting Kansas City Royals yesterday and completed a three-game sweep of fellow American League wild-card contenders.
The Mariners, who moved into sole possession of first place in the wild-card race Saturday night, took a two-game lead over the Royals.


Most Wanted; Sega a Most Worthy Video Competitor
Video games make their debut this week in the listings, and Sega of America has had a strong showing.
The company has the top-selling games for 32-bit systems and the second-ranked title for Genesis 16-bit platform, "World Series Baseball '95." In the handheld market, Nintendo dominates with titles for Gameboy.
In the video sales market, the force is clearly with the "Star Wars" trilogy, which has been newly restored using the Lucasfilms THX process.
The films, which are sold both as a boxed set of three and individually, dominate the top 10.


Obsession Transcends 'The Banality of Evil'
HANNAH ARENDT -- MARTIN HEIDEGGER  By Elzbieta Ettinger  139 pages.
Yale University Press. $16.
The image of Hannah Arendt, the author of "The Origins of Totalitarianism" and coiner of the expression "the banality of evil," hangs on her intellectual brilliance and authority.
How strange it is to learn then, in Elzbieta Ettinger's sensitive account of her private life, that Arendt was subject to a lifelong irrational attachment, irrational in the sense that its object was a man whose evil she was unable to see, even though it was all too visible to others.


Sifting Hidden Market Patterns for Profit
In the late 1970's, when Doyne Farmer and Norman Packard were graduate students in physics at the University of California at Santa Cruz, they tried to make their fortune by using miniature computers to beat the roulette tables in Las Vegas, Nev.
Roulette, they reasoned, was not quite so random as commonly believed.
With the help of friends and fellow students, they developed a computer program that roughly predicted in which octant of the wheel the spinning ball was likely to land.


Ken Kesey got good mileage out of his school bus. Prodigy hopes there's still a bit of magic left.
EVER since Ken Kesey and the Merry Pranksters crossed the country in a school bus named Further -- a long, strange trip known as the Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test -- buses have come to symbolize more than just transportation.
For as Mr.
Kesey once declared, "Now, you're either on the bus or off the bus."
Prodigy, the computer on-line service, is anxious to clamber aboard the bus, as it were, and change its image as a stolid service for an older, family audience into one that reaches out for the hipper crowd, too.
To try accomplishing that tricky task, Prodigy will use a fanciful fleet of buses painted green and white, the stars of an offbeat television and print campaign from the new Prodigy agency, Cliff Freeman &amp; Partners in New York.


And Juan Valdez Was at the Open
In advertising for Colombian coffee, Juan Valdez, the fictional coffee grower, turns up in unexpected places.
For the last two weeks, one of those places has been the United States Open tennis tournament.
Carlos Sanchez, the actor who has portrayed Juan Valdez in the Colombian coffee campaign since 1970, was on hand at the tournament in Flushing, Queens, as part of a promotion by DDB Needham Worldwide Marketing in New York for the National Federation of Coffee Growers of Colombia.
The federation was a sponsor of the Open, placing signs around the courts and offering free coffee to fans in addition to arranging for Mr.
Sanchez, in his Juan Valdez outfit, to be seated in the stands.


Sampras Serves Notice That He's Still the Best
Pete Sampras held his serve, kept his nerve and captured the United States Open yesterday by defeating Andre Agassi, the defending champion and the man who has become his significant other in a ballyhooed battle between two polar opposites who have become the top players in the world.
Sampras took a 9-8 edge in their blossoming rivalry and a 4-3 lead in their Grand Slam encounters with a 6-4, 6-3, 4-6, 7-5 victory that required just 2 hours 28 minutes to re-establish Sampras as the most talented player to lift a racquet in this decade and, perhaps, ever.


No Headline
It seemed like a good investment at the time.
When I bought it, there was at least 100 yards of beach in front of it. -- HAL H. HAYES, whose Fire Island home was badly damaged by surf.  [ B8:1. ]


Hurricanes
So far, none of the six hurricanes formed in the Atlantic Ocean this season have reached the New York area.
A hurricane makes landfall in the region only about once every 10 years and just twice a decade anywhere north of Cape Hatteras, N.C.
A storm does not necessarily have to hit directly to be dangerous.
Last month, hurricane Felix never made landfall but still caused deadly and damaging high tides on Long Island and in New Jersey.
The heart of the Atlantic's tropical storm season is from about Aug. 15 to Oct. 15.


New Cable Programming for the Over-49 Crowd
Defying the conventional wisdom that the best audience a television show can capture for advertisers is adults aged 18 to 49, three New York entrepreneurs are starting a new cable channel aimed at people over 49.
Our Time Television is what they call it, and "boomovers" is what they call their target audience, referring to "those booming over the line of 49 years old," according to Squire D. Rushnell, the new network's president.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday
None  Tuesday
Producer Prices Aug.  Wednesday
Consumer Prices Aug.  Thursday
Retail Sales Aug
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday
Industrial Production Aug.
Capacity Utilization Aug.


In America; Nafta's Bubble Bursts
Back in 1993, in a typical declaration of faith in the projected glories of the North American Free Trade Agreement, a vice president of the Mattel Corporation named Fermin Cuza assured a Congressional subcommittee that Nafta would result in the creation of new jobs at Mattel and have "a very positive effect" on the 2,000 men and women already employed by Mattel in the United States.
Mr.
Cuza's was just one of many promises made during that season of devotion to free trade.
The consumer group Public Citizen took a look back at them.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Olivetti Plans to Raise $1.5 Billion, Shed Assets  Seeking to develop fresh lines of business and to stanch hemorrhaging in its personal computer business, Olivetti plans to raise $1.5 billion through an offer of fresh shares to investors.
The Italian electronics giant said it would shed "non-strategic assets" and lay off as many as 5,000 employees.
At the same time, the company said it would raise its stake in a mobile-phone subsidiary, Omnitel, to 59 percent.  [ Page D2. ] A Trader Offers an Explanation  In his first interview since his bets on derivatives led to the collapse of Barings, Nicholas W. Leeson compared himself to a gambler.
"Unfortunately, I lost more than I won," the trader said.
Like the Sega Saturn and 3DO machines that preceded it, Sony's machine uses compact disks to store game, sound and video information.  [ D9. ] The Standard's Inaugural Edition  Compared with George, John F. Kennedy Jr.'s political magazine, The Standard is not going to win any prizes for sexiness.
But it clearly will make pulses race in Washington.  [ D9. ] Appealing to Demographics  Capitulating to advertisers' preferences, the major networks have directed their programming efforts this season toward viewers born after the end of World War II.


Unhappiest Giant? Maybe Miller
In the coming weeks the Giants are going to have to make a decision: Do they play linebacker Corey Miller, whom they signed in the off season to a four-year, $6.5 million contract (which included a $1.6 million signing bonus), or do they go with the younger Marcus Buckley?
They seem confused about whom they want to play, and that confusion is causing problems, at least with Miller.
He was clearly angry and frustrated about not playing for much of the second half today against the Chiefs -- and none of overtime -- since he was benched for Buckley.


Benjamin Mazar, 89, Israeli Biblical Archaeologist
Benjamin Mazar, a prominent historian and archeologist who pioneered a synthesis of biblical research with historical geography in Israel, died on Friday in Jerusalem.
He was 89.
A scholar of Jewish history in the biblical period and a former president of the Hebrew University, Professor Mazar was best known in Israel for directing large-scale excavations along the ancient western and southern walls of the area known to Jews as the Temple Mount in the Old City of Jerusalem.


Chrebet Drops Chance to Be a Hero
When the Jets started training camp seven weeks ago, Wayne Chrebet ranked 10th among their 10 wide receivers.
He was a rookie free agent from Hofstra, where the Jets have their year-round training base, and his presence in camp seemed almost a thank-you message to Hofstra.
But veterans were cut and rookies were cut and Chrebet stayed.
He became one of the four wide receivers who made the team and has even started his two games as a professional.
But today, when he had a chance to be a hero against the Indianapolis Colts, he failed.
His teammates did not say he failed.
He did.


METRO DIGEST
THE POOR IMPROVISE FOR BANK SERVICES
In six years, Silfrido Frias and Edwin B. Canaan have gone from running a one-room paralegal service in the Washington Heights section of Manhattan to establishing Sherman Plaza, a diverse enterprise with 2,000 square feet of new office space.
The two men are lawyers trained in the Dominican Republic who have pursued their piece of the American dream without a bank loan.
Lacking credit history, they cobbled together capital from relatives, credit cards and an informal revolving loan fund financed by other immigrants.
Finally, they said, they turned to a loan shark, who handed over $10,000 at interest of 6 percent a week.  [ Page A1. ] NEW YORK CITY AGREEMENT REACHED ON FESTIVAL
The organizers of the Feast of San Gennaro will let New York City officials examine the books from last year's event to determine whether any of the proceeds went to organized crime, Mayor Giuliani said in announcing that the festival would begin as scheduled on Thursday.
In addition, city auditors will study the festival to see whether enough of its proceeds are going to charity.  [ B3. ]
COMPLAINT LEADS TO HOURLONG SIEGE
It was a strange story that quickly became stranger: About 9:30 A.M., an agitated man flagged down two police officers in a patrol car in Park Slope, Brooklyn, and told them that he had bought a gold chain for a woman, and that her husband had threatened him with a knife.
The man led them to an apartment house overlooking the Prospect Expressway, the officers said, where they were threatened in a dark hallway by men armed with a Mossbach combat shotgun and a Russian-made AK-47 automatic assault rifle.  [ B3. ]
OFFICER'S ASSAILANT DIES IN CRASH
After spending eight years in prison for shooting and paralyzing Officer Steven McDonald in Central Park in 1986, Shavod Jones, now 25, was released on parole last week.
Early yesterday, the police said, Mr.
Jones died from head injuries he suffered after he and a friend crashed into two parked cars while performing wheelies on a motorcycle in East Harlem.
In 1986, Mr.
Jones, then 15, was convicted of trying to kill Officer McDonald.  [ B2. ]
FUNERAL HELD FOR WOMAN HELD CAPTIVE
As the church choir sang softly for her soul to rise safely to heaven, Gao Liqin lay in a simple blue wooden coffin in her finest attire: a white ruffled shirt and a frayed chocolate-colored wool coat.
Clutching a picture of his dead wife and weeping, D. M. Zhang, an immigrant from Fujian, China, sobbed uncontrollably at Chinatown's Ng Fook Funeral Home.
In broken sentences and disjointed words, he asked aloud in Chinese: what had unleashed the wrath of fury of his wife's captors that they would kill her in such a brutal way?  [ B6. ]
SUBWAY STATION CLOSES; FIRST SINCE 1962
Brooklyn's Franklin Avenue Shuttle has long stood apart from the rest of the city's subways, in ways more often grim than glorious.
The shuttle's Dean Street station closed for business just after midnight, the first subway station shuttered since 1962.
The official causes of death, given by the Transit Authority, were paltry patronage and budget cuts.
The word on the streets of Bedford-Stuyvesant, however, was that the station died of official neglect.  [ B4. ] REGION PRIMARIES TO DECIDE FEUDS
Republicans and Democrats will try to settle bitter intraparty feuds in primaries on Long Island and in Westchester County and Connecticut, hoping the fighting will not mar their chances of winning in November.  [ B8. ]
Primary elections will be held in New York City, with polls open from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M.
No primaries will be held in the Bronx or on Staten Island.  [ B8. ]
SUIT IS SETTLED OVER STRIP SEARCHES
The New York State Department of Correctional Services has agreed to pay $1,000 to each of 85 female inmates who claimed that they were subjected to improper videotaped strip searches by guards at the Albion Correctional Facility outside Rochester.
A department spokesman, James B. Flateau, said the settlement was not an admission of wrongdoing, but rather a concession to keep the case out of court.
He added that the videotaping was justified and would continue.  [ B5. ]
Chronicle B12


Bigger Battle Going On Off the Court
The birthday boys turned 44 Friday afternoon, and one had a nice surprise for the other.
Tom Gullikson had command of a corporate jet.
His twin brother, Tim, would be getting unexpected company for lunch.
Pete Sampras, Tim Gullikson's man in the United States Open semifinals, couldn't make it, naturally.
Sampras had practice balls to hit, a fragile body to rest.
Sampras had his own idea of how he would help an ailing coach celebrate the weekend.
He would beat Jim Courier in the semifinals, then save his best show for Andre Agassi yesterday afternoon.


Equity Offerings Set for This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:


Hamburg Journal; Off a German Shore, Their Lives Lie at Anchor
As the Bibby Kalmar rocks gently in the waters of this busy port city at the mouth of the Elbe River, its sterile, gray color and prefabricated, boxy form say immediately it is not the typical ocean-going liner.
The Kalmar, along with five other such vessels in Hamburg, is a giant, floating transient hotel, used by the Government to house hundreds of refugees and asylum seekers as they wait for their cases to grind slowly through the German bureaucracy.


Transactions
WEEKEND Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Recalled Cesar Devarez, catcher, and Jimmy Haynes, pitcher, from Rochester of the International League.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Activated Jeff Bronkey and Graeme Lloyd, pitchers, from the 15-day disabled list.
National League
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Recalled Michael Brown, first baseman, from Carolina of the Southern League.
Football  National Football League
CHICAGO BEARS -- Waived Ervin Collier, defense tackle.
Signed Darwin Ireland, linebacker.
DALLAS COWBOYS -- Signed Deion Sanders, cornerback, to a five-year contract.
Hockey  National Hockey League
DALLAS STARS -- Signed Mark Lawrence and Nikolai Borschevsky, right wings, to one-year contracts.


George Gerber, 69, Municipal Official
George Gerber, a former Clarks town, N.Y., supervisor who thought he had put politics behind him when he retired to Florida in 1986, died on Friday at his home in Coconut Creek, the Broward County city where he was in his second term as Mayor.
He was 69.
The cause was cancer, his wife, Marilyn, said.


I.B.M. to Introduce New Line of Home PC's
I.B.M. is expected to introduce a new line of multimedia home computers today, as personal computer manufacturers gear up for the holiday buying season.
The new I.B.M. machines -- the latest in its Aptiva line -- will be powered by the Intel Corporation's Pentium microprocessor and will ship with a number of advanced features, including high-quality video and voice recognition capability, at prices ranging from $1,800 to $3,000.
But they will not include Windows 95, the new operating system from the Microsoft Corporation that was introduced last month.


Sex Slavery, Thailand to New York; Thousands of Indentured Asian Prostitutes May Be in U.S.
She was halfheartedly helping out in her parents' grocery store in Bangkok, daydreaming of an office job that would let her wear pretty clothes, when evil entered her life in the form of a man who made her an irresistible offer: He would arrange her passage to the United States and a job as a bar hostess, he said, and it wouldn't cost her a cent, because her future employer would pay his commission.
Within days, the 23-year-old Thai woman, who asked that she be identified only by her nickname, Na, was in New York.


Stevens Institute Fills Post
Susan Vogt has been named to the top financial post at the Stevens Institute of Technology.
Ms.
Vogt, who served as associate dean at Dartmouth Medical School for 13 years, will become vice president for administration and planning at Stevens on Sept. 25, the institute announced.


Angry Surf Damages 7 Fire Island Houses
Hal H. Hayes managed yesterday to get into his three-story house in Fire Island Pines and salvage a stack of family photographs.
Then he stood back and stared at what the pummeling surf, kicked up by Hurricane Luis, had done to his ocean-front home.
The deck had been sheared off, the swimming pool had been bashed to bits and the water rushing under his house had destroyed his drainage system and slicked off so much sand around the pilings supporting the house that the whole structure was teetering.


PRO FOOTBALL The Best Football Team in New York? Right Now, It's Probably Columbia; Jets Turn Frolic Into Fiasco
Deja boo.
At the end today, having held their collective breath so many times once again, Jet fans finally reverted to form and bellowed out their feelings as somehow, some way their team lost in overtime, 27-24, to the Colts.


Odd Tale's Surprise Ending: A Standoff and 7 Arrests
It was a strange story that quickly became stranger: About 9:30 A.M. yesterday, an agitated man flagged down two police officers in a patrol car in Park Slope, Brooklyn, and told them that he had bought a gold chain for a woman and that her husband had threatened him with a knife.
The scratches on his neck were evidence enough to put the officers, John Rogers and John Xenikis, on the case.
The man led them to an apartment house overlooking the Prospect Expressway, the officers said, where they were threatened in a dark hallway by men armed with a Mossbach combat shotgun and a Russian-made AK-47 automatic assault rifle.


Abroad at Home; What Weakness Brings
If the preliminary agreement brokered by Assistant Secretary of State Richard Holbrooke actually leads to peace in Bosnia -- a large if -- the end of the killing will be reason enough to celebrate.
But no one should confuse the outcome with justice, or with Western values.
The central provision of the agreement, the creation of a Serbian Republic within Bosnia, is a victory for racist fanatics.
It legitimizes the terrible proposition that a tribal group in a territory has the right to create its own ethnically pure state, killing or expelling all others.


Pat Robertson Declares Dole Is, at Heart, Conservative
Although Pat Robertson and his conservative political organization, the Christian Coalition, have said they will not endorse any of the Republican Presidential candidates, Mr.
Robertson made it clear in an interview that he considered Senator Bob Dole of Kansas quite acceptable to religious conservatives.
Without prompting, Mr.
Robertson defended Mr.
Dole's conservative bona fides, rejecting what he said was recent criticism that Mr.
Dole was merely pandering to religious conservatives.


Why Israel Is Denied Security Council Seat
To the Editor:
In discussing Italy's plan to expand the United Nations Security Council (news article, Sept. 3), you note that 79 of the world body's 185 members have never served on the Council, "including Iceland, Israel and most Caribbean and smaller African nations."


Cambridge Journal; Lovers of Beauty Sing a Collective Ode to Keats
The three women from North Carolina were eating roast beef in the baronial dining hall of Harvard's Eliot House, and talking about John Keats, the English Romantic poet who was born 200 years ago.
"He's palpable," said Prof.
Lou Williamson Rosser, who, like her two friends, teaches Keats at Meredith College in Raleigh, N.C.
"His images are like jewels."


'State Mandate, State Pay' Plan
Organizations representing New Jersey's towns, counties and local school boards will join forces today to kick off a campaign in behalf of a question on the November ballot that would require the state to provide financing for any programs it makes obligatory.


Drive Now and Pay Later
Governor Whitman wants motorists to be able to drive now and pay later.
She will urge her colleagues at the Coalition of Northeastern Governors meeting this weekend in Bretton Woods, N.H., to adopt an electronic bar code system allowing cars to zip through special lanes on toll roads, bridges and tunnels.


PRO FOOTBALL The Best Football Team in New York? Right Now, It's Probably Columbia; Giants Blow a 14-Point Lead
The Giants are now officially in trouble.
True, it is only two games into the season.
But after a brutal 20-17 overtime loss to the Chiefs today just a week after the Giants were blown out by Dallas, Dan Reeves's team is nearing the panic mode.
The Giants had a 14-point lead in the fourth quarter this afternoon and blew it in what has to be one of the worst losses in the Reeves era.
And if one believes in football history then here is why the Giants are in dire straights: In the history of the organization, only one Giants team has started 0-2 and then gone on to make the playoffs.
And that team played in 1934.


Don't Starve the Port Authority
After weeks of uncertainty, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey has decreed that there will be no fare or toll increases for the bridges, tunnels and trains that cross the Hudson River.
Instead, the authority is laying off personnel and cutting other costs, as demanded by Governors George Pataki and Christine Todd Whitman.
Now the Governors and the authority have a more important challenge.
They need to find ways of financing much-needed transportation improvements, and to face the fact that travelers and commuters will have to pay part of the bill down the road, if not right now.
The underlying problem is that revenues generated by the authority's airports, bus terminals, bridges and tunnels have not kept pace with soaring costs.
Earlier this year, the authority warned that without more income, it would have to consider cutbacks in planned improvements to the region's aging transportation infrastructure.


A Publishing Empire Takes the Digital Road
Few people were angrier than Bob Woodward when his friend, Richard E. Snyder, was dismissed last year as the chairman of Simon &amp; Schuster.
Mr.
Woodward, who has known Mr.
Snyder since Simon &amp; Schuster published his first book, "All the President's Men," in 1973, complained bitterly that Mr.
Snyder had been unjustly ousted after a 33-year career.
Worse, Mr.
Woodward said he didn't even know his replacement: Jonathan Newcomb.
Mr.
Woodward has mellowed considerably since then.
After hinting that he might leave, Mr.
Woodward, an author and an editor at The Washington Post, signed a new book deal with Simon &amp; Schuster last fall.
And he had a friendly lunch with Mr.
Newcomb recently to discuss how the company was using digital technology to transform the way it publishes and distributes books -- and how it might publish and distribute his next book in electronic form.


Sports of The Times; Change of Wardrobe Is Needed Next Year
LIKE a big, fat, glossy autumn merchandising catalogue, Agassi-Sampras arrived in our mailbox yesterday, right on schedule.
They represent the same sporting-goods company.
They both bear the boomerang-shaped mark of the beast engraved on their foreheads.
I saw it.
Didn't you see it?
One of them would bring home the United States Open trophy to the kindly folks at Swoosh Int'l, and the consumer ratings pretty much held up: Pete Sampras, when he is on form, will always win when Andre Agassi admits he is lacking "a little pep in my step, so to speak." Sampras, when he is firing aces, is top of the line.


Essay; Third-Party Madness
Forty-three years ago, New York broadcaster John R. (Tex) McCrary was certain that Dwight Eisenhower, then commanding Allied forces in Europe, could be prevailed upon to run for President on the Republican ticket.
Tex appointed me to be chief of staff of a Madison Square Garden rally to demonstrate to the skeptical general that a groundswell of enthusiasm awaited his candidacy.


Bridge
Can an expert retire from the game and return many years later with undiminished effectiveness?
The answer seems to be yes, although a little homework on newfangled conventions may be called for.
An example is Peter Rank of Los Angeles, who won many major titles, many of them with Barry Crane, a recent inductee into the American Contract Bridge League's Hall of Fame.
They were both producers and directors, Crane of television shows such as "Mission Impossible" and Rank of amateur productions at national bridge championships.


New Alliances For On-Line Work
Four interactive alliances have been announced.
The SFM Media Corporation in New York, the media buying service, has formed a joint venture with Digital Brands Inc. in New York, a developer of digital and interactive technologies, to be known as SFM/Digital Brands.
George Asposporos, 38, president of Digital, will head the joint venture as president and will oversee interactive initiatives for SFM clients like American Isuzu Motors and the MCI Communications Corporation.


Packwood Points to Diary's Inaccuracies
Unrepentant to the end, Bob Packwood maintained in a television interview today that he bore little responsibility for the actions that forced him to resign from the Senate last week in disgrace.
Mr.
Packwood, the Republican from Oregon, said on the CBS News program "Face the Nation" that his incriminating diaries were not accurate, even though he changed several entries, and that his diary was not unusual for a public figure.
He suggested that he still did not understand that he had done anything wrong.
And, as in the past, he expressed no contrition.


Helicopters Carry Papers in Detroit Strike
In the decades since labor started organizing itself here, the tools of the adversaries in strikes have remained remarkably consistent and basic: backbone, propaganda, dollars and fists.
But late Saturday and early this morning, the managers of Detroit's two daily newspapers rummaged in their war chest and came up with an unusual weapon.


A Charge of Racism
He was not your typical defendant: an executive arrested with his elderly mother.
But Brian H. Moody believes he was singled out for one main reason: because he is black.
His crime?
Fare beating, something he says he didn't do.
Nonetheless, he and his mother were arrested and had to spend the night in jail.
Metro Matters, page B3.


When It Comes to Love, She Sings It All
She may be lovesick but she remains indomitable.
That was the essence of the songs Annie Lennox performed on Friday night at Central Park Summerstage in her first United States concert since she sang with the Eurythmics in the 1980's.
The free show, sponsored by her label, Arista Records, was filmed for a documentary for which Ms.
Lennox is a co-director, and it had a more elaborate production than Summerstage's regular events.
Against a backdrop of tall swag curtains, the band wore white, with furry mouse ears for the male musicians and golden wings for the women singing backup.
Ms.
Lennox, who is Scottish, appeared in a red plaid pants suit, striding across the stage with easy authority or making composed, dainty gestures.
"I believe in love alone," she proclaimed, then went on to sing about the many ways love can go wrong.


Shifting Lead At Forefront Of Computing
New supercomputers have always been a bit like new jumbo jets: without an initial customer and the big opening order it brings, they never take off.
But while Boeing can turn to any number of domestic or foreign airlines for that crucial first check, there has always been just one qualified buyer for computing's ne plus ultra: the Federal Government.
So the announcement last week that the Energy Department would finance the creation of the Intel Corporation's next stab at the world's fastest computer was very much in keeping with tradition.
The big difference was that "Pay to the order of" was not followed by "Cray Research Inc.," the leading producer of supercomputers for the last two decades, but by Intel, best known as the maker of the microprocessors at the heart of most personal computers.


Top Emmys to 'Frasier' And 'N.Y.P.D. Blue'
It was a big night for "E.R.," but not as big as it might have been.
And it wasn't a bad night for Barbra Streisand, Jay Leno or last year's comedy winners either.
ABC's "N.Y.P.D. Blue" was named best drama series at the 47th Annual Prime-Time Emmy Awards presented at the Pasadena Civic Auditorium in California last night, halting an expected sweep by NBC's hospital drama "E.R."


Against the Waves


Push for Limits on Lawsuits Seems to Have Lost Its Way
The far-reaching legislation that raced through both houses of Congress last spring aimed at overhauling the nation's civil litigation system is suddenly facing a deeply uncertain future and may not even not be enacted into law this year, a wide range of lawmakers, staff aides and lobbyists say.
The principal reason the legislation is stalled, those interviewed say, is the stark difference between the versions passed by the House and the Senate and a general unwillingness to seek compromise, especially on the part of the House Speaker, Newt Gingrich.


Six Murder Suspects on Trial
Six men charged with murdering four members of a once-powerful Manhattan-based Chinese gang, Fuk Ching, in their suburban headquarters in Teaneck in 1993 are scheduled to go on trial in Superior Court today.
Bergen County prosecutors contend that the defendants killed two brothers and two allies of the gang's leader, Guo Liang Chi, widely known as Ah Kay, during a feud over gang profits from the smuggling of illegal aliens from China.


Bank-Poor Communities Are Forced to Improvise
In six years, Silfrido Frias and Edwin B. Canaan have gone from running a one-room paralegal service in the Washington Heights section of Manhattan to establishing Sherman Plaza, a diverse enterprise with 2,000 square feet of new office space that offers paralegal services, real estate brokering, international calling booths, beeper sales and computer training.
The two men are lawyers trained in the Dominican Republic who have pursued their piece of the American dream without a bank loan.
Lacking credit history, they cobbled together capital from relatives, credit cards and an informal revolving loan fund financed by other immigrants.
Finally, they said, they borrowed $10,000 from a loan shark at interest of 6 percent a week.


Security Doesn't Justify Arctic Drilling
To the Editor:
"Arctic Refuge Drilling Won't Threaten Wildlife" (letters, Sept. 6) were so rife with errors and outdated information, they demand correction.


Robert Ode, 79, Oldest of Hostages Held by Iran
Robert C. Ode, the oldest of the 52 Americans held hostage for 444 days in Iran, died on Friday at a hospital in Sun City West, Ariz., the retirement community where he had lived since shortly after his release in 1981.
He was 79.
His wife, Rita, said the cause of death was pneumonia.


Deion Who? The 49ers Roll On Without Him
49ers 41, Falcons 10
Tim McDonald played the part of Deion Sanders and Jerry Rice starred as himself in another San Francisco 49ers' demolition of the Atlanta Falcons.
Rice sent Sanders a message that he will be ready for their Nov. 12 showdown in Dallas, beating Atlanta for 2 touchdowns on 11 receptions for 167 yards in San Francisco's 41-10 victory at home yesterday.
Sanders, a football free agent, left the team he helped to the Super Bowl last season when he signed Saturday with the rival Cowboys.


An Ousted Publishing Executive Is Back in Action
When Richard E. Snyder arrived at Simon &amp; Schuster as a salesman in 1961, one of his first jobs was marketing Golden Books, a children's series that Simon &amp; Schuster was publishing with a company then known as Western Printing.
Simon &amp; Schuster sold its interest three years later, but it is now apparent that Golden Books made a long-lasting impression on the young Mr.
Snyder, who was beginning his fabled ascent to the chairman's office.
Once there, Mr.
Snyder, who was adored by some and abhorred by others, quickly assumed a high profile as one of the few publishers with both editorial expertise and business vision.
During his tenure Simon &amp; Schuster became home to authors like Bob Woodward, Graham Greene, Larry McMurtry, Mary Higgins Clark, Philip Roth and David McCullough, many of them lured from other publishers.
Two editors, Alice Meyhew, who came from Random House, and Michael Korda, thrived under Mr.
Snyder and continue to be two of the best known in the business.


N.J. Transit Settles Maiming Suit
A former Princeton University student who was maimed when he climbed on top of a New Jersey Transit train at Princeton Junction and touched a power line connection will receive $3.6 million from the settlement of his lawsuit against the railroad, The Associated Press reported.


Festival's Books to Be Studied For Evidence of Mafia Ties
The organizers of the Feast of San Gennaro will let New York City officials examine the books from last year's event to determine whether any of the proceeds went to organized crime, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday in announcing that the festival would begin as scheduled on Thursday.
In addition, city auditors will study the festival to see whether enough of its proceeds are going to charity, the Mayor said.


Sports of The Times; Whoever These Jets Are, They're Just Not Very Good
I'VE been trying for the longest time to figure out whom or what the New York Jets remind me of.
After watching them disintegrate against the Indianapolis Colts yesterday, I'm convinced that they are unlike any team I've watched.
You could compare the Jets with "rabbits," runners hired by track-and-field promoters to jump out quickly and set a rapid pace in hopes of insuring fast times in high-profile races.


Women's Suit Over Prison Strip Searches Is Settled
The New York State Department of Corrections has agreed to pay $1,000 to each of 85 female inmates who claimed that they were subjected to improper videotaped strip searches by guards at the Albion Correctional Facility outside Rochester.
A Correctional Services Department spokesman, James B. Flateau, said the settlement was not an admission of wrongdoing, but rather a concession to keep the case out of court.
He added that the videotaping was justified and would continue.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week includes today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
By the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 5.34 percent and a six-month bill was 5.33 percent.


Arena Manager Buys Big Entertainment Stake
In a move that marries arenas and live shows, the Ogden Corporation has bought a 50 percent stake in Metropolitan Entertainment Inc., a concert promotion and artist management company owned by John Scher, the rock impresario.
R.
Richard Ablon, Ogden's president and chief executive, declined to specify how much the company paid for its half-interest, which Ogden announced Friday.
He said only that it was a "nominal amount of money, a couple of million dollars."


In for Life: The Three-Strikes Law -- A special report.; First Federal 3-Strikes Conviction Ends a Criminal's 25-Year Career
Tommy Lee Farmer had never heard of the new Federal three-strikes law until sheriff's deputies brought him into court last October.
That was when his lawyer gave him the bad news.
Mr.
Farmer had expected to face state charges for his role in a botched holdup of a supermarket here.
But three weeks earlier, President Clinton had signed a law intended to put incorrigible career criminals behind bars for life.


New York State of Mind For De La Hoya Camp
His fights are gory, his own barrio is two-faced, and he will seek refuge soon in New York.
Oscar De La Hoya altered another profile Saturday night, although this time his opponent stopped the bout before the referee did.
Genaro Hernandez felt his nose splinter in the sixth round, tasted a gush of blood, looked forlornly toward his wife and child and tugged on the sleeve of the referee, Richard Steele.
It was son of "No Mas."


NATO SHIFTS FOCUS OF ITS AIR ATTACKS ON BOSNIAN SERBS
Frustrated that the Bosnian Serbs continue to defy a Western ultimatum to withdraw their heavy guns from around Sarajevo, NATO today used both cruise missiles and long-range bombs for the first time in this campaign and shifted its sights to Serbian air defenses in northwestern Bosnia.
By expanding the bombing campaign to northwest Bosnia, the base of heavily defended and therefore more dangerous Serbian-held air defense networks, NATO commanders said they were trying to break the will of the recalcitrant Bosnian Serb commander, Gen.
Ratko Mladic.


Will Better Truck Fuel Economy Hurt Safety?
To the Editor:
"Trucks' Popularity Undermining Gains in U.S. Fuel Savings" (front page, Sept. 5) details the advantages of a higher federally mandated corporate average fuel economy standard for light trucks but omits a significant disadvantage: CAFE as applied to cars results in a significant increase in automobile fatalities, and raising the fuel economy standard for light trucks, utility vehicles and minivans may have even more severe safety consequences.
The possible downsizing in both weight and engine size for light trucks as a result of increased CAFE standards may increase the risk that those lighter vehicles may be more subject to tipping and rollover, or when carrying a full load, to engine stall.


Tyson Due on Assault Charge
Mike Tyson, the former heavyweight champion, is scheduled to appear in court today in a civil case in which he is accused of sexually assaulting a West Orange publicist who worked for Robin Givens, his former wife.
The publicist, Phyliss Polaner, said in her complaint that Mr.
Tyson sexually assaulted her, beat her and threatened to kill her at different times during 1988.


Judicial Primary Choices
This list summarizes our recommendations for contested judicial races in today's Democratic primary in New York City in which the outcome is tantamount to election.
Poll hours in the city are 6 A.M. to 9 P.M.
MANHATTAN Second Municipal District: Doris Ling-Cohan; Fifth Municipal District: Karen Smith.
BROOKLYN Fifth Municipal District: David Schmidt; Sixth Municipal District: Diana Johnson; Eighth Municipal District: Esther Morgenstern.


Astronomers Oppose Bright 2-Balloon Satellite
A SCHEME by French entrepreneurs to link the United Nations with the Russian space agency in launching a satellite to promote an international "Year of Tolerance" has aroused alarm and opposition among European and American astronomers.
Many astronomers believe that light pollution from such a bright satellite would interfere with observations.


Senate Panel Kills Financing For National Service Program
President Clinton's national service corps, whose future was already doubtful, suffered another blow today when a Senate subcommittee voted to give it no money for the fiscal year beginning Oct. 1.
The House had already voted to deny the year-old program money, but its prospects had been considered better in the Senate, where it had some significant Republican support when it was enacted in 1993.


Corporate Giants Tighten Their Hold on U.S.
To the Editor:
In "Companies Merge; Families Break Up" (Op-Ed, Sept. 3), Lester C. Thurow's analysis of the massive income shifts in the American economy neglects a major consequence of this redistribution of wealth: the parallel accretion of political power at all levels of government to the oligopolistic megacorporations now dominating the economy.


F.B.I. Agent Won't Testify On Deadly Idaho Standoff
The F.B.I. sniper who killed the wife of a white separatist during a standoff on an Idaho mountaintop in 1992 has rejected a Senate panel's request to appear on Tuesday to testify about his role in the incident, law-enforcement officials said today.
The sniper, Lon Horiuchi, and three other sharpshooters from the Federal Bureau of Investigation who took part in the siege at Ruby Ridge remain on the Judiciary subcommittee's schedule to testify, and Senate aides said negotiations were under way to resolve the issue.


The Future Isn't Now For the Jets and Giants
After both the Jets and Giants blew large leads and lost in overtime on Sunday, dropping to 0-2, someone quipped that there are now two major cities in the country that don't have pro football teams -- Los Angeles and New York.
How bad are things?
The Cincinnati Bengals, 3-13 last season, are off to a 2-0 start.
The St.
Louis Rams, a 4-12 finisher in 1994, are also 2-0.


Observer; Bush-League Strutting
The way to show off in 1995 is to drive a $50,000 four-wheel-drive vehicle to the supermarket.
It is an astounding measure of how far America has fallen over the past century.
That a trifling $50,000 could satisfy the human need to strut would have been unthinkable in 1895.
That year showing off meant importing an army of European workers to build you a gigantic palazzo in Newport, R.I., as Cornelius Vanderbilt 2d did in 1895.
The result is the Breakers, a summer "cottage" looking out on the Atlantic with an authority calculated to make the ocean whimper and tug its forelock.


Mexico and Rebels Agree on Agenda for Talks
After five months of difficult and often tense negotiations, the Government and Indian rebels in the southern state of Chiapas have reached a modest agreement that sets an agenda for discussions of social issues that contributed to the most serious uprising in Mexico in more than 25 years.
At a village in Chiapas where the two sides have been meeting on and off since April, Government negotiators and masked representatives of the Zapatista National Liberation Army announced early this morning that they would discuss Indian rights and poverty in indigenous communities when they meet again on Oct. 17.


Physicality, Intensity And Tackles
As a principal in Paul Taylor's company, David Grenke dances with sly wit rather than theatrical flamboyance.
As a choreographer, he reveals his ideas in a similar way.
"Thingsezisee'm/Degenerate Art," the new 65-minute piece he presented at Pace University on Friday night, has an overintellectualized message that refers to the Nazis' denigration of modern art.
Yet Mr.
Grenke's way with movement is thrilling.
There are solos in which a dancer rebounds daringly from falls to the floor or moves with manic intensity.
There are duets for acrobatically linked partners and experiments in acceleration as performers repeatedly tackle one dancer.


On My Mind; For American Worth
Saturday's headline in The New York Times: "3 Enemies Agree to Serbian State as Part of Bosnia." Monday's headline in The Washington Post: "U.S. Fires Cruise Missiles at Bosnian Serb Sites."
For four years, the U.S. and its Western allies say they want peace in Bosnia.
The U.S. manages to bring about an important agreement among the warring parties, an essential first step.


In New Economy, Russians Cannot Rely on Their Banks
The Moskovsky Gorodskoi Bank does not have a cash machine.
It does not have a customer service desk or loan officers.
It does not have deposit insurance.
And at the moment it does not have the $500 that Vladimir A. Shcherbakov entrusted to it.
As he stood outside the bank's main branch, a dilapidated storefront, Mr.
Shcherbakov, who needed his money to buy a car, was confronted first by a sign saying no withdrawals could be made for 10 days.
Then he was confronted by two men with shiny suits blocking the door, telling him politely but firmly to go away.


Not-Guilty Plea in Rape Case
A premed student at the University of Virginia pleaded not guilty yesterday to rape charges involving six attacks on women in South Orange and Maplewood from last December to July, said Ray Weiss, a spokesman for the Essex County Prosecutor's office.


Analyzing the Analysts a Job for a 'Real' Analyst
One day during the United States Open, I ended an interview with John McEnroe by saying, "See, no Mary Carillo questions." The day before he had launched into another cranky diatribe in another newspaper about the analyst Mary Carillo's qualifications, how she would have to match his pace on CBS's United States Open telecasts and how she feared for her job.
"You know, you're going to have to learn to shut up about that," I said.


Q&amp;A
Plant Respiration
Q.
My friend says it is common knowledge in Europe that sleeping with a live plant is dangerous because it uses up oxygen.
Is he right?


There Is Still Another Way to Process Words
EVEN if most of the day is spent with a spreadsheet or database manager, a note will have to be written, or a letter or a memo.
The stripped-down programs that come with Windows, DOS and the Macintosh OS -- respectively, Write, the MS-DOS Editor from DOS 5.0 on, the late unlamented Edlin with editions before that, Teachtext and Simpletext -- may serve, but most of us fire up a big-time program like Microsoft Word or Novell Wordperfect.
Then there are text editors, a specialized kind of word-processing program.
Programmers use text editors to crank out lines of computer code, and also to write E-mail to Mom.
Text editors produce plain letters and numbers that can be sent anywhere, known as ASCII text.
But nonprogrammers may want to write with a text editor too, rather than with a word processor that creates formated text that E-mail or other word-processing or page layout programs may choke on. (Any word processor can save text as ASCII, but you have to remember to do it.)


Parole Team On the Watch As Wheelie Killed Parolee
Four parole officers from a special criminal intelligence unit had a new parolee under surveillance on Saturday evening when the parolee, Shavod Jones, enjoying his third day of freedom after almost a decade in prison, fell off a speeding motorcycle in East Harlem.
He died several hours later from head injuries.
The investigators were so close to their subject, state and police officials said yesterday, that one officer was slightly injured when the motorcycle careered out of control and hit her car at the intersection of Madison Avenue and 114th Street.


House Takes Its Turn on Internet Censorship
To the Editor:
Draconian censorship of the Internet is imminent, and nobody knows about it.


G.M. Settles 4 Lawsuits Over Safety of Pickup Trucks
The General Motors Corporation has settled four lawsuits resulting from fatal crashes and fires involving pickup trucks with side-mounted gasoline tanks, lawyers representing the families of the victims say.
Neither side would disclose the terms of the settlements, as has been the practice in other settlements involving the G.M. trucks.


China Battery Venture
Delphi Automotive Systems, a unit of the General Motors Corporation, plans to form a joint venture with a Chinese partner to produce one million car batteries annually in Shanghai, G.M. said yesterday.
The partnership with the Shanghai Mechanical and Electrical Holding Company will require an investment of about $30 million, and Delphi expects to hold a majority stake, G.M. said.
Production is expected to begin in 1997. (AP)


Chess Still Lacks Big-Money Sponsors
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 10 news article on the coming World Chess Championship states that chess is beginning to resemble many other international sports with multimillion-dollar sponsors and widespread television coverage.


Simpson Lawyers Say They Will Call 'Startling' New Witness
Lawyers for O. J. Simpson refused to rest their case today after Judge Lance A. Ito denied them the opportunity to strike portions of Mark Fuhrman's testimony or to call him back to the stand -- for more questioning or for him to utter the racial epithets he had spoken on tape, ostensibly to prove that it was he who said them.
While the defense pursued an appeal, the prosecutors began what is expected to be their week-long rebuttal case with a series of photographs of Mr.
Simpson in his broadcasting days wearing tight brown leather gloves, much like those found behind his house and near the bodies of the two people he is charged with killing.
With additional defense witnesses, closing statements and wrangling over jury instructions still to come, jurors are not expected to begin deliberating until the end of the month.


Alcyon Lake Cleaned Up
Alcyon Lake, closed in 1981 because of health risks, has been cleaned up and will be open next summer for recreational boating, local and Federal officials said yesterday.
Swimming will continue to be prohibited because the lake does not have enough parking or restrooms, Mayor Bruce Ware said.


Chinese Auto Maker Trims 14,000 Jobs
China's third-largest automobile company has shed 14,000 workers in one of the nation's first experiments with voluntary retirement.
The Dongfeng Motor Company offered pension packages at the start of the year to induce older workers to leave, a spokesman said.
Workers received pensions of up to 900 yuan ($108) a month.


U.N. Chief Says Finances Hurt Its Role
With the 50th annual session of the General Assembly scheduled to open next Tuesday, Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali is warning that the finances of the United Nations are deteriorating, its development funds are drying up and the safety of its field personnel is at risk.
If those problems are not effectively addressed, Mr.
Boutros-Ghali said in a 133-page report released today, "they can irreparably damage the United Nations as a mechanism for progress."


Leetch Comes to Camp With a Foot Problem
Do not worry, said Brian Leetch and his Ranger bosses.
The star defenseman has a fracture in his right foot, but it is just a hairline crack, nothing to be too concerned about.
Leetch missed full-contact scrimmage games today as the Rangers opened their training camp at the University of Vermont.
He said he hoped to be skating in three or four days, although the injury could keep him out of practice and exhibition games for up to two weeks.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $10 million of bonds due in 2005 through Nationsbanc Capital Markets Inc.
Callable in one year, the bonds are priced at par to yield 7.39 percent.


Secret Service Goes On Line and After Hackers
It was a classic sting operation, the kind of undercover gambit that has nabbed bad guys for decades: Federal agents disguised as big-time thieves set up shop and put the word out on the street that they were eager for business.
Soon shifty characters were stopping by, officials said, peddling stolen goods that were worth millions of dollars.
But as the agents revealed yesterday, the meeting place for this subterfuge was not some grimy storefront.
It was a computer bulletin board that the United States Secret Service had rigged together to troll for people who are illegally trafficking in the codes that program cellular phones.


EASTERN COLLEGE REPORT
Rough Start for Big East
Of the Big East's eight teams, only Pittsburgh (2-0) can boast of being unbeaten so far this season.
Miami, at No. 19, is the only team ranked among the Associated Press's top 25.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Activated Ben McDonald, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Activated Dave Gallagher, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
National League  CINCINNATI REDS -- Announced Ron Gant, outfielder, has withdrawn an appeal of a four-game suspension and will begin to serve the suspension immediately.
HOUSTON ASTROS -- Announced Doug Drabek, pitcher, has withdrawn an appeal of a four-game suspension and will begin to serve the suspension immediately.
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Activated Cliff Floyd, first baseman, from the 60-day disabled list.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Activated Dave Clark, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Football  National Football League  ARIZONA CARDINALS -- Waived Melvin Aldridge, strong safety.
WASHINGTON REDSKINS -- Signed Robert Bailey, cornerback.
Released Jeff Brohm, quarterback.
Hockey  National Hockey League  BUFFALO SABRES -- Named Larry Carriere assistant to the general manager.
EDMONTON OILERS -- Signed Bill Ranford, goaltender, to a one-year contract.
LOS ANGELES KINGS -- Signed Eric Lacroix, left wing, to a two-year contract.
NEW YORK ISLANDERS -- Agreed to terms with Patrick Flatley, right wing.
NEW YORK RANGERS -- Signed Peter Ferraro, center; and Chris Ferraro and Joe Kocur, right wings.
PHILADELPHIA FLYERS -- Signed John LeClair, left wing.
PITTSBURGH PENGUINS -- Signed Ed Patterson, right wing.
TAMPA BAY LIGHTNING -- Agreed to terms with John Cullen, center.
WINNIPEG JETS -- Signed Randy Gilhen, center.
International Hockey League  LOS ANGELES ICE DOGS -- Named Brian McCutcheon assistant coach.
College
CENTRAL FLORIDA -- Named Art Zeleznik associate athletic director.
CORNELL -- Named Matt Carlin and Scott Garrow men's assistant hockey coaches.
MERRIMACK -- Named Michele Myslinski senior women's administrator.
MIAMI -- Named Stan Jones men's assistant basketball coach.
MISSOURI -- Reinstated Ramone Budgetts, linebacker; Maurice Daniels, safety;, and Chris Meredith, offensive tackle, to the football team.
MONTANA STATE -- Named Anna West women's assistant basketball coach.
NICHOLLS STATE -- Named Will Boudloche track coach.
RADFORD -- Named Geoff Rowland assistant lacrosse coach.
VILLANOVA -- Extended the contract of Steve Lappas, men's basketball coach, through the 1999-2000 season.


After 50 Years, a German-Dutch Military Partnership
When Europeans talk about the fabric of their unity, they often end up at the raggedy seams.
Take, for instance, the First German-Dutch Army Corps stationed in this one-time Prussian garrison town.
The corps was formally inaugurated late last month to fanfare about the intertwined destiny of two neighbors whose relationship is distinguished by the reluctance of the Netherlands to be nice to Germany, which occupied it during World War II.


Turnaround at Pechiney Brings First-Half Profit
Pechiney S.A., which is being groomed to be sold by the French Government, bounced back into profitability in the first half of this year, aided by a surge in the worldwide demand and price for aluminum.
But the company said yesterday that demand had started to level off in the second quarter and profit from trading might suffer.


Triumph and Loss As Wolves Return To Yellowstone
THE evening breeze had died and a setting sun was gilding the slopes of the Lamar Valley as Mike Phillips gazed across the steep ravine of Rose Creek and whispered to a visitor, "That area of matted grass to the left of the aspens and the right of the sagebrush -- see it?"
There, perhaps 500 yards away, a young, gray female wolf was taking her ease.
Three other young wolves, all black, soon came into view through the binoculars.
Now 19 weeks old, a little bigger than coyotes and nearly half grown, the four are part of a litter of eight, the first known reproduction by resident wolves in the Yellowstone ecosystem in seven decades and a signal step toward rescuing the gray wolf from the endangered list.


Pataki Seeking Lilco Breakup To Ease Rates
Kicking off the latest, and perhaps last round, in the tortured history of the Long Island Lighting Company, Gov.
George E. Pataki today called for the dissolution of the utility to reduce electricity rates on Long Island.
For Mr.
Pataki, the announcement represented a significant turnabout since last year's election campaign, when he derided the proposal by Mario M. Cuomo, then the Governor, for a state takeover of Lilco.  [ News analysis, page B6. ]


Visit by Pope Sets the Multitudes in Motion
It is no ordinary feat, the hosting and hailing of a Pope.
There are choirs to be assembled and hymns to be arranged, paths to be charted for motorcades and priests to be enlisted for the serving of communion to jampacked arenas of the faithful.
And then there is the shopping.


40,000 Are Delayed In a Train Mishap
More than 40,000 Metro-North commuters were up to three hours late getting home to Westchester County and Connecticut last night after a train became tangled in power lines between Harrison and Rye, N.Y., starting a chain reaction whose effects could linger through this morning.
The accident occurred shortly after 5 P.M., when a train bound from New Haven to Grand Central Terminal in Manhattan was switching tracks.


Designers Play the Flip Side for Fall
Fashion's latest revolution passed almost unnoticed, coming as it did not with the bang, bang, bang of the revolution just before it, but with a slow, soothing whimper.
Or maybe a coo is a better word.
After staging elaborate assaults on the runway each season, fashion has taken out balm and bandages.
The clothes for fall, in stores now, are meant to soothe not just battered fashion customers but also fashion's tarnished image.


Japanese Company Blinks As a Cherished Myth Cracks
Just as the purchase of Rockefeller Center came to symbolize what Americans perceived as the Japanese "threat" in the 1980's, the decision by the Japanese owner to walk away from its property is likely to come to symbolize the latest example of Japanese folly.
Like many other Japanese companies, the Mitsubishi Estate Company vastly overpaid for an American trophy property in the belief that real estate prices in the United States would continue ever upward, as they had been doing in Japan.


Meeting the Beatles Before They Were Fab
A collection of more than 40 previously unreleased studio recordings and live performances by the Beatles as well as a "new" Beatles recording is to be released by Capitol Records on Nov. 20.
The two-disk set, called "The Beatles Anthology, Vol. 1," is to be the first of three such compilations to be released by the middle of next year.
Its release is tied to the three-night television broadcast of "The Beatles Anthology" on ABC beginning on Nov. 19.
Like "Live at the BBC," the archival collection of BBC radio recordings released last December, the anthology will bring many recordings previously available on bootleg recordings into the official catalogue.
But it will also include several recordings that have never been available, even in bootleg form.


Governor Leans to Plan Once Scorned
Less than a year ago, in the heat of a tight race for governor, the Republican candidate, George E. Pataki, released a blistering radio commercial attacking Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's proposal for a state takeover of the Long Island Lighting Company.
"It shows a blatant disregard for taxpayers and the fiscal stability of our state," an announcer intoned.
"This cynical deal rips off upstate taxpayers who get nothing but the bill. And it's not even good for the taxpayers on Long Island."


Robinson: 'Old Brains,' Young at Heart
Grambling Coach EDDIE G. ROBINSON who has won more games (398) than any other college football coach, said that he contemplated retirement 20 years ago.
"I had started planning about 20 years ago to be prepared to step down," said the 76-year-old Robinson at a news conference yesterday at a Manhattan restaurant.
"You know sometimes people just decide that after Saturday's game I will retire. My wife and I have discussed this thing about retirement."


3 Top Officers Resign at AST; Big Loss Is Seen
In the latest sign of AST Research Inc.'s continuing struggles, the computer maker asked three senior executives to resign yesterday and forecast that it would likely lose more than $40 million this quarter.
The company announced the management shake-up and revised its financial forecast after the close of the market.
AST shares fell 25 cents yesterday, to $12.75, in Nasdaq trading.


Woosnam Replaces Olazabal on Cup Team
Europe's Ryder Cup team lost one Masters champion yesterday and gained another.
Spain's JOSE MARIA OLAZABAL, the winner at Augusta last year, was forced to withdraw from the 12-man team because of a recurring injury to his right foot.
He was replaced by IAN WOOSNAM of Wales, the 1991 Masters champion.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13 FAULT LINES OVER NATO BOMBING The cruise missile attack on the Bosnian Serbs is revealing the disagreements among NATO members as well as with Russia, historically an ally of the Serbs, which stepped up its opposition.
A1 A LETDOWN IN SARAJEVO In the capital of Bosnia, under siege for so long, the movements toward peace with the Bosnian Serbs do not sit very well.
People see some services restored, but an undercurrent of anger remains.
A12 DON'T BANK ON IT IN RUSSIA Banking in Russia has turned out to be a risky business for people who are looking for a safe place to keep their money, with little regulation and institutions that vary greatly in strength and dependability.
A1 FACE-OFF IN BEIJING George Bush, in Beijing for a meeting, had disparaging comments to make about Bella Abzug, there for the world women's conference, and she said it was an effort to belittle the conference.
A3 Appeasing China, President Clinton will not see the Dalai Lama.
A3 POLITICAL VOID IN INDIA The assassination of Rajiv Gandhi, India's former Prime Minister, remains on many people's minds both because of the need for new leadership and because questions about the killing remain.
A6 A dire warning about United Nations finances.
A13 An army unit shows the ragged seams of European unity.
A12 Thousands of Palestinians expelled by Libya remained stranded.
A8 An agenda for discussions with rebels was reached in Mexico.
A5 London Journal: Is the pigeon lady a threatened breed?
A4 National A14-21 AMERICANS STAY PUT The Census Bureau said that fewer Americans are pulling up their roots and moving out of state than at any time since 1950.
A1 U.S.
ASKED TO GIVE ALASKA JOBS Alaska's two senators are pushing a bill that would require the Federal Government to provide Southeast Alaska with 2,400 timber jobs.
A14 SKYDIVING CRASH INVESTIGATED Investigators examined the wreckage of a skydiving plane that crashed into a house in Virginia on Sunday, killing 12 people.
A14 TRUCK LAWSUITS SETTLED The General Motors Corporation settled four lawsuits resulting from fatal crashes and fires involving pickup trucks, lawyers said.
A16 SIMPSON DEFENSE PROTESTS Lawyers for O. J. Simpson refused to rest their case after the judge would not let them strike portions of Mark Fuhrman's testimony.
A17 CLINTON SPEAKS ON EDUCATION The President told a university crowd in Illinois that in the changing global economy "unless we better educate our people, too many of them will be left behind." A18 BLOW TO SERVICE CORPS President Clinton's national service corps suffered another blow when a Senate panel voted to give it no money.
A18 WILSON PULLS OUT OF IOWA Gov.
Pete Wilson pulled the plug on his Presidential campaign operation in Iowa, scene of the first major 1996 caucus.
A18 POWELL REVEALS OPINIONS Gen.
Colin L. Powell, speaking in a television interview, said he favors abortion rights, affirmative action and gun control.
But he said he still did not know whether he wanted to run for President.
A19 SETBACK FOR WELFARE MOTHERS The Senate rejected a Democratic effort to provide $11 billion for child care for the welfare mothers required to work under the Republican welfare plan.
A20 VOTE TO CUT ENVIRONMENT BUDGET A Senate panel voted to cut the budget of the Environmental Protection Agency by nearly $1 billion in the next fiscal year.
A21 Metro Digest B1 LEAVING A LANDMARK In a striking retreat by a Japanese investor, the Mitsubishi Estate Company plans to walk away from its investment of almost $2 billion in Rockefeller Center.
A1 STAGING A PAPAL BLOCKBUSTER For millions of Catholics in New York and New Jersey, Pope John Paul II's Oct. 4 visit presents a rare opportunity to see the Holy Father.
For officials organizing the visit, it presents a logistical challenge staggering in scale and detail.
A1 PATAKI BACKS LILCO DISSOLUTION In the latest chapter in the tortured history of the Long Island Lighting Co., Governor Pataki endorsed dissolving the utility to reduce Long Island electricity rates.
A1 CHANCELLOR CONCESSIONS SOUGHT Seeking an extraordinary concession of power by an incoming school chancellor, Mayor Giuliani will support only candidates who agree that City Hall should control the budget of the school system and school safety, a mayoral aide said.
A1 Business Digest D1 Science Times C1-12 Fashion Page B8 Sports B9-14 Obituaries D23 Arts/Entertainment C13-18 Hermitage catalogue is a hard-won hit.
C13 From the Beatles.
C13 Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23 Editorials Unanswered Medicare questions.
Settler violence in Israel.
Mr.
Giuliani's fair solution.
Judicial primary choices.
Letters Russell Baker: Bush-league strutting.
A.
M.
Rosenthal: For American worth.
Patrick Mayhew: Ireland's path to peace.
Spurgeon M. Keeny Jr.: The arms race is on.
Chronicle B2 Chess B4 Crossword C17


Corrections
Because of a transmission error, two pictures in SportsMonday yesterday, showing Pete Sampras striking the ball in the United States Open tennis final, appeared in mirror image in some copies.
Sampras is right-handed, not left-handed.


Defeat for Child-Care Aid in Welfare Bill
The Senate rejected a Democratic effort tonight to provide $11 billion for child care for the poor in a Republican bill intended to require welfare mothers to work.
The vote was 50 to 48, with Democrats holding ranks and picking up the support of two Republicans, Senators James M. Jeffords of Vermont and Ben Nighthorse Campbell of Colorado.


New French Phone Chief
The board of France Telecom, the state-controlled telephone company, nominated Michel Bon yesterday to lead the company, replacing Francois Henrot, who abruptly resigned last week, a week after he was named to the post.
Mr.
Bon, 52, who directed Agence Nationale Pour L'Emploi, the national job placement agency, is taking the position in a time of disagreement on how soon the Government can undertake a partial sale of the company. (Bloomberg Business News)


Inquiry Reignites Saatchi Dispute
The dispute between Maurice Saatchi and his former agency company has flared anew as a British Government agency investigates possible insider trading of shares in the company, then called Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C. and since renamed Cordiant P.L.C.
The Department of Trade and Industry in London is looking at trading during December and January, when Saatchi &amp; Saatchi was thrown into turmoil by the ouster of Mr.
Saatchi, its former chairman, and the resignation of several other top executives.
During that time, as the stock was falling 30 percent, many executives sold stock; those included Mr.
Saatchi and his brother, Charles, who together sold all their holdings, about 1.8 million shares.


Poignant and Hulking, A New Rigoletto
Before the Saturday matinee performance of Verdi's "Rigoletto" at the New York City Opera, there were telltale signs that the company's mind was elsewhere.
As the orchestra warmed up, amid the din of Verdian fragments you could hear various players practicing riffs from Hindemith's three-hour opera "Mathis der Maler," with which the company had opened its season on Thursday night in trying circumstances and to generally poor reviews.
On Saturday, the contributions of the orchestra and chorus seemed dispirited, despite the excellent efforts of Joseph Colaneri, the conductor, who paced Verdi's score with dramatic savvy and chose effective tempos, measured enough to allow breathing room, but directed and supple.


The Looney Tunes Factor; Why Time Warner and Turner Are Crazy About Cartoons
Eight billion dollars to make sure that Bugs Bunny has room to run?
Of all the stated and implicit rationale and the supposed synergies driving Time Warner Inc.'s plan to acquire Turner Broadcasting System, Looney Tunes may make as much sense as any.


Prisoner Frustration Grows as Programs Vanish
To the Editor:
There has been much media coverage about the planned protest in New York State prisons (news article, Sept. 6) but virtually no coverage of legitimate concerns about prison conditions.


State Less Taxing on Business
A bill that makes New Jersey's corporate tax rate for small businesses the lowest in the Northeast was signed into law yesterday, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's office said.
The new law reduces the tax rate for businesses with a net annual income of $100,000 or less to 7.5 percent from 9 percent.


Richard Tobin, 85, Veteran Journalist
Richard L. Tobin, a reporter and editor for The New York Herald Tribune and an editor and executive of The Saturday Review, died on Sunday at a nursing home in Southbury, Conn.
He was 85.
At The Herald Tribune from 1932 to 1956, Mr.
Tobin was a reporter, editor, war correspondent and assistant to the publisher.
At The Saturday Review for 16 years beginning in 1960, he was managing editor, executive editor, associate publisher and senior vice president.


Noh With Firelight Near a Park Castle
"Takigi-Noh '95," presented by Umewaka Rokuro and Company on Friday night at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park, promised much.
Mr.
Umewaka is a celebrated performer and director of Noh, the ancient Japanese theater form known for the intensity and refinement of its poetic suggestion.
The idea of Noh performed outdoors by the light of bonfires, as is Takigi-Noh, sounded like an irresistible use of the Delacorte, with its backdrop of woods and a distant castle.
But much of the program fell oddly flat.
And it was performed on a stage bright with lights.
The evening opened on an impressively ceremonial note, with the bonfires symbolically lighted by George C. Wolfe, producer of the Public Theater, and by dignitaries representing New York City, the United Nations and the Japan-United States Partnership for the Performing Arts Inc., the co-producer of the event with the Public.
And the two pieces presented had great comic and tragic possibilities.


Book for Hermitage Is a Hard-Won Hit For U.S. Publisher
From the moment Paul Gottlieb was shown into a locked, dark storage room in the Hermitage late last September in St.
Petersburg, he knew he had a hit on his hands.
In front of Mr.
Gottlieb, the president of the publishing house Harry N. Abrams, were 74 breathtaking Impressionist and Post-Impressionist paintings seized in Germany during World War II.
Most had never been seen by the public, and the Russian authorities had not even acknowledged their existence despite foreign press reports about them.
Early this year, the glimmer in his eye became "Hidden Treasures Revealed," the catalogue for the landmark show on view in St.
Petersburg.
And Abrams is glowing over a book that is selling around the world like nest-egg dolls on Russian street corners.
Some 170,000 copies of the book are in print, and Abrams began organizing another printing of 50,000 copies even before Mikhail B. Piotrovsky, the director of the Hermitage, announced last Tuesday that he was extending the show by four months, through next March.


Nebraska's Phillips May Get Another Chance
Amid an escalating series of legal problems for the University of Nebraska's championship football program, Coach Tom Osborne yesterday left open the possibility that running back Lawrence Phillips might eventually rejoin the team, despite his arrest Sunday on assault charges.
According to The Omaha World-Herald, Osborne made the suggestion during a previously scheduled appearance at a luncheon.
"I'm not giving up on him yet," Osborne was quoted as saying of Phillips, although the coach did not describe when or how a possible return would be determined.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Mitsubishi Plans to Scrap Stake in Rockefeller Center Mitsubishi Estate plans to walk away from its investment of almost $2 billion in Rockefeller Center and pass ownership to the real estate investment trust that holds the $1.3 billion mortgage on the bankrupt property.


A Natural Leap, With Bachian Beethoven
More and more, the pianist Vladimir Feltsman seems to be emulating his older Russian pianist colleague Vladimir Ashkenazy.
Now 43, Mr.
Feltsman, like Mr.
Ashkenazy at that age, has become increasingly involved with conducting.
It's a natural leap for a pianist who does as much concerto playing as Mr.
Feltsman, at least in the Classical period repertory, for which conducting from the keyboard was once standard practice.
On Saturday night Mr.
Feltsman also demonstrated the state of his skills as a symphony conductor during a concert with the excellent Orchestra of St.
Luke's, the main event of the annual Friends of the Arts Beethoven Festival at the bucolic Planting Fields Arboretum in Oyster Bay, L.I.


Getting Ready for the San Gennaro Festival


His Eye on China, Clinton Skips a Formal Meeting With Dalai Lama
White House officials said today that President Clinton would not schedule a meeting with the Dalai Lama during the current visit of the exiled Tibetan leader despite a unanimous Senate vote urging him to do so.
In what supporters of Tibet said was a sign of the Administration's eagerness to placate China while frayed relations are on the mend, the White House said that Vice President Al Gore would meet the Dalai Lama on Wednesday, but that Mr.
Clinton would drop in only if he had the time.


Syndication Gravy Train Adds Cars
If the commercial networks are no longer such big shots, one reason, of course, is cable.
But another is the decades-old marketing device of syndication.
Increasingly more aggressive in sale techniques and occasionally more imaginative in content, syndicated shows account for a huge chunk of the schedule outside of network prime time.
The mix includes talk shows, game shows and those reruns that will keep Lucy, Archie and the Brady Bunch alive forever.
Syndication's programming palette is a glorious hodgepodge, beginning with the off-network reruns that produce the out-of-sight profits producers were unable to reap on their original and costly network runs.
Syndication is the gravy train of television.
Just ask Bill Cosby.
Or consider Tim Allen and his "Home Improvement" series, which began a syndicated run on Fox last night.


Giuliani Now Favors Leasing, Not Selling, Three Hospitals
The Giuliani administration would now prefer to lease three city hospitals to the private sector, rather than selling them outright, the city's top attorney said yesterday.
Paul A. Crotty, the city's Corporation Counsel, said long-term leases for the three hospitals now up for sale -- Coney Island Hospital and the Queens and Elmhurst hospital centers -- would allow the city to retain a voice in their management.


Mr. Giuliani's Fair Solution
The Feast of San Gennaro, New York's best-known street fair, is going to open on schedule Thursday.
The festival's books will be audited by a former Federal prosecutor to make sure the proceeds are given to charity, and not -- as was alleged by a grand jury -- to organized crime.
This happy resolution is due to Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, who took what his aides called "an inflexible position" that the celebration would not open until the city could be assured that the money was going where it should go.
Inflexibility -- often an undesirable trait in a mayor -- turned out this time to be just the right approach.


Newark Schools Begin Push to Lift Scores
In preparation for the opening of schools today, Anzella K. Nelms, an assistant superintendent, squeezed into a child's desk surrounded by nine elementary teachers at Warren Street School, her right hand brandishing a sheaf of charts and bar graphs showing disastrous spring test results.
She singled out these teachers because the sixth grade reading scores at Warren Street dropped calamitously in one year, from 74 percent passing statewide tests to just 33 percent.
As a teacher started to mumble an explanation, Mrs.
Nelms cut her off.


What's Next, Boardrun?
It took 60 years, but Parker Brothers, the makers of the Monopoly board game, finally set the record straight in a ceremony yesterday on the boardwalk: it's Marven Gardens, not Marvin.
Charles Darrow, who invented the popular board game, misspelled the name of a neighborhood in Margate that combines the first three letters of that town with the first three letters of Ventnor.
Both communities are near Atlantic City.


Pickens Removes Himself From Mesa Severance Plan
T.
Boone Pickens, the chairman and chief executive of Mesa Inc., said today that he would exclude himself from a "golden parachute" severance plan that had been criticized by dissident investors seeking to take over the company or to have it sold.
In a Sept. 8 letter to Mesa's nine directors, Mr.
Pickens said that the dissident group had been "vocal in its criticism of our retention program, using my inclusion in the plan as their lightning rod."


Stocks Continue to Gain, With Dow Climbing 4.22
Stocks extended their broad advance yesterday, with traders focusing on corporate earnings growth.
"Capital continued to come in from the sideline," said Alan Ackerman, senior vice president of Fahnestock &amp; Company.
"The momentum is so strong that major bears appear to be turning into reluctant bulls. We were seeing lots of short covering," meaning traders were rushing to buy shares to repay loans; they had sold borrowed shares in the expectation prices would drop.


No Headline
"I've got no idea if I'll get my money back. I'm resigned to losing it. But if I do get it back, I'll change my rubles into dollars and hold on to it myself." VLADIMIR A. SHCHERBAKOV, who lost his $500 deposit in a Moscow bank.  [ A10:3. ]


CHRONICLE
How do you celebrate a combined 210 years on this planet?
Very quietly but festively, if you are one of the Delany sisters, whose life story is being played out on Broadway in "Having Our Say."
Dr.
A.
ELIZABETH DELANY, who is known as Bessie and was a dentist, turned 104 on Sept. 3, and SARAH L. DELANY, who is called Sadie and was a home-economics teacher, will be 106 on Sept. 19.


INSIDE
'Sting' Nets Hackers
A computer bulletin board covertly run by the United States Secret Service led to the arrests of at least six suspected hackers.
Page B1.
Wilson Retreats in Iowa
Gov.
Pete Wilson of California withdrew from the Presidential competition in the Iowa caucuses after a poor showing in polls.
Page A18.
U.S.
Cold War Coup
From 1960 to 1972, the Soviet Union could not hide from a remarkable system of U.S. spy satellites.
Now the story can be told.
Page C1.
A Bacterial Threat
Health experts fear that the evolution of drug-resistant bacteria may soon outstrip the development of new drugs.
Science Times, page C1.
New Jersey Bank Merger
In New Jersey the UJB Financial Corporation agreed to acquire the Summit Bancorporation for stock worth $1.1 billion.
Page D1.


Bear Rally Teases, But Falls Just Short
The Green Bay Packers' offense had set the standard in Soldier Field all night.
It started on fire, with 21 consecutive points and with a jaw-dropping 99-yard touchdown pass from Brett Favre to Robert Brooks.
In the end, though, the Packers' defense was required to keep things hot.
With 1 minute 59 seconds remaining and with the Bears in the midst of a furious rally, the Packers monstrous end, Reggie White, did some meddling.
He burst into the pocket and grabbed the arm of Bears quarterback Erik Kramer as Kramer was looking downfield to pass.
Kramer wound up looking at the ground, where Packers linebacker Wayne Simmons was recovering the ball that had been stripped from Kramer by White.


Great View, Unsurprising Game (Everyone's an Analyst)
The 107th-floor observation deck of the World Trade Center echoed yesterday with exclamations, though not the usual oohs and aahs at the awe-inspiring view.
Rather, it was full of the ardent kibitzing of the chess mavens, as hundreds of them -- from lofty grandmasters to lowly "patzers" -- gathered for the first game of the world championship match between the current titleholder, Gary Kasparov of Russia, and his Indian challenger, Viswanathan Anand.
After nearly three and a half hours and 27 moves, the first game, which produced few surprises and experts characterized as cautious but interesting, ended when Mr.
Kasparov offered a draw and Mr.
Anand accepted.
The score of the match is thus 1/2 point for each player; the first player to reach 10 1/2 points wins.


Woodward Field Vanishing Around Turn
The field for the $500,000 Woodward Stakes, which had already lost Thunder Gulch, the winner of the Kentucky Derby, was further reduced yesterday when Concern was withdrawn and the number of starters shrank to the favorite Cigar plus maybe four other horses.
Concern, who won the Breeders' Cup Classic last year, was withdrawn by his trainer, DICK SMALL, after a dull workout at his home base in Maryland.


40,000 Riders Are Delayed On Railroad
More than 40,000 Metro-North commuters were up to three hours late getting home to Westchester County and Connecticut last night after a train became tangled in power lines between Harrison and Rye, N.Y., starting a chain reaction whose effects could linger through this morning.
The accident occurred shortly after 5 P.M., when a train bound from New Haven to Grand Central Terminal in Manhattan was switching tracks in what ought to have been a routine move.
Instead, the rooftop mechanical arm that links the train with overhead power became fouled in at least two 11,000-volt lines.


1995 Emmy Award Winners
Here is a list of the 1995 Prime-Time Emmy Awards announced on Sunday night in Pasadena, Calif.:
Drama series: "N.Y.P.D. Blue," ABC.


A Well-Known Hat Bobs at Women's Conference
In a plush hotel ballroom this morning, far from the conference site where thousands of women were caucusing over how best to achieve equal rights, former President George Bush addressed a gathering of food production executives today in his famously rambling, half-sentence style.
The subject inevitably came around to the United Nations Fourth World Conference on Women under way here, and Mr.
Bush singled out a favorite Republican target at a conference he described as damaging to the Chinese Government: Bella Abzug.


Kotite Aims to Develop a Killer Instinct in Jets
First the Jets had a case of the nerves and were thrashed by the Dolphins, 52-14.
And now, after his club blew a 21-point lead Sunday and lost in overtime to the Colts, Coach Rich Kotite is addressing the killer instinct.
The Jets don't have it.
"In all my years I've been in football, I've never seen so many opportunities to put a team away," Kotite said today of the 27-24 loss to Indianapolis.


Signet Jewelry Has Loss
Signet P.L.C., the British jewelry company that is under siege from dissident investors who are seeking to break it up, reported yesterday a narrowing of its loss for the first half of the year.
Signet, which makes most of its money in the Christmas season and normally reports a first-half loss, had a pretax loss of $:21.3 million, or $32.9 million.
That was down from a loss of $:25.9 million a year ago.
Sales fell 2 percent in Britain and were flat in the United States, where Signet's Sterling unit is the second-biggest jewelry retailer. (Reuters)


N.B.A. Taking a Timeout For Decertification Results
Eagerly but anxiously, National Basketball Association officials, owners, players and union officials plus assorted lawyers and agents await the results today of the union decertification election.
With the N.B.A. season hanging in the balance, three members of the National Labor Relations Board's New York office will count the votes publicly at 2 P.M.


Vitamin E May Fight Heart Disease, Too
VITAMIN E, a potent antioxidant that can help keep cholesterol from clogging arteries, may also protect against heart disease and stroke by preventing blood clots, a new study of its biochemistry suggests.
Although vitamin E has long been known to have some anticoagulant properties (people with bleeding problems are cautioned against taking supplements of it), this clot-breaking ability has largely been ignored by researchers studying its potential role in combating cardiovascular deaths.


Primaries Today
There will be several primary elections for local offices and judgeships today in New York State, New York City and Connecticut.
Polling hours are 6 A.M. to 9 P.M. in New York City and the following counties: Erie, Orange, Rockland, Westchester, Nassau and Suffolk.
Elsewhere in the state they are from noon to 9 P.M.
Polling hours in Connecticut are 6 A.M. to 8 P.M.


New Jersey to Start Inquiry on Prudential
The New Jersey Insurance Department said yesterday that it would start next week to review documents from the Prudential Insurance Company of Newark in an investigation into Prudential sales practices.
New Jersey, which is leading the special examination into Prudential, said the insurer had agreed to provide information on 45 million transactions involving four million to five million life insurance policies issued in 1990 through 1994.
The company was asked on Aug. 15 to provide the documents; the study is expected to be completed by the end of the year.


Robinson, Cook, Sabetzki Named to Hall
LARRY ROBINSON, who spent 17 season as a defenseman with the Montreal Canadiens, was unanimously selected yesterday as a member of the Hockey Hall of Fame in Toronto.
Robinson is in his first season as head coach of the Los Angeles Kings after serving as an assistant with the Devils.


Paramount Settles Buchwald's Compensation Suit
After seven years of legal wrangling, Paramount Pictures and Art Buchwald have agreed to settle a compensation dispute from the film "Coming to America," with Mr.
Buchwald and a co-plaintiff, Alain Bernheim, being paid more than $1 million.
The settlement, which has been accepted by a state appellate court in California, ends a battle that began in 1988, when Mr.
Buchwald, the syndicated humor columnist, and Mr.
Bernheim sued Paramount for breach of contract.
They contended that the film, which starred Eddie Murphy, was based on a two-page treatment that Mr.
Buchwald had sold to the studio in 1983.


London Journal; Zanies? Here They're Eccentrics and Proud of It
To some, the story of Jean Knowlson carries a troublesome message about modern Britain.
Mrs.
Knowlson, 68, is not known as "the pigeon lady of Purley" for nothing.
What began as a harmless hobby, feeding pigeons, turned into a full-time compulsion.
Soon she was spending most of her day dispensing giant sacks of bread crumbs.
The house where she lived in South London became covered in bird excrement.
Neighbors were awakened at dawn's first light by a thunderous whirring of wings.


Financing Plan Causes Olivetti Shares to Plunge
The shares of Olivetti S.p.A., the Italian computer maker, fell sharply yesterday and company factories were hit by strikes in response to a revamping plan and a huge capital increase announced by the company.
Shares of Olivetti closed at 1,262 lire, down 144 lire, or 10.2 percent, in trading in Milan.


METRO DIGEST
DEMANDS MADE IN SEARCH FOR CHANCELLOR Seeking an extraordinary concession of power by an incoming schools chancellor, Mayor Giuliani will support only those candidates for chancellor who agree that City Hall should control the budget of the school system and school safety, a top mayoral aide said.  [ Page A1. ] PREPARING THE WAY FOR POPE'S VISIT It is no ordinary feat, the hosting and hailing of a Pope.
Mario M. Cuomo's proposal for a state takeover of Lilco.
News analysis.  [ B6. ] NEW YORK CITY  JUDGE CONSIDERS  FATE OF GIGANTE Two portraits of Vincent Gigante, considered by prosecutors to be the city's most powerful mobster, were offered as a Federal judge in Brooklyn began hearings to determine if Mr.


Senate Panel Votes to Cut E.P.A. Budget
A Senate subcommittee voted today to cut the budget of the Environmental Protection Agency by nearly $1 billion in the fiscal year that begins in three weeks, but it did not trim as much money or impose as many restrictions on the agency as the House did last month.
The recommendations, which are to be considered by the full Appropriations Committee on Wednesday and on the Senate floor as early as next week, would reduce by hundreds of millions of dollars the Federal aid to states for financing sewage and water treatment plants, the cleanup of hazardous waste dumps and other purposes.


Want Job Security? Obviously, You Don't Start for the Giants
A sense of concern spread through the Giants' locker room today.
Part of the uneasy feeling was a result of Sunday's bitter overtime loss to the Kansas City Chiefs.
More important, some players fear they could lose their jobs.
How concerned is Coach Dan Reeves?
The offense, defense and special teams gathered this afternoon for an unprecedented marathon meeting that began about 2 P.M. and ended around 6:45 P.M.


Mira Barer-Hopkins, 44, Environmentalist
Mira Barer-Hopkins, a former deputy commissioner of the New York City Department of Environmental Protection, died on Saturday at a Manhattan apartment she had been subletting while undergoing medical treatment.
She was 44 and lived in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
Dr.
Barer-Hopkins, known professionally as Dr.
Mira Barer, had pancreatic cancer and was in New York City for treatment at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, The Miami Herald reported yesterday.


CHRONICLE
Could there be a message in the music video taped yesterday by MARLA MAPLES TRUMP?
Mrs.
Trump and NAOMI CAMPBELL, the model, went to a castle with a moat in Lloyd Harbor, L.I., to film the video version of a song from the new Bruce Roberts album, "Intimacy." The song's title: "When the Money's Gone." The lyrics ask, "Will you still love me when the money is gone?"


Self Magazine Editor Named
Rochelle Udell, a longtime publishing executive who has held many senior creative positions at Conde Nast magazines since 1972, has been named editor in chief of Self magazine, replacing Alexandra D. Penney.
Ms.
Penney, the magazine's editor for the last six years, said on Aug. 29 that she was resigning but would stay until a successor was chosen.
James Truman, the editorial director of Conde Nast Publications, a unit of Advance Publications, said he made that choice on Friday.


Between Love and Money, A City Chooses Gambling
YOU won't hear locals call Niagara Falls "the World's Honeymoon Capital" anymore.
The ads for heart-shaped tubs on Motel Strip are quaint reminders of the old days, when the "No" in the vacancy signs were always lit.
Even the souvenir shops have pulled postcards with wedding themes off the racks.
Not that couples no longer visit.
They do; but few stay.
And the same is true of families and bus tours.
Hotels have already started laying off workers for the winter.
There is little chance they will be needed.
While more than eight million people poured into town last year, even at the height of the tourist season, the average visit was little more than a day.


'Innocent' Files Can Carry a Virus
A NEW kind of computer virus has descended upon the world.
How easy is it to create one?
Fifteen minutes after opening a Microsoft Word reference manual, I had cranked out a one-line program that could eliminate crucial system files from a hard drive.
After an hour I had adapted the program to run automatically whenever anyone opened a file called HELPFUL.DOC.
By bedtime I had figured out how to get this file to transmogrify Word itself so it would embed my trick program in any document it opened.
In an evening, I had created a virus of my very own.
This is scary stuff.
Lacking the skill and knowledge to create a classic computer virus, I managed to put together this new kind with relative ease.
Scarier still is that if I can do it, millions of others can too.


JAPANESE SCRAP $2 BILLION STAKE IN ROCKEFELLER
The Mitsubishi Estate Company of Japan plans to walk away from its almost $2 billion investment in Rockefeller Center, the Hope diamond of world real estate.
Mitsubishi proposed yesterday afternoon that it pass ownership of the Manhattan property to Rockefeller Center Properties Inc., the publicly traded real estate investment trust that holds the $1.3 billion mortgage on the center, according to advisers involved in the negotiations to bring Rockefeller Center out of bankruptcy protection.


New Data: Stars Still Seem Too Old
NEW measurements of galactic distances have confirmed paradoxical findings last year that the universe appears to be younger than some of the stars in it.
And this has astronomers worrying more than ever that there may be something wrong with elements of their standard theory of cosmic evolution.
Using observations by the Hubble Space Telescope, astronomers in England and the United States made calculations showing the age of the universe to be 9.5 billion years, give or take 1.1 billion.


3 Keys to Devils' Cup Miss Opening Practice
The Devils opened training camp today, but their defense of the Stanley Cup is already plagued by distractions.
Three of the team's top players -- Claude Lemieux, Martin Brodeur and Scott Niedermayer -- were missing.
Lemieux, the most valuable player in last season's playoffs, was suspended for not honoring the four-year, $5.2 million contract that was faxed to him on March 22.
Brodeur and Niedermayer are unsigned free agents.


A 'Traviata' in City Opera's More Utilitarian Mode
The New York City Opera gets so much attention for its efforts to explore unusual repertory like Hindemith's "Mathis der Maler" that it is easy to forget the company's other missions.
Offering opportunities for young, mostly American singers and conductors to be heard in the standard repertory is one of them; making opera accessible by making it affordable is another.
The company's production of Verdi's "Traviata," which had its first performance of the season on Saturday evening, is a reminder of the City Opera's more utilitarian side.
It is also a reminder that as adventurous as the company can be with its rarities, it feels constrained to offer safe, noncontroversial readings of the classics.


Female Muslim Guard Reinstated at Rikers
Under pressure from the Justice Department, New York City has agreed to reinstate a Muslim woman who was dismissed from her job as a guard at Rikers Island after she refused for religious reasons to frisk male prisoners.
The decision came in response to a lawsuit brought by the Government on the behalf of the 30-year-old woman, Everlina Lee of Dumfries, Va.
The Justice Department decided to sue after the Federal Equal Opportunity Commission determined that Ms.
Lee's complaint had merit.


Consolidation By Taco Bell
The Taco Bell Corporation unit of Pepsico Inc. said yesterday that it would consolidate its account, previously divided between Bozell Salvati Montgomery Sakoda in Costa Mesa, Calif., and the Richards Group in Dallas, at Bozell Salvati.
The billings were estimated at $155 million.
Amy Sherwood, a spokeswoman for Taco Bell in Irvine, Calif., confirmed a report of the change this week in Adweek.
She said the company had decided to consolidate the account at Bozell Salvati, which is part of Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon &amp; Eckhardt, "to focus creative energies at one shop." Though the account was first split about evenly between the two agencies, Bozell Salvati was recently awarded added duties that had been handled by Richards.


Anand Leads the First Game to a Draw
In the first game of the Professional Chess Association's World Championship Match yesterday, Gary Kasparov of Russia, the champion, and his challenger, Viswanathan Anand of India, agreed to a draw after 3 hours 20 minutes of play.
In 27 moves, neither created a position unbalanced enough to be worth pursuing.
With the white pieces, Anand, who usually treats Kasparov's provocative play with black by coming on hard with ingenious attacks, played cautiously in the quiet, manuevering style of Kasparov's erstwhile rival, Anatoly Karpov.
If he intended to wear down his opponent's patience, his plan did not work.
Sometimes a player just wants to accustom himself to the crowd and the surroundings on the first day.
Maybe that was also Anand's idea.


One Last Loving 'Sh-Boom'


Media Services For Shop Network
Affiliated Advertising Agencies International in Aurora, Colo., a network of independent shops known as 3AI, and Media That Works, the media services company, have formed a joint venture under which Media That Works will provide media services -- including planning, buying, auditing, training and consulting -- to 3AI member agencies as needed.
The venture, as yet unnamed, will be based at the Cincinnati office of Media That Works and be supervised by a board of managers composed of representatives from 3AI and Media That Works.


UJB Will Buy Summit Bank In New Jersey
The UJB Financial Corporation announced an agreement yesterday to acquire the Summit Bancorporation for about $1.1 billion of UJB stock, to create the second-largest banking company in New Jersey after First Fidelity, and one that could be attractive to acquirers.
The new bank will take the Summit name, but its chief executive, T. Joseph Semrod, and a majority of its board will come from UJB, the parent company of the United Jersey Bank.


Clinton Urges Fight to Keep Student Loans
Seeking to rally public support for student loan programs, President Clinton told a cheering university crowd here today that in the changing global economy "unless we better educate our people, too many of them will be left behind."
The President struck populist tones in attacking bankers and Washington lobbyists, as he fought for a program enacted by Congress in 1993 over the objections of banks to let the Government make direct college loans to students, who have a longer time than under the previous system to repay them.


Alexander-Jardine Deal
Alexander &amp; Alexander Services Inc., a New York-based insurance brokerage firm and consulting company, said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire most of the United States retail insurance brokerage and consulting businesses of Jardine Insurance Brokers Inc. of Britain.
The purchase price is not to exceed $54 million, half of which is payable in cash on closing, Alexander &amp; Alexander said.
Jardine's marine business based in New York City and other businesses in Latham, N.Y., are not included in the transaction.
Jardine is part of Jardine Matheson Holdings Ltd., which is based in Bermuda. (Dow Jones)


Alaska Republicans Push Subsidy for Logging
The rivers rushing from the steep, misted forests of the Alaska Panhandle are clogged with salmon, as a massive surge of coho moves upstream to spawn and die.
In towns like Sitka and Ketchikan, the once-rowdy docks are similarly clogged -- but with tourists, disgorged by the thousands from cruise ships.
All summer long, restaurants have been full.
Hotels and lodges have been booked.
Seafood processors are rushing to harvest, freeze and ship out some of the prodigious protein that courses through saltwater inlets here.
Never before have there been so many jobs in Southeast Alaska.


Corrections
A picture caption on Saturday with an article about the appointment of two former members of the Newark school board to a panel advising state officials who assumed control of the school system misidentified the school where a teacher discussed preparations with an assistant executive superintendent.
It was the Ann Street School, not Warren Street.


25 Nobelists Join to Save Institute
WITH the National Institute of Standards and Technology facing possible extinction at the hands of a budget-cutting Congress, 25 American winners of the Nobel Prize in Physics and the presidents of 18 scientific societies joined yesterday in an 11th-hour plea to save the institute.
Representatives of the group said they knew of no instance in which so many prominent American physicists had shown such unity.


Women Less Optimistic About Work, Poll Says
When it comes to the world of work, the mood of America's women appears to have taken a pessimistic turn.
They believe overwhelmingly that while women are better off than they used to be, they continue to face restrictions and discrimination, according to a new poll to be made public today.
Of the 3,000 women polled, 84 percent agreed that "regardless of changes that may have occurred, women still face more restrictions in life than men do." A total of 77 percent said that sexual discrimination, although more subtle and less open than it used to be, "remains a serious problem."


New Tricks Introduced For a Cause
Benefit concerts can bring out unusual behavior in performers.
Freed from the responsibility of being a sole headliner, they can try new things or team up for one-time-only collaborations, even if fans still yell for the hits.
At the Paramount on Sunday night, Pete Townshend played piano in public for the first time; Paul Simon sang harmony with him on "The Kids Are All Right." Wynton Marsalis, famed for his jazz purism, lent trumpet solos to "You Can Call Me Al"; in the same song, Annie Lennox delivered a verse in a thick Scottish accent, while Mr.
Townshend suddenly turned into a hoofer.
The concert raised $850,000 for the Children's Health Fund, which provides medical care for poor children.


Ready for Work in Space


Executive Changes
ACTION INDUSTRIES, Pittsburgh, said R. Craig Kirsch had resigned as chairman, president and chief executive.
The company said its board had elected T. Ronald Casper acting president and chief executive and Joel Berez chairman.
JOS.
A.
BANK CLOTHIER INC., Hampstead, Md., named David Ullman chief financial officer.


Bands Coming of Age In Front of Audiences
As young bands gain experience through touring, their performances change.
Some groups change because they get used to playing in front of an audience.
Others decide to express themselves in a different way, or start making more money that can then be invested in their stage show.
There were examples of all three of these cases when Live, P. J. Harvey and Veruca Salt played here tonight, closing Jones Beach's summer concert series.
When Live performed in New York last year at Irving Plaza, supporting its album "Throwing Copper" (Radioactive), the lighting was simple, as was the performance, which emphasized songs over theatrics.
Since then, "Throwing Copper" has hit No. 1 on the pop charts, and Live's performance has been overhauled to conform to the band's new stature.
At Jones Beach, Live played as if it had been attending the college of arena-rock, and shopping at the school store.


A Political Debate in a Cemetery
Although there is talk of peace in Sarajevo, few of the citizens visiting the Martyr's Cemetery seem overjoyed by the news.
On Sunday, pulling weeds from the graves of loved ones and friends, Sarajevans at this former park remembered the dream of an independent, unified Bosnia and spoke with resignation of the peace agreement signed last Friday in Geneva that seems to have dashed the idea.


Turner Is Said to Want a Deal by Friday
Ted Turner, the chairman of Turner Broadcasting System, is hoping for a final agreement for the sale of his company to Time Warner Inc. by Friday, when Turner is to hold its next regular board meeting, an executive close to Turner Broadcasting said yesterday.
Mr.
Turner has some reason for optimism.
Over the weekend, Time Warner's chairman, Gerald M. Levin, met in Denver for more than six hours with John C. Malone, the chief executive of Tele-Communications Inc., the company that controls the Liberty Media Corporation, which in turn owns a 21 percent stake in Turner Broadcasting.
Liberty can effectively veto a sale of Turner, and Mr.
Malone has been seeking a favorable deal if it agrees to sell its Turner shares.


Tape in Simpson Trial Hurts Blacks Most; No Rogue Officer
To the Editor:
I must take issue with your headline "Racism of a Rogue Officer Casts Suspicion on Police Nationwide" (front page, Sept. 4).
For Mark Fuhrman to be fairly characterized as a rogue officer, you would have to have evidence he operated alone, without cooperation or complicity by his peers or superiors.


Unanswered Medicare Questions
The Republican Congressional leaders have not yet revealed their full plan for Medicare reform.
But the provisions unveiled so far indicate that they have not figured out how to cut 20 percent of the future cost of Medicare without damaging health care for the elderly and, perhaps, everyone else.
The Republicans boxed themselves in when they promised to balance the budget in only seven years.
That pledge, in turn, forced them to go after Medicare for a whopping $270 billion.
House Speaker Newt Gingrich offered some thoughts over the weekend about how the Republicans can hit their target, and the picture that emerged looked unrealistic.


Make No Mistake About It, Milbury Is in Charge of Isles
Mike Milbury did not take long to put his stamp on an Islanders practice.
Early in Milbury's first official session as head coach of the team, he got into the face of the first-round draft choice Wade Redden, the No. 2 pick over all in this year's National Hockey League draft.


For Congressman, It's Time to Leave


Tropical Storm Delays the Arrival of the QE2
The cruise liner Queen Elizabeth 2, encountering the howling winds and battering seas of a fading Tropical Storm Luis on a trans-Atlantic crossing early yesterday, had to reduce speed and, though apparently undamaged, will arrive late in New York today and will return to Europe a day late, the Cunard Line said.
While plowing through the heavy weather south of Newfoundland, the ship, carrying 1,200 passengers and 1,000 crew members from Southampton, England, and Cherbourg, France, diverted its course by 16 miles in response to another vessel's distress signal, adding to the delay, Cunard and the Coast Guard said.


Wanted: Women in Politics
Women high school and college students will be encouraged to become active in politics during a ceremony today to honor women who have served in the Legislature.


Market Place; Lehman Looks 'Cheap,' and Vulnerable
Wall Street likes Wall Street.
Reasoning that Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc. is undervalued and may be a takeover target, stock traders have recently bid up the price of shares in the Wall Street investment bank.
Lehman's stock has climbed almost 20 percent from mid-August to $23.50 a share yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange.
So far this year, Lehman's shares have risen almost 60 percent from less than $15 a share at the start of January.
Lehman shares have also outpaced those of most other investment banks, which as a group have risen about 43 percent this year, on the back of the steady rise in the stock market.


Corporate Giants Tighten Their Hold on U.S.; Decay of Family Unit
To the Editor:
Lester C. Thurow (Op-Ed, Sept. 3) identifies wage stagnation in the United States economy as the principal cause of family breakup and paternal abandonment.
Numerous elected officials, from President Clinton to Richard Gephardt, the House minority leader, also cite economic anxiety due to wage stagnation as the underlying cause of family fragmentation.
Yet little evidence exists to support this thesis.


Unit Is Revamped By Bear, Stearns
Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, reorganized its fixed-income division yesterday after a series of senior departures.
It named Craig Overlander head of fixed-income sales, Kevin J. Finnerty to lead the firm's mortgage department, and Peter Cherasia to head its financial analytics and structured transactions group.
All three executives are already directors of the Bear Stearns Companies, the firm's holding company.
The appointments, which were expected, follow the recent departures of Matthew J. Mancuso, who headed fixed-income sales; John C. Sites Jr., who managed the mortgage department, and R. Blaine Roberts, who previously worked alongside Mr.
Cherasia as co-head of that department.


Blinded by Science? Labor Talks on Move
The so-called labor negotiations have turned into a roadshow: Have law degree, will travel.
For several weeks, small groups of lawyers for the owners and the players have traveled to Pittsburgh, Detroit, New York and Milwaukee (twice) for meetings and have emerged, both sides agree, with better chemistry than negotiators had during the players' eight-month strike.


Charles Hitch, 85, Dies; Led Turbulent U. of California
Charles J. Hitch, who served as president of the University of California at a time of campus unrest, budgetary restraints and legislative and administrative intervention, died yesterday in a rest home in San Leandro, Calif.
Mr.
Hitch, who lived in Berkeley, Calif., was 85.
An economist and Rhodes scholar who compiled an impressive record in academic and administrative posts, Mr.
Hitch came to the nation's largest education institution -- then nine campuses with an enrollment approaching 90,000 -- from the Pentagon.
As an Assistant Secretary of Defense from 1961 to 1965 in the Administrations of John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson, Mr.
Hitch was the controller who revolutionized military budgeting and prepared detailed military spending plans that accounted for roughly 55 cents of every dollar taxpayers paid the Federal Government.


COMPANY BRIEFS
INTEGRATED PROCESS EQUIPMENT CORP., San Jose, Calif., a maker of semiconductor processing equipment, said it would acquire Gaard Automation Inc., Portland, Ore., a computer chip manufacturing concern, for about $28.5 million.
PELICAN COS., Conway, S.C., agreed to buy Sunbelt Cos., Greenville, S.C., for about $24.9 million, or $7.95 a share, in cash.
Both companies are building-products retailers.
SIGMA CIRCUITS INC., Santa Clara, Calif., a maker of computer circuit boards, said it would acquire privately held Citation Circuits Inc., for a combination of cash, stock and debt with a value of $16 million.
NATIONAL MEDIA CORP., Philadelphia, an infomercial company, agreed to acquire DirectAmerica Corp., Oxnard, Calif., an informercial production company, for $7 million in stock.


Wilson Ends Race in Iowa, Moving Effort to Northeast
Lagging in public-opinion polls and scrambling for money, Gov.
Pete Wilson today pulled the plug on his Presidential operation in Iowa, scene of the first important contest in the 1996 race, and announced that he would instead concentrate on the early primaries in New Hampshire and elsewhere in the Northeast.
Campaign aides said Mr.
Wilson had concluded after a poor finish in a recent Republican Party straw poll in Iowa that it would take too much time and money to recover there and make a "reasonable" showing in the Feb. 12 caucuses, despite their traditional importance.


McDowell Leads Wild-Card Charge
The Indians have the best record in baseball.
The Yankees have Jack McDowell.
The Indians have the best offense in baseball.
The Yankees have McDowell.
The Indians have the best pitching in their league.
The Yankees have McDowell.
Tonight, McDowell was superior to the awesome team that could snatch the World Series, guiding the Yankees to a 4-0 victory.
As uncomfortable as this season has been when the Yankees have underachieved, one of the most comfortable feelings for Buck Showalter lately is the vision of McDowell striding to the mound in a tense situation.
With a serious gaze, almost a full beard and a nasty repertory of pitches, McDowell is dominating batters and making everyone in the dugout dream of a wild-card berth.
He made sure Cleveland would not add to its phenomenal catalogue of comebacks.
Tonight, he was the best.


State Moves to Oust Co-op City President
State housing officials have begun proceedings to remove the president of the corporation that runs the Co-op City housing development in the Bronx, saying that she went beyond the bounds of her power by unilaterally hiring and firing executives and making management decisions.
In taking the action, the state has jumped into a bitter political fight that has split the leadership of the complex just as it is undergoing a renovation of its utility system.
The state oversees Coop City's finances.


So Many Candidates, So Few No. 1 Spots
The United States Open is already infamous for its excesses: too noisy, too crowded, too expensive, too windy, too much hamburger grease, and, according to the event's surly sanitation scout, the third-ranked Thomas Muster, too much garbage wafting through the air over this metropolitan landfill site.
Leave it to the Open, then, to come up with too many champions.


4 Years After the Killing of Rajiv Gandhi, Doubts Persist
Monsoons have muddied the field, and construction of a permanent memorial is stalled until the rains end.
But still the crowds come, by bus and rickshaw and car, to pause where a suicide bomber assassinated Rajiv Gandhi four years ago.
For India, Mr.
Gandhi's death remains an open sore.
Although he was no longer Prime Minister when he was killed, and faced an uphill struggle to win the election he was contesting when he died at a rally in this small town outside Madras, his death left a political void.
For all but three short periods since 1947, his family, the Nehrus and the Gandhis, had led India's Government.


By Design; Nestled in Nylon
The nylon jacket, the height of fashion and functionalism, could be on everyone's shopping list for fall.
Women beguiled by shine will find the outerwear attractive as well as a good buffer against the cool fall air.
For men, a well-designed nylon jacket adds dash to the most mundane suit and tie and can do double duty by moving easily to the weekend.
The best unisex styles are found in men's departments.
Saks Fifth Avenue has Iceberg's black three-quarter-length jacket with turquoise snap-out lining for $750.
At Searle, an iridescent khaki topper from Stone Island ($695) also has a removable lining.


Mets Close Roadshow: Nostrums, Not Hits
In retrospect, Bill Pulsipher and the Mets didn't have much of a chance against Pedro Martinez and the Expos tonight at Olympic Stadium.
Forget that the Mets had won the first three games of this series and were looking for their first four-game sweep of the Expos since 1991.
Martinez beating the Mets is about as sure a thing as hearing French spoken in Montreal.
Martinez beat the Mets for the third time this season and improved his career record against them to 7-0 with a masterly four-hit shutout witnessed by a crowd of only 9,715.


TV Interview Adds a Few Pieces to Powell Puzzle
Gen.
Colin L. Powell favors abortion rights, affirmative action and gun control.
He opposes organized prayer in the schools and objects to the Clinton Administration's lack of consistency in foreign policy.
He still does not know whether he wants to run for President and, if he does, whether he should do so as a Republican, an independent or even as a Democrat.
Those are the among the disclosures that General Powell makes to Barbara Walters in an interview scheduled to be broadcast on Friday night on the ABC News program "20/20." Highlights from the interview were made public today by ABC News.


To Support a Schools Chancellor, Mayor Demands Budget Control
In a sweeping bid for power that roiled the search for a schools chancellor, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said last night that he has decided to support only those candidates who agree that City Hall should control the budget of the school system and school safety.
Already, one leading candidate who refused to meet the conditions has withdrawn under mayoral pressure.
Mr.
Giuliani confirmed last night that he had met privately with three other candidates.


The Chess Column
During the match between Gary Kasparov and Viswa nathan Anand, the Tuesday chess column by Robert Byrne will not appear.
The column will resume after the match.


U.S. No Longer A Land Steeped In Wanderlust
A smaller percentage of Americans are pulling up their roots and moving out of state than at any time since 1950, the Census Bureau said today, suggesting that the great post-war population shifts that reshaped the country's political, social and economic landscape have, for the moment, come to an end.
The Census Bureau's figures show an overall decline in Americans' mobility.
It said that about 16.7 percent of the population changed residences during a one-year period ending in March 1994, far below the 20 percent that moved in a typical year during the 1950's and 1960's and the second-lowest level of mobility since 1948 when the Census Bureau began tracking such movement.
The percentage of people moving from one state to another dropped to 2.6 percent from 3.6 percent.


CHRONICLE
Never mind the mall or the bookstore.
To promote his new autobiography, Senator ALFONSE M. D'AMATO is going to a loftier setting: Harvard University.
Senator D'Amato, the New York Republican, is to speak at the Kennedy School of Government on Monday.
The title of his talk is identical to that of his book, "Power, Pasta and Politics," published last month by Hyperion.
And he will take an hour to sign copies at the Harvard Coop, the university store in the heart of Harvard Square.


Pataki Eases on Jobs Shift
Gov.
George E. Pataki sidestepped a major battle with state employee unions, as well as the top Republican Senator, by announcing yesterday that he would scale back plans to move roughly 4,500 state jobs from the Albany area to Kingston, about an hour to the south.


Charles Denner, 69, French Star Of Truffaut and Lelouch Films
Charles Denner, a French stage and film actor who is best remembered for his role in Francois Truffaut's screen comedy "The Man Who Loved Women," died on Sunday at a hospital near his home in Dreux, west of Paris.
He was 69.
No cause of death was given, but he had been fighting cancer for more than a decade.


Corporate Giants Tighten Their Hold on U.S.; Homemaker Nostalgia
To the Editor:
Re "Companies Merge; Families Break Up" (Op-Ed, Sept. 3): Lester C. Thurow correctly points out that the decline in men's wages is a major cause of family change.
But he implies that the answer to family break-up and child neglect is to shore up male wages and restore the "traditional" family.
While better jobs for all is a desirable goal, returning to a system of male breadwinning is an unworkable and, for many families, undesirable solution.


Seduction. Greed. Puffery. CBS is eager to welcome you to 'Central Park West.'
YOU'RE traveling through another dimension, a dimension not only of sight, sound and mind but of hyperbole, hoopla and puffery.
You're moving into a wondrous land where shadow often overshadows substance.
That's the signpost just up ahead -- your next stop, "Central Park West."
O.K., so CBS won't be promoting a big new television series by rewriting the introduction to a beloved old one.
But short of spiriting Rod Serling from "The Twilight Zone" to a publicity tour of the Upper West Side, the network is undertaking all types of unorthodox marketing tactics to build buzz, that invaluable yet ephemeral word of mouth, for "Central Park West."


Two More Swimmers Drowned
The summer death toll at New Jersey beaches climbed to 14 over the weekend after a Pennsylvania man drowned while swimming in turbulent waters while no lifeguard was present.
John Robert Esbenshade, a Lancaster County dairy farmer and chairman of the East Lampeter Township Planning Commission, died Sunday afternoon.


Mother Gets 75 Years for Smothering 5 of Her Children
Telling Waneta E. Hoyt that she owed her only surviving child the truth about her actions, a judge today sentenced her to at least 75 years in prison for smothering her five other children a quarter-century ago when they were infants.
"Mrs. Hoyt, I only have one thing to say to you, and that is consider your sixth child," Judge Vincent Sgueglia said as the Hoyt family, including a 19-year-old adopted son, Jay, sat in the Tioga County courtroom here in Owego, about 25 miles from Ithaca.


Settler Violence in Israel
Militant Jewish settlers in the West Bank have been among the most irreconcilable opponents of Israel's peace agreements with the Palestine Liberation Organization.
As citizens of a democratic country, that is their right.
But last weekend, two gangs of settler militants took their opposition to the point of criminal violence.
On Friday, masked men dressed as Israeli soldiers murdered a Palestinian in his home near Hebron.
A militant group later claimed credit.
Then, on Sunday, a group of settlers angered by the display of a Palestinian flag on a girls' school in Hebron attacked the school, beating up its headmistress and several students.


Dissecting Family Secrets With a Sharper Scalpel
ANOTHER YOU By Ann Beattie 323 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $24.
When we first meet Marshall and Sonja Lockard, the husband and wife at the center of Ann Beattie's arresting new novel "Another You," they simply feel like older versions of the characters in her earliest fiction: aimless, passive folks, afflicted with a free-floating sense of alienation and seemingly doomed to live in a continuous present, exiled from the past and future and cut off from each another.


WIDER NATO RAIDS ON SERBS EXPOSE RIFTS IN ALLIANCE
The cruise-missile attack launched against Bosnian Serb air defenses on Sunday has exposed emerging fault lines within the NATO alliance as well as deepening those with Russia.
France and Italy have expressed some concern about the intensification of the attacks to force the Bosnian Serbs to break the siege of Sarajevo.


Ireland's Path to Peace
For a year now, there has been peace in Northern Ireland.
Not total peace, but peace enough to transform the life of the people, to bring unemployment down steeply, and to create real optimism about the chances of achieving a lasting peace.
A summit meeting of the British and Irish Prime Ministers was due to take place last week.
But the Irish Government postponed the meeting after problems arose with the intricate negotiations.
These talks are intended to move the peace process forward to the point where we can then convene negotiations that include all the major political parties.
That postponement was a disappointment, but our determination to continue the search for a settlement remains undiminished.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
4.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.75
5.67
4.73
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.33
5.34
4.61
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.32
5.33
4.99
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.21
6.21
7.44
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.58
6.57
7.71
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.53
7.55
8.58
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.03
6.03
6.47
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Inquiry Begins on Crash of Sky Divers' Plane
Investigators started work today on the wreckage of a plane ferrying sky divers that crashed into a house in eastern Virginia on Sunday evening, killing the 11 people on board and a man who relatives say was reading the Bible on his porch.
"You have one engine and a pretty good-sized piece of the tail," said Michael Benson, a spokesman for the National Transportation Safety Board.
"The rest is meltdown -- just small pieces."


2 Women Sexually Attacked on East Side
Two young women visiting from Sweden who were entering an Upper East Side apartment building early yesterday were sexually attacked and robbed by a man brandishing a gun, the police said.
The attack was the third brutal crime in two months against women in an area generally perceived as among the safest in the city.
In one of the attacks, a reclusive 49-year-old woman was raped and killed just two blocks from where yesterday's attack took place.
Officials said, however, that they did not believe any of the cases were related..


Tape in Simpson Trial Hurts Blacks Most
To the Editor:
Re "Race, Lies &amp; Audiotape" (Week in Review, Sept. 3):
After listening in horror to the Mark Fuhrman tapes in the O. J. Simpson trial last week, I was disheartened to discover that you chose to write about the events from a white perspective.
Does it not trivialize the true victims of racist attitudes to write about white angst over the "R word" (racism)?


Patterns
Charm of a Little Bad Taste
In the trade it's called an item-driven collection.
Calvin Klein's runway show yesterday for CK Calvin Klein, his bridge line, was just that, a display of little cardigans, translucent dresses, short box-pleated skirts and stretch knee-length straight skirts.
Bridge or lower-price collections are generally not agents of change but rather -- from more advanced designers like Mr.
Klein, Donna Karan and Anna Sui -- fashion weather vanes.


Sports of The Times; Why Can't Champions Stay Clean?
IS it possible to win the national college football championship without scandal?
Will we ever again watch so-called scholar-athletes celebrating on a field around New Year's Day without wondering how soon that university, that team, that coach, those players, will be in disgrace?


Legalizing Syringes Won't Curb Drug Abuse
To the Editor:
Re "Time to Legalize Syringe Sales?" (editorial, Sept. 5): In Connecticut "addicts reported a hefty 39 percent decrease in sharing of needles" when state laws were changed to allow pharmacies to sell syringes.
Does anyone believe that the testimony of drug addicts commenting on their own behavior can be relied upon as fact?


Idols of the Grunge Circuit, But Only on School Break
The members of Silverchair are living every high school rocker's dream.
They are three 15- and 16-year-olds from Australia who have grown their hair long, listened to a lot of Pearl Jam and Soundgarden (and maybe a bit of the Sex Pistols and Deep Purple) and recorded an album in less than two weeks that entered the Australian charts at No. 1 and is currently No. 12 in America.
Now they get to travel the western world (only during school vacations, of course), performing for capacity crowds.
On Friday night at the Academy, Silverchair proved that its youth has little to do with its success.
Performing nearly every song from its album, "Frogstomp" (Epic), the band motored through heavy 70's jams updated with angst-ridden punk choruses.
Daniel Johns has learned a battery of techniques to get a big sound from his guitar.
He played with distortion effects, scraped his hands along the guitar neck and picked high, rattling notes on the strings near his tuning pegs.
Ben Gillies came down on his drum set with all the power he could muster while Chris Joannou paraded all over the stage, spitting out fast, heavy bass lines as if he were playing along with a Slayer record.


Far Above Manhattan, a Silent Battle Begins
In a soundproof enclosure on the 107th floor of the World Trade Center, the chess champion Gary Kasparov, right, and his challenger, Viswanathan Anand, began their battle for the world title yesterday.
Page B4. (Jim Estrin/The New York Times)


Corrections
The Pulse chart yesterday about hurricanes misstated the strength of storms that hit the Atlantic and Gulf Coasts from 1900 through 1995.
The correct figures, based on the Saffir/ Simpson scale of hurricane intensity, are 68 hurricanes of Category 1 strength, the weakest level assigned by the National Hurricane Center; 35 of Category 2; 44 of Category 3; 15 of Category 4, and 2 of Category 5.


Spy Satellites' Early Role As 'Floodlight' Coming Clear
CORONA.
Everything about it was beyond top secret -- its name and history, builders and operators, cameras and orbits, photographs and interpreters and, most important of all, what it snooped on from space.
As the world's first system of spy satellites, Corona was a cold war coup of extraordinary dimensions and it was officially and assiduously treated for decades as if it did not exist.
Until now.
The veil slipped in February when President Clinton declassified thousands of Corona's early photographs and documents.
It later fell further when reconnaissance pioneers spoke freely for the first time of their top-secret troubles and triumphs, revealing a series of surprises about the most highly classified of the nation's space programs.


Reputed Mobster's Faces: Very Sick or Very Clever
To prosecutors, Vincent Gigante is the city's most powerful mobster, a man who has ordered multiple murders and collected illegal millions.
To Mr.
Gigante's sons, as well as to his expensive lawyers, he is a sick, 67-year-old man, a schizophrenic haunted by imagined voices and hounded by ambitious prosecutors.
Both portraits were offered yesterday as a Federal judge in Brooklyn began hearings to determine if Mr.
Gigante, known as Chin, was physically and mentally capable of being tried on murder and racketeering charges.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about the Intel Corporation's sponsorship of the World Chess Championship misstated the relationship of Gary Kasparov, the champion, and Robert E. Rice, the commissioner of the Professional Chess Association, which is sponsoring the event.
Mr.
Rice, a lawyer, is not Mr.
Kasparov's personal attorney.


F.B.I. Sharpshooter Invokes Fifth Amendment at Hearing
An F.B.I. sharpshooter invoked his Constitutional right against self-incrimination today in refusing to tell a Senate panel how he shot and killed a white separatist's wife during a bloody 1992 confrontation on a remote Idaho mountain.
The marksman, Lon Horiuchi, appeared before a closed session of the Senate Judiciary subcommittee and formally asserted his unwillingness to answer questions.
His decision came after lawmakers refused to accede to a request by Mr.
Horiuchi's lawyers to grant him immunity from prosecution in exchange for his testimony.


New Ranking of Doctoral Programs Serves Up Familiar Names and a Few Surprises
In the nation's most comprehensive assessment of university doctoral programs, released yesterday, Harvard, Stanford and the University of California at Berkeley remain at the forefront of scholarly quality, but public universities and non-Ivy League institutions have made significant gains since the last rankings, in 1982.
The study is used as a guide to programs both by those who finance research projects and by students choosing graduate programs.
It is also used by faculty members and administrators to assess academic departments according to the quality of scholars and their academic effectiveness, including such measures as how long it takes to graduate and the percentage of women and minorities in the programs.


New Prudential Officer From New York Life
The Prudential Insurance Company said yesterday that it had hired William F. Yelverton, an executive at the New York Life Insurance Company and a former sales agent, to head Prudential's largest insurance subsidiary.
Mr.
Yelverton comes to Prudential at a time the company is plagued with customer complaints, lawsuits and investigations by state regulators about improper sales practices by its network of agents.
Insurance sales at Prudential dropped sharply last year and the number of Prudential agents selling to its bread-and- butter middle-income market has fallen to about 14,000 from 20,000 several years ago.


Of Tragedy and Truth, Caught in a Legal Tangle
A Civil Action  By Jonathan Harr  500 pages. Random House. $25.
Within the space of a few short years, beginning in the mid-1970's, several children and at least one adult who lived in the same neighborhood of the once-prosperous town of Woburn, Mass., died of leukemia.
"A Civil Action" is the story of the epic lawsuit that the eight families of the deceased filed against two companies, Beatrice Foods and W. R. Grace, whom they held responsible for poisoning the local water supply and thereby causing the deaths.


Computer Failures in Midwest Delay at Least 200 Airline Flights
At least 200 airline flights were significantly delayed around the country yesterday after an air traffic control computer near Chicago and then a second system failed, the Federal Aviation Administration said.
The main computer, which is 25 years old, normally handles nearly 10,000 planes a day through six Midwestern states.
It failed to restart correctly early in the morning, after it was shut down for repairs the previous night.
Then a second computer also briefly failed, which forced controllers to hold Midwest-bound planes on the ground around the country.


Love Theme Restaurants? Here's the Man to Thank
JOE BAUM, the innovative restaurateur, insists he never does the same thing twice.
That applies to Sunday's party, with entertainment by a quartet of juggling Joe Baum look-alikes in gray suits.
The jugglers, along with a dozen Radio City Rockettes, worked the Rainbow Room, one of Mr.
Baum's better-known projects, at a black-tie dinner in honor of his induction into the Hall of Fame at the Culinary Institute of America in Hyde Park, N.Y.
He shares the honor with seven others, including Julia Child, Paul Bocuse and Craig Claiborne.
As Ferdinand Metz, the school's president, put it, "We are celebrating Joe Baum's legacy of pleasure."


Calm Down: Mattingly Decides Not to Decide, Just Yet
Don Mattingly sensed the reporters nearing his locker today, so he invited them closer and asked them to be quick because he emphasized there was little to discuss.
Mattingly's innocent post-game words Monday night about playing zestfully over the next three weeks had been misconstrued by some observers to mean something more serious about his future, and he intended to end the confusion.
Mattingly said he has not made a decision about playing baseball in 1996, said that he did not mean the remaining 17 games would be his last as a Yankee and said he was focusing on New York's pursuit of the wild-card berth.
Nothing more needed to be construed, said Mattingly, whose vague words about his future were analyzed for the second time in less than a month.
The first instance involved him considering playing first base in Japan, another issue he later dismissed.


When the Smoke Clears, It's Still Reynolds
Dirk Herrman and Diane Roberts bill themselves as the co-founders and only employees of the Moonlight Tobacco Company, a new outfit in Advance, N.C., that is introducing a line of cigarette brands bearing funky names like Jumbos, Sedona, Politix ("Join the party!") and Bees ("Honey-toasted tobacco").
If smokers view Dirk and Diane as the Tobacco Road equivalents of Frank and Ed, the folksy fellows who sold Bartles &amp; Jaymes wine coolers, the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company will be happy.
Because 20 miles down the road from Advance, in Winston-Salem, N.C., is the headquarters of R. J. Reynolds, the nation's second-largest tobacco marketer -- and the parent of Moonlight Tobacco.


25 Years to Life for Doctor in Woman's Death After a Bungled Abortion
Focusing on what he called a Queens obstetrician's greed and incompetence, a judge sentenced the doctor yesterday to 25 years to life in prison for allowing a woman to bleed to death on an operating table after a botched abortion two years ago.
Justice Robert J. Hanophy of State Supreme Court lashed out at Dr.
David Benjamin, whose license was in the process of being revoked at the time of the fatal operation, for trying to perform the difficult second-trimester abortion on the woman, who was 19 to 20 weeks pregnant.


Foreign Affairs; Pipeline Politics
On Aug. 24, Emre Gonensay, the chief adviser to Turkey's Prime Minister, visited Georgia's leader, Eduard Shevardnadze, appealing to him to support plans for an oil pipeline that would go from Azerbaijan, across Georgia and out to market through Turkey rather than through Russia.
Mr.
Shevardnadze gave him Georgia's support.
Five days later a car bomb exploded near Mr.
Shevardnadze, nearly killing him.
Three days after that, Turkey's Prime Minister, Tansu Ciller, came to Tbilisi to see Mr.
Shevardnadze.
At their joint news conference, Mr.
Shevardnadze was asked if he thought the assassination attempt on him might have been related to the oil pipeline dispute.


U.S. Envoy Highlights Fine Print on Bosnia
Despite last week's agreement among the adversaries in Bosnia and an ongoing NATO bombing campaign, the chief American negotiator said today that the most basic issues of power sharing and territory are unresolved and that there is no guarantee any settlement will hold.
In an hourlong interview before flying to the Balkans for a new round of talks, the envoy, Richard C. Holbrooke, sought to dispel the optimism created by the agreement among the Bosnians, Croats and Serbs to create a Serbian republic within Bosnia and to accept the legal existence of the Bosnian state.


Mariners Win to Stay Close to Yankees
Mariners 14, Twins 3
Jay Buhner drove in four runs with two homers and Tino Martinez also drove in four runs last night to lead the Seattle Mariners to a 14-3 victory over the visiting Minnesota Twins.
The Mariners remained one-half game behind the Yankees in the American League wild-card race.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
My work necessitates a great deal of air travel, and I frequently find myself seated toward the back of the plane.
Recently, waiting to exit a plane that had just landed at La Guardia, I noticed a girl about 4 or 5, standing in the aisle next to my seat.
I smiled.
"Is it fun for you to ride on an airplane?" I asked her.
She looked up at me, then looked behind her and in a shrill, anxious voice yelled "Mommy! A stranger is talking to me." I was embarrassed and in my calm, most reassuring voice I said: "You have nothing to worry about; you're with your mom. Sometimes passengers who don't know one another just talk pleasantly when they're waiting to get off the plane."


Comcast Hires Ex-Disney Executive to Expand Programming
The Comcast Corporation, the third-largest cable operator in the nation, said yesterday that it had hired Richard H. Frank, a former executive at the Walt Disney Company, to expand the company's programming and communications businesses.
Comcast, which already owns QVC Inc., the home-shopping cable channel, hopes to expand into new areas of home-shopping programming, including educational shows, and might develop new cable channels and TV programming both here and overseas.


Giuliani Defines Issue: Control of School Budget
With his dramatic demand for direct control over the school budget, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has finally made it clear that the search for a new schools chancellor is not really about whether the next chancellor is an educator or a business leader, or how many bureaucrats lurk in numberless offices at 110 Livingston Street.
The issue is simply whether the Mayor or the Board of Education will run the schools, and the awkward maneuvering of the last two days has made it more difficult than ever to determine the outcome.


Watershed Moratorium at Issue
Whether to extend a building moratorium for the watershed areas that feed New Jersey's aquifers will be discussed today at a joint meeting of the Senate Environment Committee and the Senate Natural Resources Trade and Economic Development Committee in Kinnelon.
An 18-month moratorium that was imposed in 1988 to protect environmentally sensitive areas from development is still in place, depriving local governments with large watershed areas of tax revenue, said Senator Henry F. McNamara, Republican of Wyckoff and the environment committee chairman.


AT BREAKFAST WITH: The Archbishop of Canterbury; An Outsider And Leader Of the Flock
IN this paradigm of secular cities, the Most Rev.
George Leonard Carey, the 103d Archbishop of Canterbury and the spiritual leader of the Church of England, paused over breakfast in New York last week to challenge the notion that a secular society exists.
"When you think what's happened in this century, all the countries which have tried to bring about pure secularism have failed," Archbishop Carey said.
"Russia, China, other places where they tried to bring in doctrinaire atheism have not worked because the majority of people, in their hearts, believe in values, believe in something 'other.' "


No Headline
"If I can intimidate a candidate for chancellor, then the person shouldn't be chancellor. The person should be tough enough to be able to handle New York City." -- MAYOR RUDOLPH W. GIULIANI  [ A1:1. ]


Congressional Roundup: Democrats Try to Maintain Welfare Spending but Lose; Roth To Lead Finance Panel
Republicans today picked Senator William V. Roth Jr. of Delaware to succeed Senator Bob Packwood as chairman of the Finance Committee, elevating the four-term Republican to one of the most powerful jobs in Washington.
The 74-year-old Mr.
Roth, who was elected to the Senate in 1970 after serving four years in the House of Representatives, has been a member of the Finance Committee since 1973.
The committee has jurisdiction over many of the toughest issues facing Congress this year, including taxes, Medicare, Medicaid, welfare and international trade.


Corrections
An article yesterday about Bosnian Muslims' reaction to the latest Balkan peace initiative referred incorrectly in some copies to the ratio proposed for the partition of Bosnia.
The larger part of the 51-49 split would be for the Bosnian Government and its Bosnian Croat allies, not the Bosnian Serbs.


CHRONICLE
Need a new bauble or two?
Princess SALIMA AGA KHAN, the former wife of the Aga Khan, will sell a collection of jewelry valued at more than $10 million at auction on Nov. 13 in Geneva, it was announced by Christie's yesterday.
The collection of more than 250 pieces is considered to be the most lavish to come on the market since that of the Duchess of Windsor in 1987.
It includes a deep blue heart-shaped diamond known as the "Begum Blue" that is the centerpiece of a necklace of 41 heart-shaped diamonds.


William J. Lentsch, Theater Director, 53
William J. Lentsch, a theater director who worked Off Broadway, died on Saturday at his home in Valatie, N.Y.
He was 53.
The cause was heart failure, according to the Raymond E. Bond Funeral Home in Valatie.


INSIDE
N.B.A. Players Back Union
By an overwhelming margin, N.B.A. players voted against union decertification, increasing the chances the season will start on time.
Page B9.
Graduate Programs Rated
A study of doctoral programs placed Harvard, Stanford and the University of California at Berkeley at the forefront of quality.
Page B7.
New York's Sweatshops
In an unusual meeting, sweatshop workers told the Labor Secretary of their plight -- long hours, meager wages, cramped quarters.
Page B1.


Allergic to Latex? It's Also in the Air; To Manage Asthma
To the Editor:
"Asthma Common and on Rise in the Crowded South Bronx" (front page, Sept. 5) leaves a sense of hopelessness.
While the situation is dire, the American Lung Association is spearheading the effort to help those suffering from asthma.


Russia Fails In U.N. to Bar Raids on Serbs
Russia tried today to get the Security Council to call an immediate halt to NATO's bombing of the Bosnian Serbs, but its efforts failed because of a lack of support and in some cases outright opposition from other members.
The Russians sought to push the debate over Bosnia back to where it began, the Security Council, which had authorized the United Nations peacekeeping mission in Bosnia.
But the Security Council has found itself eclipsed since the Clinton Administration took the lead in trying to impose a negotiated peace in Bosnia.


Wine Talk
I CAN see the fellow out of the corner of my eye.
Thinking I'm distracted, he's getting ready to strike.
He edges closer, closer . . . now! . . . he makes his move.
In one smooth motion he scoops up the wine bottle on my table and gets into position to pour.
The kid is fast but I'm faster.
My hand shoots out and covers the glass.
He jumps back, surprised and confused.


U.N. Juggles Funds to Stay Afloat, Expert Says
The United Nations has run out of money to pay its regular operating expenses and is being forced to borrow from peacekeeping funds, which are also strained, an American accounting expert in charge of financial management here told a General Assembly committee today.
The regular budget ran out of cash in mid-August and $98 million has been borrowed from the peacekeeping budget since then, Joseph E. Connor, Under Secretary General for Administration and Management and a former chief executive officer at Price Waterhouse, told an oversight committee.
If nations in arrears do not pay their debts, the diversion of funds from peacekeeping will rise to $200 million by the end of October and to $300 million in November, he said.


What U.S. Business Wants From Immigration
To the Editor:
Re "Liberals Duck Immigration Debate" (Op-Ed, Sept. 7) by Michael Lind: American manufacturing no longer has an interest in maintaining a mass influx of unskilled, low-wage immigrants.
While a large number of unskilled laborers helped fuel the Industrial Revolution, the technology-driven plants and offices of today's competitive global economy require the expertise of skilled workers.


Should Dying Patients Be Told? Ethnic Pitfall Is Found
On some of the most fundamental issues of death and dying, some immigrant groups hold sharply different views from the American mainstream, posing difficult questions for doctors and hospitals, according to a study to be released on Wednesday.
The study of 800 elderly patients by the University of Southern California found that immigrants from South Korea and Mexico were far less willing to let patients make decisions about medical care than were either black or white Americans.


States Have a Place On the Data Highway
To the Editor:
Re "The Information 'Have Nots' " (editorial, Sept. 5):


Corrections
A list of 1995 Emmy Award winners yesterday and in some copies on Monday referred incorrectly to one award, for writing for a drama series.
Lance A. Gentile won for the "Love's Labor Lost" episode of "E.R.," not for the show's pilot.


Big Ninth Lets Yankees Outmuscle the A.L. Bullies
Could the best team in the major leagues be afraid of the once unpredictable and underachieving Yankees?
Maybe the Indians aren't scared, but they're definitely bothered because the Yankees are not so unpredictable and not so underachieving anymore.
The Yankees are peaking and streaking at precisely the right time.
Scott Kamieniecki pitched competently into the seventh inning tonight and the Yankees' offense took care of the rest in a 9-2 defeat of the Indians that continued New York's dominance at Jacobs Field.
The Yankees overcame a two-run deficit and errors by left fielder Darryl Strawberry and shortstop Tony Fernandez to register their 6th straight victory and their 13th in 16 games.
They also maintained their half-game lead over Seattle in the wild-card race.


2 High Corporate Appointments Announced by Times Company
David L. Gorham, chief financial officer and senior vice president of The New York Times Company, is being promoted to the new position of deputy chief operating officer.
Mr.
Gorham will be succeeded by Diane Price Baker, the chief financial officer and senior vice president of R. H. Macy &amp; Company.


Corrections
Because of a computer malfunction, a picture in some editions yesterday showing Waneta E. Hoyt, who was sentenced to 75 years in prison for the murders of her children, was printed in mirror image.
Ms.
Hoyt carried a bible in her left arm, not her right.


O. J. Simpson Jury Revisits the Gloves, A Stitch at a Time
After a dissertation on stitching, hemming, antique sewing machines and the properties of "naked" leather, a prosecution expert testified today that the distinctive brown leather gloves O. J. Simpson wore as a football commentator were the same model as those at the heart of the case against him.
Richard Rubin, a former executive at Aris Isotoner, said he was "100 percent certain" that the gloves that appeared to fit so snugly over Mr.
Simpson's hands in a photograph taken at the Cincinnati Bengals-Houston Oilers football game in January 1991 were identical to the crumpled, bloody gloves found on Mr.
Simpson's property and alongside the people he is charged with killing: extra large, brown Aris Lights, serial number 70263.


IN PERFORMANCE: DANCE
A Night of Improvisation Dotted With Preparation  Chris Aiken Dance Theater Workshop
The program note said that "Blues Suite: Underneath It All" had been choreographed in advance.
The other pieces offered by Chris Aiken on Friday night were improvisations.


Temerlin McClain Forms an Alliance
Temerlin McClain in Irving, Tex., has formed a strategic alliance with Cartel Creativo in San Antonio, an agency that specializes in advertising aimed at Hispanic consumers.
The terms were not disclosed.


Correction
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday by Sir Patrick Mayhew, Britain's Secretary for Northern Ireland, on the peace process in Northern Ireland misstated the relationship between the Irish Republican Army and several political parties.
Only Sinn Fein is associated with the I.R.A.


Nesconset Man Pleads Guilty to Murder in Strip-Mall Sniper Attacks
Admitting that he was the sniper who terrorized Suffolk County last summer by firing a high-powered rifle through the windows of restaurants and a gas station, a 25-year-old Long Island man pleaded guilty today to murder and assault.
The man, Peter Sylvester of 6 Midwood Avenue in Nesconset, fidgeted with his hands and rocked on his feet as he admitted under questioning by the Suffolk County District Attorney, James M. Catterson, that he had fired knowing that he might kill.


A New Unit Serves Clorox
The San Francisco offices of Foote, Cone &amp; Belding and Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. are teaming up with an important client of both agencies, the Clorox Company, to open a dedicated unit that will handle media planning on the Clorox account, with combined billings estimated at more than $140 million.


Lindros Is Still Learning the Game
A year ago, Brett Lindros was one of the intriguing stories of the Islander season.
But with a new coach and a number of new faces surrounding him, the younger brother of the best player in the league has somewhat faded into the background.
For now.


Law Secretary Wins Primary For Judgeship
A state Assistant Attorney General and a State Supreme Court law secretary were among the winners in last night's primary elections for Civil Court judgeships in New York City.
While voters cast ballots for nominees for 15 Civil Court judgeships, only 5 were contested in the Democratic primary.
There were no Republican candidates for judgeships.
No primaries were held in the Bronx or Staten Island.


BOSNIAN MUSLIMS SAID TO PUSH BACK REBEL SERB FORCES
As NATO warplanes took advantage of clearing skies to pound Serbian targets near Sarajevo, the forces of the Bosnian Government were reported to be exploiting the weakened position of the Bosnian Serbs to retake small parcels of territory.
In attacks over the last several days, the Bosnians retook an important route to their industrial center of Tuzla and launched small operations, some in conjunction with their Bosnian Croat allies, on several fronts in central and western Bosnia.


Two More Quit As Candidates For School Job
A day after Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said he would support only those candidates for schools chancellor who agreed that he should control the finances and security of New York City's schools, two more candidates withdrew abruptly from consideration yesterday, with one citing the bitterness between the Mayor and the Board of Education.
Nevertheless, Mr.
Giuliani strongly defended his role in the chancellor search, saying he would continue to meet with candidates to screen out those who opposed him on the two issues he said were "vitally important, as I see it, to the future of the school system."


He Saw It Coming From 99 Yards Away
The eagerness was evident in his eyes.
They were sharp, darting, glowing eyes that were wide open.
They were eyes that unveiled an awareness that made it easier to concentrate, to hold on to the football, to see things clearly.
And this was after the game.


Cheap Rents For Officials Irk Italians
First came Tangentopoli, or Bribe City, the great wave of bribery and kickback scandals that led to the toppling of Italy's political elite.
Now comes Affittopoli, or Rent City, an end-of-summer scandal that in its own way has been just as revealing about the way Italian public officials regard special privileges as their due.
Kicked off by Il Giornale, a right-leaning newspaper based in Milan, the rent scandal has focused on prominent leftist politicians and union officials who pay low rents to live in apartments owned by Government pension funds.


Gore Assails Bill to Revise Telecommunications Laws
Vice President Al Gore leveled a blistering attack on legislation to reform the nation's communications laws today, amid signs that the legislation was bogging down in a busy Congress.
Speaking to an audience of telecommunications executives here, Mr.
Gore derided the bill passed last month by the House of Representatives as "a contract with 100 companies."


CHRONICLE
Moses comes to Washington: CHARLTON HESTON appeared at the Smithsonian Institution on Monday evening to address the Smithsonian Associates and incidentally to promote his autobiography, "In the Arena," published by Simon &amp; Schuster and to lament the soaring costs of making movies.
"Films cost far too much -- tens, hundreds of millions of dollars," he said.
"You can't do the epic now. You could never do 'Ben Hur.' You can never make musicals. And it's not worth fiddling with the smaller films."
Of the famous chariot race in "Ben Hur," he said: "It was fixed."


Roy Hemming, Writer, 70
Roy Hemming, a writer, critic and broadcaster specializing in music, film and video, died on Monday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in New York City.
He was 70.
The cause was multiple myeloma, said Dr. Craig Metroka.


CHRONICLE
When executives of Meigher Communications, the magazine publishing company in New York, learned that ANDREW HEISKELL, an adviser and friend, was to turn 80 today, "We decided we wanted to do something," JOE ARMSTRONG, the company's publishing director, said yesterday.
"What we didn't know was that everybody who ever met him wanted to give him a birthday party."
Indeed, one could be busy doing nothing but attend events honoring Mr.
Heiskell, the former chairman of Time Inc. and a leader of numerous civic and philanthropic organizations.


In Uncertain Times, the Kitchen Takes Stock
Just as near-death experiences prompt people to take stock and make resolutions, so the Kitchen, the experimental performing-arts center on West 19th Street in Chelsea, has been forced to do some soul-searching of its own.
The last few years have been precarious for this experimental institution, where Philip Glass, Laurie Anderson and Eric Bogosian, among many other avant-garde luminaries, had their beginnings.
It is by now a familiar story for smaller arts spaces: government financing has shrunk, as have corporate contributions, while audiences are dwindling.
Even a slight rise in ticket prices hasn't helped much.
In the face of a mortgage of more than $1 million on its space, the Kitchen has been frighteningly close to going under.


F.B.I. Gunman Silent
An F.B.I. sharpshooter invoked his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination in refusing to tell a Senate panel how he killed a white separatist's wife during a 1992 shootout in Idaho.
Lawmakers had refused to grant the gunman immunity in exchange for testifying.
Article, page A19.


Congressional Roundup: Democrats Try to Maintain Welfare Spending but Lose; Cocaine Terms Unchanged
The House Judiciary Committee voted today to overturn a recommendation by the Federal Sentencing Commission to equalize penalties for possession of crack and powdered cocaine.
The five-member commission of judges and lawyers, which set sentencing guidelines for Federal crimes a decade ago and continually reevaluates them, concluded in February that there was an unfair racial disparity in the treatment of the two types of cocaine.


Food Notes
New Mexico Peppers
It's harvest time in Hatch, N.M., a town that is to fresh green chili peppers what Vidalia, Ga., is to sweet onions.
And Kitchen, 218 Eighth Avenue (at 21st Street), is flying in the freshly picked peppers and sells them for $4.95 a pound.
Hatch chili peppers, on the mild side, are about four inches long and wide enough to stuff.
What's New in Mushrooms
Smoked mushrooms are new on the food scene.
They are slightly moist and chewy, like sun-dried tomatoes, and are best moistened before use.
Shiitakes in six flavors are made by Franklin Foods, in North Franklin, Conn.
The more sharply seasoned varieties like maple spice, bayou spice, teriyaki and Italian are better than the somewhat acrid-tasting hickory and boubon.
Zabar's, at 80th Street and Broadway, has them in four-ounce packages for $6.95.
Durham's Tracklements in Amherst, Mass., has whole portobello mushroom caps three to four inches in diameter with a nice smoky taste.
They can be used whole or slivered in various dishes and, without prior soaking, are even good sliced in a salad.
The caps are $3 each, with a minimum of three caps, plus $3 shipping.
They can be ordered by calling (800)844-7853.
TriBakery Opens
TriBakery, 186 Franklin Street (near Greenwich Street), opens for retail business today.
It is something of an ultra-bakery with heavy-hitting backers like Robert De Niro, Christopher Walken, Bill Murray, Luther Vandross and the peripatetic Drew Nieporent.
The actual baking for TriBakery occupies the lower level, with David Norman from Grand Central Bakery in Seattle and David Blom from Montrachet in charge.
There is also an informal 125-seat restaurant, retail counters with baked goods, ice cream, prepared foods and sandwiches, plus a coffee and liquor bar.
Free Cider, Bargain Ice Cream
Food events this weekend include a free cider festival from noon to 5 P.M.
Sunday at Applewood Winery, 82 Four Corners Road, Warwick, N.Y., near Woodbury Commons For information: (914) 986-1684.
And ice cream prices will be rolled back to 1950 -- 25 cents a scoop -- on Sunday from noon to 5 p.m. at Vivian's Kitchen, a just-opened but authentically old-fashioned ice-cream parlor at 10 Prospect Street, in Westfield, N.J.
Moving Further Downtown
Broadway Panhandler has moved from Broadway and Spring Street to 422 Broome Street (near Wooster Street).
The new double loft space is well-stocked with cookware, baking utensils, cake decorating equipment and kitchen machines.
Off the Menu 50 Restaurants on the Way
Unlike some past seasons, this fall promises to be a time of feeding frenzy for food groupies who love to be the first in the reservation books.
About 50 new restaurants, from Wall Street to Harlem, are likely to open by the end of the year.
Newly open and running are 13 Barrow, 13 Barrow Street (Seventh Avenue South), with John Tesar, formerly of the Inn at Quogue in Quogue, L.I., as chef; Borgo Antico, 22 East 13th Street, rustic Italian; Motown Cafe, 104 West 57th Street, in a former Automat, offering homage to the Supremes, among others, and Bay Leaf, 49 West 56th Street, interpreting Indian cuisine.
In the newly renovated Kitano New York, 66 Park Avenue (at 38th Street), is the first American branch of Nadaman Hakubai, specializing in kaiseki tasting dinners.
Nadaman Hakubai has a dozen branches in Japan and five elsewhere in Asia.
Open and redecorated are a softer-looking Lutece, 249 East 50th Street; a newly carpeted Mulholland Drive Cafe, 1059 Third Avenue (62nd Street); Oceana, 55 East 54th Street, with handsome nautical decor and an upstairs oyster bar, and C. T., 111 East 22nd Street, with its bar moved to the front.
Chefs on the Move
Jean-Jacques Rachou, gearing up for next month's opening of La Cote Basque, has signed Richard Leach, who has worked at Aureole and Symphony Cafe, as his pastry chef.
And at the Mark Hotel, Raymond Bickson, the director, has hired Christophe Barbier as chef for Mark's Restaurant.
Mr.
Barbier who trained and worked in France, had been the chef at Fiorello's.


Congressional Roundup: Democrats Try to Maintain Welfare Spending but Lose; Blow to Legal Services Unit
The House Judiciary Committee effectively voted to abolish the Legal Services Corporation today, failing on a tie vote to approve legislation to keep the agency alive, albeit with much less authority and money, through the year 2000.
The 17-to-17 vote followed a lobbying blitz by the House Republican leadership on behalf of its favored proposal, which would break up the $400 million-a-year corporation and offer some of the money to states as block grants.


Order on Turnpike Strike Is Lifted
A Middlesex County judge lifted a restraining order yesterday that barred New Jersey Turnpike toll collectors from striking.
But the Superior Court judge, J. Norris Harding, issued his ruling only after leaders of Local 194 of the International Federation of Professional and Technical Engineers promised that the absence of a restraining order would not lead to a strike.
The turnpike authority and the toll collectors have been locked in often-contentious contract negotiations since workers' contracts expired at midnight July 2.


Golden Reunion for Prizefighter
Fourteen years ago, Howard Davis, a middleweight boxer, lost his 1976 Olympic gold medal in a burglary at his home in Dix Hills, N.Y., but yesterday the prizefighter and his prize were reunited.
For four years, the medal had been in the possession of Jay Fiesel, who spotted it while he was cutting the grass on the median strip of the Long Island Expressway.


Frances Roosevelt, Portrait Artist, 78
Frances Webb Roosevelt, a portrait artist who was the mother-in-law of Gov.
William F. Weld of Massachusetts, died on Monday at North Shore University Hospital in Glen Cove, L.I.
She was 78 and lived on the Roosevelt estate, Sagamore Hill, in Oyster Bay, L.I.
Mrs.
Roosevelt was the widow of President Theodore Roosevelt's grandson, Quentin Roosevelt.


Immigration Panel Proposes Fee For Bringing In Foreign Workers
A bipartisan Federal commission on immigration recommended today that companies pay "substantial fees" -- up to $10,000 -- when they recruit and hire some skilled foreign workers.
The panel, the United States Commission on Immigration Reform, suggested that paying such a fee would be a way for a company to demonstrate its need for a foreign worker, as opposed to an American one.
As a trade-off, the commission suggested streamlining the system by which a company certifies that it tried and failed to find an American worker to fill the job, a process that can take up to two years.


HORSE RACING: Going for Global Glory; Cigar's Camp Sets Its Sights Beyond the Breeders' Cup
He is named Cigar after an aviation checkpoint in the Gulf of Mexico, and he is taking the direct route to more honor and glory and money than any horse in racing history.
He is a sleek 5-year-old bay who has won nine races in a row on dirt after switching from grass, plus purses of $2.7 million and the inside track on succeeding Holy Bull as the Horse of the Year.
And his trainer, Bill Mott, who once pulled his 170 pounds into the saddle to ride him, says that no one can yet answer the question: How good a race horse is Cigar?


A Classmate Is Arrested In a Murder
When 25-year-old Christina Jung was found bludgeoned to death in her Fresh Meadows, Queens, apartment, the police at first suspected that the promising young bond trader had been killed by a burglar.
After all, they knew of no one who would want to kill her.
But several detectives were not so sure.
And yesterday, they announced a surprising twist in the case, saying they had charged one of Ms.
Jung's old classmates from the prestigious Stuyvesant High School, Jimmy Ng, in her death.


Eileen Chang, 74, Chinese Writer Revered Outside the Mainland
Eileen Chang, a popular novelist and short story writer whose finely honed psychological studies and precise language won her acclaim as a giant of modern Chinese literature, was found dead on Friday in the Los Angeles apartment where she had lived as a virtual recluse.
She was 74.
Friends said that Miss Chang, known to Chinese readers as Chang Ai-ling, had died of natural causes several days before her building manager discovered her body after becoming alarmed that she had not answered her telephone.


N.B.A. Players Support Union By a Landslide
By a margin that would have represented a runaway in one of their games, National Basketball Association players have voted to retain their union and secure the coming season.
A challenge to the vote, conducted by the National Labor Relations Board, could still derail Commissioner David Stern's plans for a smooth ride to the Nov. 3 start of the season, but there was doubt yesterday that the group of players pushing for decertification would file an objection.


Fluoride-Calcium Therapy Shown To Reverse Bone Loss in Study
A new slow-release form of fluoride and calcium can reduce spinal fractures and build bone in elderly women with a severe form of osteoporosis, researchers said today.
Scientists at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas announced final results of a clinical trial in which half the participants received the fluoride-calcium treatment and the rest received calcium and a dummy drug.
They said the results showed that the therapy reduced the incidence of spinal fracture by 70 percent.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  BOSNIANS RECAPTURE TERRITORY  As NATO warplanes took advantage of clearing skies, Bosnian Government forces exploited the weakened position of the Bosnian Serbs to grab back territory.
A1


Imitators Don't Flatter Famous Golf Courses
Just like the feared and revered par-5 14th hole at Pebble Beach, the fairway here doglegs sharply to the right.
The cup, exactly 565 yards from the tee, is reached through the same narrow, uphill gap of a green, wedged between two monster sand traps that have been the bane of some of the game's greatest players.
Elsewhere on the course is a faithful replica of the infamous, three-hole "Amen Corner" from the Master's course at Augusta, Ga., complete with dogwoods and azaleas.
There are also the 8th at Shinnecock Hills, in Southampton, L.I., the 3d at Pinehurst, in North Carolina, and the 18th at Doral, in Miami.


How to Top Doctorate Programs in the United States Are Ranked, by Discipline
Following are the rankings of graduate schools under two criteria from a study by the national Research Council.
The first dolumn indicates scholarly quality, as measured in part by a survey of faculty peers nationwide.
The second is effectiveness in teaching Ph.D.
Candidates.
Asterisks inidcate a tie.
U.C.-Berkeley . . . 2 1 Harvard . . . 2 8 U. of Virginia . . . 4 5 Duke . . . 5 . . . 10 Stanford . . . 5 . . . 4 Cornell . . . 7 2*
U. of Pennsylvania . . . 8 . . . 6 Columbia . . . 8 . . . 13 U. of Chicago . . . 10 . . . 7 Johns Hopkins . . . 11 . . . 9 FRENCH LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE Yale . . . 1 . . . 1 Princeton . . . 2 . . . 2 Duke . . . 3 . . . 8 Columbia . . . 4 . . . 5*
U. of Pennsylvania . . . 5 . . . 4 Stanford . . . 6 . . . 12 U.C.-Berkeley . . . 7 . . . 5*
Cornell . . . 8 . . . 3 U. of Michigan . . . 9 . . . 9 U.C.-Irvine . . . 10 . . . 27*
U. of Connecticut . . . 16 . . . 9*
MUSIC Harvard . . . 1 . . . 2 U. of Chicago . . . 2 . . . 1 U.C.-Berkeley . . . 3 . . . 4*
C.U.N.Y.
Graduate School 4 . . . 9*
Yale . . . 5 . . . 4*
Princeton . . . 6 . . . 3 U. of Pennsylvania . . . 7 . . . 9*
U. of Rochester . . . 8 . . . 6*
U. of Michigan . . . 9 . . . 6*
Hebrew Union College . . . 13 . . . 7 Columbia . . . 14 . . . 10 SPANISH AND PORTUGUESE LANGUAGE &amp; LITERATURE Columbia . . . 1 . . . 10 Duke . . . 2 . . . 24*
Brown . . . 3 . . . 1*
Princeton . . . 4 . . . 5 U. of Virginia . . . 5 . . . 7 U. of Pennsylvania . . . 6 . . . 11 U. of Wisconsin . . . 7 . . . 4 Cornell . . . 8 . . . 3 U.C.-Berkeley . . . 9 . . . 6 Harvard . . . 10 . . . 12 U. of Kansas . . . 11 . . . 1*
U.C.-San Francisco . . . 4 . . . 3 Stanford . . . 5 . . . 1 Columbia . . . 6 . . . 8 Johns Hopkins . . . 7 . . . 6*
Columbia . . . 9 . . . 11*
U.C.-Berkeley . . . 3 . . . 2*
U. of Wisconsin . . . 4 . . . 4 U. of Illinois . . . 5 . . . 6 Cal Tech . . . 6 . . . 7 Stanford . . . 7 . . . 5 U. of Delaware . . . 8 . . . 8 Princeton . . . 9 . . . 9 U. of Texas . . . 10 . . . 13 U. of Pennsylvania . . . 11 . . . 10*
Cornell . . . 13 . . . 10*
CIVIL ENGINEERING M.I.T. . . . 1 . . . 1 U.C.-Berkeley . . . 2 . . . 6 Stanford . . . 3 . . . 3 U. of Texas . . . 4 . . . 4 U. of Illinois . . . 5 . . . 5 Cornell . . . 6 . . . 7 Cal Tech . . . 7 . . . 2 Princeton . . . 8 . . . 8 Northwestern . . . 9 . . . 11*
Cornell . . . 3 . . . 3 U.C.-Berkeley . . . 4 . . . 4*
U. of Illinois . . . 5 . . . 7 Stanford . . . 6 . . . 6 U. of Massachusetts . . . 7 . . . 2 U.C.-Santa Barbara . . . 8 . . . 10*
Penn State . . . 9 . . . 8 U. of Pennsylvania . . . 10 . . . 12 Carnegie Mellon . . . 11 * . . . 9 R.P.I. . . . 13 . . . 10*
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING Stanford . . . 1 . . . 1*
M.I.T. . . . 2 . . . 3 U.C.-Berkeley . . . 3 . . . 1*
Cal Tech . . . 4 . . . 4 U. of Michigan . . . 5 . . . 8 Princeton . . . 6 . . . 5 Cornell . . . 7 . . . 9 U. of Minnesota . . . 8 . . . 11 U. of Illinois . . . 9 . . . 6 U.C.-San Diego . . . 10 * . . . 13*
Stanford . . . 3 * . . . 4*
M.I.T. . . . 5 . . . 3 Cornell . . . 6 . . . 6 Columbia . . . 7 . . . 8 U. of Illinois . . . 8 . . . 7 U. of Wisconsin . . . 10 . . . 10 U. of Chicago . . . 10 . . . 11*
U.C.-San Diego . . . 6 . . . 5*
U. of Chicago . . . 7 . . . 7 Harvard . . . 8 . . . 14 Stanford . . . 9 * . . . 5*
Cornell . . . 9 * . . . 16 Brown . . . 12 . . . 8*
SUNY-Stony Brook . . . 8 . . . 7*
Florida State Univ. . . . 9 . . . 7*
U. of Maryland . . . 10 . . . 9 U. of North Carolina . . . 13 . . . 10 . . .
PHYSICS Harvard . . . 1 . . . 1 Princeton . . . 2 . . . 2 M.I.T. . . . 3 * . . . 3 U.C.-Berkeley . . . 3 * . . . 7 Cal Tech . . . 5 . . . 4 Cornell . . . 6 . . . 6 U. of Chicago . . . 7 . . . 5 U. of Illinois . . . 8 . . . 8 Stanford . . . 9 . . . 9 U.C.-Santa Barbara . . . 10 . . . 11*
Yale . . . 13 . . . 10 Social and Behavioral Sciences ANTHROPOLOGY U. of Michigan . . . 1 * . . . 1 U. of Chicago . . . 1 * . . . 2 U.C.-Berkeley . . . 3 . . . 3 Harvard . . . 4 . . . 5 U. of Arizona . . . 5 . . . 7 U. of Pennsylvania . . . 6 . . . 4 Stanford . . . 7 . . . 6 Yale . . . 9 . . . 12 U.C.L.A. . . . 9 . . . 8 U.C.-San Diego . . . 9 . . . 10*
U. of Illinois . . . 14 . . . 9 Johns Hopkins . . . 21 * . . . 10*


Personal Health; Breaking, or at least taming, the caffeine habit
GIVEN how easily I got hooked on caffeine, it is a good thing I never tried cigarettes or cocaine.
Not that I had ever been a heavy consumer of caffeine.
Maybe three or four cups of coffee a day, but no tea or soft drinks or No-Doz and only an occasional indulgence in chocolate.
Through the years, I had gradually cut down to just two cups of coffee a day, usually instant coffee, one upon awakening and the other in midafternoon.
But when I recently tried to give up caffeine altogether, my body rebelled.
I developed a headache so intense that if I had not known better I would have sworn I had a brain tumor or had suffered a stroke.
Neither aspirin nor acetaminophen made a dent in the pain.
My headache was so overwhelming that I never noticed whether I suffered any of the other common effects associated with caffeine withdrawal: fatigue, depression, difficulty concentrating, stiffness and flulike symptoms.


New Haven Line Back in Action After a Failure
Metro-North Commuter Railroad officials said today that a power failure that delayed the New Haven line's 47,000 riders for hours Monday evening was caused by a squirrel.
Trains were halted along the line, Metro-North's busiest, just as the evening rush began, when a train heading to New York from New Haven snagged the overhead cables that power the trains, ripping them from across all four tracks just west of the Rye station, officials said.


In West Bank Town, Ancient Rivalry Burns
In her crowded office at the Arabic girls' school in the center of Hebron, the deputy director, Izdiharar al-Karaki, bridled on being asked if she would ever move the school.
"I can't even think of leaving," she declared.
"We will stay even if the school falls brick by brick."


Clinton's Budget, Gingrich's Budget
Maybe Newt Gingrich and Bill Clinton were separated at birth after all.
How else can we explain why, rhetoric aside, the Republican and Administration budget plans look so much alike?
Both plans put off balancing the budget for years, offer tax cuts we cannot afford and shortchange essential public investments in research, education and infrastructure.
Both avoid reasonable but politically unpopular cuts in Social Security.
Meanwhile, details of Republican plans to reform Medicare, offered by the House Speaker over the weekend, appear to fall short of the goal of $270 billion in savings, and the President's own proposals are vague.


Berchtesgaden Journal; An Unspoiled Alpine View, a Legacy of Demons
Near an untended but surprisingly well-trod Alpine path lies a cluster of unmarked ruins that are slowly being consumed by lush overgrowth.
"People are always coming up here, either to look for treasure or just to get a feel of the place," said a hiker who paused before the ruins on a cool afternoon.
"You get a sense of history all around you."


Devils' Defense Gets Shot of Youth
Devils Coach Jacques Lemaire has a simple formula for playing championship hockey: defense comes first.
That commitment enabled the Devils to capture their first Stanley Cup last season, but it also made their decision to allow the veteran defenseman Bruce Driver to sign with the archrival Rangers somewhat surprising.


Nassau Primaries Pick Legislative Candidates
Republicans and Democrats chose their first candidates for the new Nassau County Legislature in today's party primaries, and for the most part, they appeared to follow the advice of party leaders.
Seretta C. McKnight, the president of the Roosevelt Board of Education, narrowly won victory in a three-way Democratic primary in the First District.
She defeated the party's designated candidate, Frederick K. Brewington, a civil-rights attorney, and Alice Barr, an assistant to State Assemblywoman Earlene Hill.


Amtrak Seeks Fuel Tax Share To End Subsidy
Amtrak could soon manage without operating subsidies, as Republicans in Congress have insisted, if it could permanently keep a half cent of the Federal gasoline tax for its capital budget, its president promised today.
But the struggling passenger railroad's goal runs directly counter to the plan of the House committee with jurisdiction over Amtrak, where the chairman wants to take the gasoline tax off the budget entirely, so it can be used solely for roads and not be hoarded to make the Federal deficit look smaller.
In addition, transit systems fear that the half cent could come out of their penny-a-gallon share of the 18-cent-a-gallon tax.


The New, Improved Powell
The book tour has not even started and already Colin I is history.
Everybody liked him, but he did not stand for much of anything.
Colin II does not stand very firmly, but he has unveiled a set of inclinations that could be toted comfortably by a lukewarm Democrat.
For our part, we do not care what party label General Powell chooses, but his latest revelations may be a jolt in some quarters.
Now that Mr.
Powell is an out-of-the-closet moderate, for example, what will become of Bill Kristol's plan for the Republicans to shun all their existing Presidential candidates and exploit this retired soldier?
Mr.
Kristol writes that if you have a general for all seasons, moderation in pursuit of victory is no vice.
But something tells us that Ralph Reed and the right-to-lifers may not agree.


Round of Shadowboxing Ends Quietly at Chess Match
Two of the heaviest hitters of chess prowled around each other ever so carefully yesterday in Game 2 of the world championship, but just as in the opening game they didn't land a punch.
The challenger, Viswanathan Anand of India, set up a solid defense and 3 hours and 31 minutes later, the champion, Gary Kasparov of Russia, had not succeeded in penetrating his guard.
With each player gaining a half point for the tie, the score is 1-1.


Cost of a Commercial Climbed 10% in 1994
According to results of an annual survey released yesterday by the American Association of Advertising Agencies, the average cost of producing a national television commercial rose 10 percent in 1994, to $245,000 from $222,000 in 1993.
That increase compared with gains of 13 percent from 1992 to 1993, 7 percent from 1991 to 1992 and 5 percent from 1990 to 1991.
The survey by the association, which is based in New York, covered 1,958 national spots of all lengths produced by 22 agencies.


A Death and a Dispute Among Officers
A domestic dispute between two off-duty police officers at a Queens apartment yesterday left both officers injured, one of them shot with a police revolver and the other cut while falling down the stairs.
Last night, in another incident, an off-duty police housing bureau officer apparently committed suicide at a housing office at 318 East 100th Street in Manhattan.
The officer, whose identity was not immediately released but who the police said had been on the force for 10 years, shot herself in the head at 8:40 P.M., said Detective Mark Patterson, a police spokesman.
It was not clear whether she used her service revolver.


What U.S. Business Wants From Immigration; A Policy of Compassion
To the Editor:
In "Liberals Duck Immigration Debate" (Op-Ed, Sept. 7), Michael Lind dismisses the contention that "sinister racist 'scapegoating' " is a motivation behind the argument that legal immigrants take jobs away from American citizens.
Yet he is quick to assert that "the white and black working poor have been fleeing the metropolitan areas of California, where the economic competition with Latin American and Asian newcomers is the most intense."


Business Travel; Small and medium-size companies are beginning to buy kidnapping and ransom insurance.
THE risk of being a target of kidnappers and extortionists while traveling overseas remains minuscule, but it is increasing at a disturbing rate.
As a result, many small and medium-sized companies that would never have given much thought to such perils have begun buying kidnapping and ransom insurance just within the last year.
"One reason is that terror tactics have gotten a lot of publicity in recent years," said Kenneth Stephens, the crime, kidnapping and ransom product manager of Chubb &amp; Son Inc., part of the Chubb Group of Insurance Companies.
"In addition, many smaller companies are branching out overseas, setting up offices and plants or thinking about doing so, therefore in some of those countries their employees are now at risk."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the first day of school in Newark omitted the identity of the school where fresh graffiti in the gym upset a Principal, Kirk Smith.
It was West Side High School.


The Mets Are Suffering More Teething Pains
In the world according to Mets Manager Dallas Green, there are two dangers that baseball people recognize and attempt to avoid -- evaluating young talent in March and in September, when the season is about to begin and end.
He would not allow himself to gain an inflated opinion of his young team after the recent, successful road trip to the West Coast and Canada.
Sometimes, the encouraging Mets would surely look exactly like the team the standing says they are -- cellar-dwellers in the National League East.


Indians Protest Cuts in Agency's Budget


Allergic to Latex? It's Also in the Air
To the Editor:
Jane Brody, in her Sept. 6 Personal Health column, discusses the intensification of allergic response with exposure to more than one allergen at a time.
Among the allergens she mentions is latex, used in most condoms and in surgical gloves.
It is also in the rubber gloves I use to wash dishes, in adhesive tape, cathethers and so on.


Competition Heats Up For Foods With Less Fat
The nation's low-fat food menu got fatter yesterday as three giant food companies announced plans to extend major low-fat and no-fat product lines.
Conagra Inc. announced a partnership with Nabisco Inc., the nation's largest cookie maker, to create a new roster of cookies, crackers and snacks under Conagra's Healthy Choice logo, and the Oscar Mayer Foods Corporation announced the introduction of what it said were the first fat-free sliced ham products for the mass market.


On the Highways, a Squirrel-Death Mystery; Hundreds Have Died on Busy Roads During the Summer, Baffling Even the Experts
Ed Legg and his highway crews have been cleaning up raccoons and other roadkill for more than 35 years, but they have never seen anything like the numbers of dead squirrels pocking New York State roads during this uncommonly dry summer.
Today, along one three-mile span of Route 209 just north of this Catskills city, Mr.
Legg, a state highway engineer, counted 156 flattened squirrel carcasses scattered on the asphalt.
A week before on the same three-mile stretch, his workers picked up 280 dead gray squirrels.


Dining Club Ends Maiming Suit
The Campus Club, a dining club for Princeton University students, became the last defendant yesterday to settle a lawsuit brought by a former student who lost parts of one arm and both legs after he climbed on top of a shuttle train and touched a metal bar carrying 11,000 volts of electricity, his lawyer said.
The university and a fraternity, Sigma Alpha Epsilon, had reached separate settlements with the former student, Bruce L. Miller, on Monday, a university spokesman said yesterday.


International Briefs; U S West and Olivetti In Cable TV Venture
U S West International said yesterday that it would form a joint venture with a unit of Olivetti S.p.A., the Italian computer giant, to design, build and operate regional cable networks in Italy.
Initial plans involve an investment of $4 billion to $5 billion, a spokesman for U S West said.


What's in a Name? Art and Food
Talk about felicitous matches.
An exhibition of 300 works by the Spanish painter Francisco de Goya that opened yesterday at the Metropolitan Museum of Art is financed by none other than Goya Foods Inc., the manufacturer of Hispanic foods.
The Met wooed and won Goya Foods, which had never sponsored an art show, and the company brought a dowry of $250,000.
The show, from the museum's collection, has no other sponsors.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
4.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.50
5.73
4.64
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.28
5.33
4.58
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.28
5.32
4.97
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.15
6.21
7.41
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.50
6.58
7.68
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.47
7.53
8.50
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.99
6.03
6.46
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Mrs. Clinton on the Air
To the Editor:
We appreciate the allusion in "Mrs. Clinton's Unwavering Words" (editorial, Sept. 6) to international shortwave transmissions and how they will soon remedy the Chinese Government's omission of Mrs.
Clinton's remarks from official broadcast coverage of the United Nations Fourth World Conference on Women.


The Mayor and the School System
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani knows what is wrong with the New York City school system.
The question has always been whether he knows how to fix it.
This week he has been progressively making things worse.
The issue is selection of a new schools chancellor.
Mr.
Giuliani has said that he wants the next head of the school system to have strong management expertise.
Now he has added another qualification: a willingness to give City Hall control of the education budget.


Red Cross Tones Down AIDS Materials
The American Red Cross is seeking to tone down the content of its multimillion-dollar AIDS-prevention program, a move set off by Elizabeth Hanford Dole, the organization's president and the wife of Senator Bob Dole, who is seeking the Republican Presidential nomination.
Although internal Red Cross documents do not suggest any political motive by Mrs.
Dole, some officials of the organization said the board of governors was reflecting her desires and those of her top aides at a time when Mr.
Dole was trying to satisfy the demands of conservatives.


Elizabeth Arden Losing an Executive
Neil Kraft, a creative executive in fashion and retail advertising, is leaving Elizabeth Arden Inc. in New York, where he was a creative consultant for seven months, to consider options, including starting an agency.
Mr.
Kraft, who is 38, said he was leaving because of the departure last month of Kimberly Delsing, Arden's president.
While working with Ms.
Delsing, Mr.
Kraft created campaigns for fragrances including True Love.


District Battles Home-Rule Erosion
As Congress prepares this week to appropriate its annual Federal payment to the District of Columbia, city officials are campaigning to minimize the number of strings attached.
With the city struggling to emerge from a financial crisis that prompted President Clinton to appoint a financial control board in the spring, Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. and other leaders have been urging lawmakers to approve the payment, of $660 million, without restrictions that would reduce local officials' power under the limited autonomy that Congress granted more than 20 years ago.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Months of Strategy Pay Off As Dollar Tops 100 Yen  The dollar rose to more than 100 Japanese yen for the first time since early January, settling at 101.16 yen and sparking celebrations in Washington.
After a fall of roughly 20 percent earlier this year, to a record low of 79.75 yen in April, the dollar has regained nearly all its lost ground.
The Administration gave much of the credit to Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin, who often used skills honed on Wall Street to catch speculators off-balance, making them wary of wagering that the dollar would resume its decline.  [ Page A1. ] Tobacco Companies Increase Donations to Republicans  The tobacco industry has poured more than $1.5 million into Republican Party treasuries in the first half of 1995, five times more than in the similar 1994 period.
Mr.
Edwin McDowell: Business Travel.  [ D8. ]


At Last, Good News: Sherrard Is Ready to Play
After a 35-0 embarrassment against the Dallas Cowboys and a 20-17 come-from-ahead overtime loss to the Kansas City Chiefs, the Giants are looking for anything to get healthy.
Mike Sherrard, their best receiver, is getting healthy, and maybe that will help.
Sherrard, in the 10th season of a pro career marked by injuries, missed the first three games of preseason with a strained hamstring.
He played the last preseason game, then suffered bruised ribs in the opener and missed Sunday's game.
But when the Giants start practice Wednesday for Sunday's game against the Packers in Green Bay, Sherrard will be ready.


Senate Panel Slashes Funds Of State Dept.
The Senate Appropriations Committee approved sharp cuts today in the State Department budget, and Secretary of State Warren Christopher warned that such a move could force the United States to close 50 overseas missions and to violate its obligations to the United Nations and NATO.
Mr.
Christopher said he would recommend that President Clinton veto the bill, which faces a vote by the full Senate on Friday.
The bill would reduce the State Department's operating budget by 12 percent and cut Washington's contribution to the United Nations, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and other international organizations by 42 percent.


Use of Marijuana Soars, Survey Says
The number of teen-agers using marijuana has nearly doubled since 1992, according to a Federal survey released today.
Fewer young people say they consider trying the drug a "great risk," the survey added.
Among teen-agers, 7.3 percent said they had smoked marijuana in the preceding month, up from 4 percent in 1992.
Cocaine use showed no increase, and drinking declined slightly.
Drug use by people 18 to 34 also declined slightly, the report said.
The use of illegal drugs by the entire population rose slightly, with 12.2 million people using drugs in an average month last year, up from 11.7 million in 1993, the study said.
The survey, by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, had 22,181 interviews.


Lines Redrawn In Rockefeller Center Battle
The Mitsubishi Estate Company's move yesterday to relinquish its majority ownership of Rockefeller Center and hand the property over to Rockefeller Center Properties Inc., the publicly traded real estate investment trust that holds the $1.3 billion mortgage on the center, intensified the scramble to win control of the Manhattan landmark.
Yesterday morning, the trust announced that it had reached a definitive agreement with an investment group led by Sam Zell, the Chicago financier, which would give it a $250 million cash infusion in exchange for a 50 percent stake.


Creative Shifts At 2 Agencies
Two big agencies have made changes in creative executives on important accounts.
William J. Ludwig, 40, executive vice president and creative director on the General Motors Corporation's Chevrolet account at Campbell-Ewald Advertising in Warren, Mich., was promoted to the new position of executive creative director.
He will be responsible for Chevrolet creative assignments among the advertising, marketing communications and retail divisions of Campbell-Ewald, which is owned by the Interpublic Group of Companies.
Don Gould, 52, executive vice president and managing director of the Chevrolet unit of C-E Communications, a sibling of Campbell-Ewald, was named to succeed Mr.
Ludwig.


I.R.S. Delaying Program of Special Audits
Worried that its budget will be cut, the Internal Revenue Service will delay for at least 60 days the grueling "audits from hell" it planned to begin on Oct. 1 for 153,000 businesses and individuals, who would be required to prove everything on their tax return, including producing a marriage license to justify a joint return.
The delay will allow the service to evaluate how much its $2 billion Taxpayer Compliance Measurement Program will be affected by expected budget cuts, Tax Notes Today, the electronic edition of a weekly trade paper, reported yesterday.


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
A Musical Version Of the Anne Frank Story  'The Secret Annex' Playhouse 91
Is it possible to make a musical of the story of Anne Frank without cheapening this heartbreaking account of a Jewish family victimized by the Holocaust?
"The Secret Annex," a well-meaning but hopelessly misconceived mess of a show, suggests not.


IN PERFORMANCE: DANCE
Abstract Mood Pieces, From Uneasy to Wistful  Artichoke Dance Company Merce Cunningham Studio
Amy L. Drum, Lynn Neuman and Daniel M. Gwirtzman, who met when they were dance students at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, are now the directors of the New York-based Artichoke Dance Company, which offered a program called "Fall Harvest" on Saturday night.


Posthumous U.S. Medal for Hasidic Rabbi
Rabbi Menachem M. Schneerson, who built the Lubavitch Hasidic movement into a powerful force in Judaism, was posthumously given a Congressional Gold Medal yesterday at a White House ceremony.
President Clinton called the rabbi a man who stood "for the timeless values of the spiritual and ethical life" and who became "an extraordinary force for good" before his death on June 12, 1994, at 92.
Rabbi Abraham Shemtov of Philadelphia, national director of American Friends of Lubavitch, accepted the award.


International Briefs;
The United Microelectronics Corporation, Taiwan's second-largest maker of semiconductors, said yesterday that it would team up with a group of North American companies to invest in a $1 billion chip plant in Taiwan.


C.I.A. Chief States Case for Covert Action
The Central Intelligence Agency will maintain, and perhaps increase, its covert operations abroad and continue to hire informers from terrorist cells, military governments and drug syndicates, the new Director of Central Intelligence said today.
The Director, John M. Deutch, called espionage "the core mission of the Central Intelligence Agency." That mission has been questioned by critics of the C.I.A. in Congress and the foreign-policy establishment, who wonder whether the rewards of secret information are worth the risks of undertaking covert operations and recruiting murderous and corrupt foreign agents.


Romance in the Afternoon


New Deal Doesn't Go Down Smoothly
The National Basketball Association players union avoided decertification, but some of its members remained dissatisfied.
Various agents who led the decertification movement insisted that most players who voted against decertification did so only because they wanted to start the season, not because they endorsed the tentative collective bargaining agreement.


Goodbye to a City of Real People
HERE is one more New York story.
It begins back in the early 50's when the Kid's voice had not yet changed.
His father would come home with The Times and The Post, hoping to encourage his son to read about politics and foreign affairs, but the Kid wasn't much interested.


Game 7 Toss Goes to ABC
ABC won a coin flip yesterday for the rights to telecast Game 7 of the World Series.
ABC will also carry the first, fourth and fifth games.
NBC will carry the rest.
"If there's a Game 7, it figures to be highly rated, and that's the business we're in," said Dennis Swanson, president of ABC Sports.
"Having the World Series was one of the reasons we got back into baseball."


International Briefs; Shift at British Giant
Cable and Wireless P.L.C., the British telecommunications company, has announced a management revamping under which James Ross will become deputy chairman and chief executive.
Peter Howell-Davies, the deputy chief executive of Hong Kong Telecom, will become chief executive of the Mercury Communications unit after the resignation of Duncan Lewis.
"I greatly regret Duncan Lewis's decision to resign on personal grounds," the Cable and Wireless executive chairman, Lord Young, said in a statement.
"Over the last nine months he has refocused Mercury, laid the strategy and put the company back on the growth path." (Reuters)


Sex Shops Zoning Plan Eases Rules in Manhattan
Yielding to criticism from residents in the boroughs outside Manhattan, the City Planning Commission revised its new zoning proposals for sex-related businesses yesterday by expanding the areas in Manhattan where they could operate.
The latest plan would keep the restrictions that are intended to reduce the number and break up the concentration of X-rated video stores and topless bars in places like Times Square.


Gorgeous Schemers On the Upper West Side
Beautiful people, drop-dead wardrobes, witless motivations.
So what else is new in the television universe of the producer Darren Star, a name associated with such trailblazing concoctions as "Beverly Hills 90210" and "Melrose Place"?
Nothing much, as far as "Central Park West" is concerned.
This is the ferociously ballyhooed series, beginning tonight at 9, that CBS hopes will give the network a new young and bold image advertisers covet.
Angela Lansbury may very well get the last laugh.
"Central Park West" does not, of course, bear the slightest resemblance to the real place.
The television locale is populated by airheads constantly playing power games.
Nasty schemes litter the landscape.
No sooner does Stephanie Wells (Mariel Hemingway) arrive in New York to be editor of a monthly magazine called Communique than she runs up against the Ubervixen Carrie Fairchild (Madchen Amick), a columnist who happens to be the stepdaughter of the top boss (Ron Leibman) who is known as "the Darth Vader of publishing." Carrie is especially venomous toward Stephanie, it seems, because the new editor banned smoking in the office.


Low-Wage Jewelry Workers Made Millions in Theft Ring, Prosecutors Say
Bella Jakubovicz and Asya Drubich came to the United States from the Soviet Union in the early 1980's, inconspicuous additions to the thousands of Jewish emigres making the flight to freedom.
According to law enforcement officials, the two women wound up in Brooklyn, sought help from local relief agencies and eventually took jobs as minimum-wage employees with a jewelry manufacturer in Manhattan.
Within two years, prosecutors said, the women's modest wages had become millions -- the result of long hours, hard work and a criminal money-laundering ring that stole gold jewelry from the Manhattan company and turned it into nearly $35 million worth of illicit profits.


In Japan, a Real Estate Setback Brings Little Embarrassment
Japan's largest real estate company abandoned its once-prized stake in Rockefeller Center to stanch further losses at a time when its domestic business is severely deteriorating, the company's president said.
"Unless we do a serious restructuring, our future is uncertain," Takeshi Fukuzawa, the president of the Mitsubishi Estate Company, said at a news conference here late Tuesday night.
"So I had to make a drastic decision."


Digital, Sun and Xerox Join To Make Better Printer Link
Seeking to make computers and printers from different manufacturers more compatible and manageable, the Digital Equipment Corporation, the Sun Soft subsidiary of Sun Microsystems Inc. and the Xerox Corporation announced an alliance yesterday to develop software that would permit communications between various devices.
The first shipments of the software, called Printxchange, are expected about the middle of next year and would be intended for machines using the Unix operating system.
The software would be embedded in products made by the companies, so users would not have to purchase it separately.


IN PERFORMANCE: CABARET
Adapting a New Style From the Concert Hall  Weslia Whitfield Oak Room at the Algonquin
Recently, Weslia Whitfield, the transplanted San Francisco cabaret singer who now appears regularly at the Oak Room, scored a stunning success at the Carnegie Hall tribute concerts to Frank Sinatra.
Displaying a side of her musical personality that she has rarely shown in more intimate settings, she delivered a piercingly emotional version of "How Deep Is the Ocean" that drew one of the concerts' warmest ovations.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about international reaction to NATO's attacks on the Bosnian Serbs referred incorrectly in some copies to Vitaly I. Churkin, a Russian diplomat.
He is Ambassador to Belgium, not Foreign Minister.


Housing Funds for the Disabled
A bill that will appropriate $52.2 million for building and upgrading community homes for the disabled was signed into law yesterday by Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman.
The funds are the first to be spent under a $160 million bond issue passed by the voters in 1994.


Prison Time for Lawyer Convicted of Bribery
A Bronx lawyer who was once an assistant district attorney was sentenced to eight months in Federal prison yesterday for bribing and threatening witnesses in several murder and kidnapping cases three years ago.
The lawyer, John Marchisello, appeared overcome with emotion as he pleaded for leniency from Judge Constance Baker Motley in Federal District Court in Manhattan.


New Workout Regimen: Protein Gets the Emphasis
TOM GRIESEL, a 40-year-old office manager for the Long Island Lighting Company in Roslyn, L.I., used to place his faith in linguine, fettucine and capellini.
But now there's a different holy trinity as far as he's concerned, and it's known, somewhat cryptically, as 40-30-30.
In June, Mr.
Griesel decided he did not feel very healthy.
So he switched his diet from one heavy on carbohydrates, like pasta, to one that emphasized protein.
Forty percent of his diet these days consists of protein, like grilled salmon; the other 60 percent is evenly divided between carbohydrates and fat.


Boardinghouse Rules Upheld
Three beach communities have been authorized by a Federal court to enforce local licensing ordinances intended to impose tougher standards for boardinghouses.
The New Jersey Coalition of Rooming and Boarding Houses had filed a civil rights suit against Keansburg, Asbury Park and Neptune to block a 1993 state law giving local governments licensing control over rooms generally inhabited by poor or mentally ill people.


California Utility Groups Agree On Key Issues to Aid Competition
California's drive to open the state's utilities to greater competition got a lift yesterday when some groups said that they had reached a consensus on key issues, including giving customers the eventual right to deal directly with power companies.
Because the high cost of power has been hampering California's ability to attract industry, the California Public Utilities Commission proposed last May to set up an agency to buy power for the state's customers from the lowest-cost producers in many states.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CLOROX CO., Oakland, Calif., which markets household products, acquired the Black Flag insecticide line from Reckitt &amp; Colman P.L.C. of Britain for undisclosed terms.
MOORE CORP., Toronto, extended its $1.29 billion takeover offer for Wallace Computer Services Inc., Hillside, Ill., to Nov. 8.
Moore's $56-a-share offer, which was rejected by Wallace's board, was to expire next week.


Writer Named Coach
Flamengo, Brazil's most popular and successful team, has dismissed its coach and replaced him with a sports columnist who has never coached a team.
EDINHO was dismissed by telephone Sunday, a day after Flamengo lost, 2-1, to Corinthians of Sao Paulo.
It was the team's third straight defeat, virtually eliminating Flamengo, which features the attacking line of ROMARIO, EDMUNDO and SAVIO, from the first round of the national championship.
The team is in 10th place in the 12-team league.


Producer Prices Down Last Month
For the third straight month in August, the nation's producers failed to obtain even the slimmest price increase for their finished products, a surprisingly tame Government inflation report showed today.
Particularly impressive, analysts said, were flat or declining prices for goods at earlier stages of production whose surges earlier in the year aroused fears that it was just a matter of time before quickened inflation would ripple all the way through to the consumer.


No Headline
The Rev.
Jerome Theisen, Abbot Primate of the world's 30,000 Benedictine monks and nuns, died Sunday night at a hospital in Rome.
He was 64.
Abbot Theisen, the second American to lead the Benedictine order in its nearly 1,500-year history, died of a heart attack, said his secretary, Jacques Cotes.


A Raskolnikov Transported to South America
Francisco J. Lombardi's searchingly earnest film "No Mercy" has the temerity to transport Dostoyevsky's "Crime and Punishment" across two hemispheres to Lima, Peru, and apply its philosophical dialogues to modern South American culture.
Although the transposition is far from seamless, the movie is illuminated by two burning performances.
The Raskolnikov character, renamed Ramon Romano, is a rebellious philosophy student whose double murder of his vicious landlady and her husband is motivated partly by his disgust with what he calls "people of a certain class." The film uses the murders to ask the question of what justifies the violent overthrow of a corrupt, oppressive Government.


Another Packwood Inquiry
When Senator Phil Gramm was asked to explain an entry in Bob Packwood's diaries suggesting he may have illegally delivered $100,000 to help Mr.
Packwood's 1992 re-election campaign, he told the Senate Ethics Committee it was just a big misunderstanding.
But that will not do.
The provocative comments demand a rigorous, independent assessment of whether Mr.
Gramm and Mr.
Packwood deliberately violated the campaign finance laws.
The alleged transaction is mentioned in one of several diary entries that Mr.
Packwood altered before surrendering them to the Ethics Committee.
In the original unaltered version, as dictated on tapes, Mr.
Packwood describes a meeting he had with Mr.
Gramm in March 1992, when he was running for re-election and Mr.
Gramm was head of the National Republican Senatorial Committee, a party fund-raising arm.


Olga Ivinskaya, 83, Pasternak Muse for 'Zhivago'
Olga Ivinskaya, the inspiration for Boris Pasternak's tragic Russian love story, "Doctor Zhivago," died on Friday in Moscow.
She was 83.
Her family said Mrs.
Ivinskaya had been suffering from cancer for the last year.
She was buried today in a church in central Moscow in a religious service.


Sports of The Times; The Score On Labor Isn't Final
PEOPLE who believe they have heard the last of decertification in the National Basketball Association are pitifully mistaken.
Today, contract ratification.
Next month, unfair labor practice charges with the National Labor Relations Board, and perhaps in the not-too-distant future, the N.B.A. and the N.L.R.B. in a new-age partnership called the N.B.A.B.
If Jerry Jones can merge Texas Stadium with the Republic of Nike, if the N.B.A. can be in cahoots with its union against the decertification dissidents, why can't it do business with the N.L.R.B.?


The Latest on Coffee? Don't Worry. Drink Up.
WITH coffee bars proliferating from Seattle to Boston, and the specialty coffees they feature promising to turn around a decades-long decline in American coffee consumption, the news about coffee's effects on health is surprisingly good.
A substantial amount of research, including several large studies done in the last few years, has turned up very little solid scientific evidence to indict a moderate intake of coffee or caffeine as a serious or even minor health threat.


Luxuries They Can't Afford
The scene at the sprawling Mercedes-Benz factory in Sindelfingen, where the auto maker assembles its popular E-class model, is bedeviled by sloth and confusion, at odds with the popular image of Teutonic efficiency.
The five-story building, built in 1916, is loud and dimly lit, peppered with numerous half-built cars pushed to one side.
Many workers stand idle, either with nothing to do or waiting for a car to reach their station.
Activity has ground to a halt in large areas, like the dashboard-assembly section, because too much stock has piled up.
Unlike modern plants in Japan or the United States, where cars follow a single line after they leave the paint shop, here they are machine-hoisted back and forth as many as 46 times between lines.


Legislators Letting Court Remap Georgia
After 20 days and $500,000 worth of fruitless negotiations, Georgia's Democratic-controlled Legislature today abandoned its efforts to redraw the state's Congressional district lines, ceding that responsibility to the Federal courts.
In a landmark case, the United States Supreme Court ruled in June that Georgia's 1992 Congressional map was unconstitutional because race played a dominant role in the configuration of the 11th District.
Like meandering districts in a number of other states, the 11th snakes 260 miles through east Georgia, pulling pockets of black population into the same district.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Sept. 8
Sept. 1
Aug. 9
1995
1995
1994
Gasoline production, daily
7.6
7.5
7.2
Distillate production, daily
3.3
3.2
3.2
Gasoline stocks
195.9
196.2
209.4
Distillate stocks
129.0
126.9
139.3
Crude imports, daily
8.7
7.2
7.1
Product imports, daily
1.6
2.1
2.0
Crude stocks
308.8
312.2
321.4
Crude production, daily
6.5
6.5
6.6
Refinery utilization (%)
96.9
94.0
96.0
Source: American Petroleum Institute


France's Nuclear Twin
To the Editor:
"Mr. Chirac's Nuclear Blunder" (editorial, Sept. 7) criticizes France for its decision to resume nuclear testing.
Many of your points apply to United States nuclear policies.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a report in the Calendar column of The Home Section on Thursday about an exhibition of furniture and objects with a faux finish at the Isabel O'Neil Studio Workshop, at 177 East 87th Street, misstated the dates of the show.
It is open today through Friday.


Sweatshop Job Abuse Worsening, Workers Say
Inside Ying Yi Deng Chan's frayed, palm-sized notebook is the carefully kept record of her exploitation for the last six years in New York City's sweatshops.
On each page, the 56-year-old Chinese immigrant has recorded every 12-hour day she worked as a garment worker, how little she was paid and how often she worked and was never paid at all.
Five years ago, for instance, she earned $295 for a 60-hour week making shirts; these days, she gets just $122 for the same amount of work.


International Briefs; All Nippon Confirms Jet Order From Boeing
Confirming an announcement earlier this year by the Boeing Company, All Nippon Airways of Japan said yesterday that it had signed a contract to buy 10 new 777-300 passenger jets for 130 billion yen, or $1.3 billion.
The airline said that it would receive the first of the planes in October 1998 and that it would use them to replace Boeing 747-200's on busy domestic routes.


Mayor Is Victor In the Primary In Baltimore
Mayor Kurt L. Schmoke, the first black to be elected Mayor of Baltimore, won the Democratic mayoral primary tonight, a victory that virtually insures his re-election for a third term in November.
Surviving a strong challenge from Mary Pat Clarke, the City Council president, who is white, Mr.
Schmoke won the right to oppose Victor Clark, a car salesman who defeated two other candidates in the Republican primary.


A Double Swearing In


Harlem Development Agency Provided Housing, Not Patronage
To the Editor:
"A Welcome Change in Harlem" (editorial, Sept. 7), on the closing of the Harlem Urban Development Corporation, says that the agency has "little to show" for the roughly $4 million a year it received in operating and development funds.


IN PERFORMANCE: DANCE
Flash and Movement From the Heartland  'Lake Effects: Minnesota New Choreographers' Dance Theater Workshop
Eye-catching theatrical devices were combined with movements in "Lake Effects: Minnesota New Choreographers," a program featuring Minneapolis dancers presented on Monday night.


Yale to Expand Teaching of Western Civilization
Under fire from an alumni group for returning a $20 million gift to promote the study of Western civilization, Richard Levin, the president of Yale University, has agreed to expand two programs that offer a survey of Western thought.
Mr.
Levin's proposal is less extensive than the one sought by the original donor, Lee M. Bass, which involved the creation of a Western studies department.
But it is clearly an effort to end a battle over the school's commitment to the teaching of Western civilization.


Breaking Up the Messier Line A Consideration for Rangers
In their four years together in Gotham, center Mark Messier and left wing Adam Graves have been the Batman and Robin of the Rangers, with a Sock! here and a Pow! there for any Penguin or other joker in the path of their first-line tandem.
That pairing is hardly broken, but Coach Colin Campbell might fix it anyway by moving Graves from left wing to center and playing him on another line.
The coach said today he will probably experiment with this concept during the exhibition season, which begins next Monday night at New Jersey.
He might use Graves against big, powerful, talented centers like Mario Lemieux of Pittsburgh and Eric Lindros of Philadelphia.


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
A Vaclav Havel Play In a Post-Communist Light  'The Increased Difficulty of Concentration' New Perspectives Theater
With the collapse of Communism and Vaclav Havel's elevation from Czechoslovakia's leading dissident to President of the Czech Republic, his plays will inevitably be viewed in a new light.
There may be an intrinsic sympathy for the writer scribbling in a dungeon, but it does not go with him when he moves to Hradcany Castle.


Top Winners Named For Package Design
Three packages were named best of show at the fourth annual international award competition for package design.
Two of the three International Brand Packaging awards, sponsored by Graphic Design U.S.A. magazine and Murray J. Lubliner Associates, both of New York, were awarded to designers in this country.
The Leonhardt Group in Seattle won for its bottle and label design for Covey Run, a wine, while SBG Partners in San Francisco won for Mann's Sunny Shores packaged vegetables.
The third winner was Wickens Tutt Southgate in London, for the BHS line of light bulbs.


Real Estate; Two big banks in Charlotte, N.C., have lured other businesses and created a gleaming skyline.
THE growth of interstate banking has created a gleaming new skyline for this city.
Home to two of the largest banks in the country -- Nationsbank and the First Union Corporation -- Charlotte has seen six office buildings built in the last five years.
Two more will be under construction within months, adding a million square feet of office space to the nine million already in downtown.
"The expansion in the banking industry trickles down to every business in the area," said Eric Karnes, president of a Charlotte real estate research firm that publishes a quarterly report on the local office market.
"One of the things the South has always been deficient at was getting capital. Now businesses come to Charlotte."


Tobacco Companies Pump Cash Into Republican Party's Coffers
The tobacco industry has begun an aggressive campaign-donation drive, pouring more than $1.5 million into national Republican Party treasuries in the first half of 1995, five times as much as in the same period last year.
The surge in donations comes when the industry is facing the most serious threats from Washington in its history.


Clinton and Congressional Leaders Meet on the Budget
In their first meeting since before the summer recess, President Clinton and Congressional leaders agreed tonight to work toward an accommodation on the Federal budget, but neither side moved substantially from the positions that divide them.
Emerging from the meeting, held at the White House, Speaker Newt Gingrich said, "If there's any way we can work together in a a mature way, we're going to cooperate." But he added that "there is not going to be a compromise" on the Republican drive to balance the budget in seven years.


Tyson Agrees to Settle Sexual Assault Case
The day before a trial was to begin in Newark, MIKE TYSON settled sexual assault charges brought by a woman who once worked for his former wife, their lawyers said yesterday.
The civil lawsuit brought by PHYLLIS C. POLANER was settled Monday evening in the chambers of the state judge who was to preside over the trial.


Swiss Banks Find $34 Million Perhaps Owned by Wartime Jews
After denying for years that there was any money left in their coffers belonging to descendants of Nazi Holocaust victims, the Swiss banking community announced today that its members had discovered at least $34 million in dormant bank accounts opened before the end of World War II that might have belonged to Jews.
The bankers said they would set up an independent office, a banking ombudsman, so that relatives of Holocaust victims could be helped in looking for suspected lost accounts.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Tarango Topples Stich
Jeff Tarango, who became a household name in tennis by accusing an official at Wimbledon of favoritism and storming off the court during a match, pulled off a major upset yesterday at the Romanian Open in Bucharest.


Despite Rough Year, Yonkers Mayor Survives Primary Challenge
The embattled Mayor, Terence M. Zaleski, held off a primary challenge from a fellow Democrat who has never held public office.
The Mayor's victory came after a year in which he feuded publicly with two former aides while his wife, Lynn, was investigated for overseeing solicitations of campaign contributions from city employees.
He also presided over a government that has often been disabled by disputes between him and the Republican-controlled City Council.


At Women's Forum, Peru's Leader Defies Church
Peru's President, Alberto K. Fujimori, arrived here tonight and said he would speak out at the international women's conference here against the Vatican's opposition to contraceptives.
He said in an interview late tonight that he hopes to persuade other South American leaders to take part in a coalition he is trying to form to break the Vatican's influence over the South American continent's estimated 250 million Catholics on family planning issues.


Congressional Roundup; Democrats Try to Maintain Welfare Spending but Lose
Democrats were narrowly defeated today on another important amendment to the Republicans' welfare bill.
Their amendment, rejected by a vote of 50 to 49, sought to prevent states from slashing their contributions to basic welfare programs.
But the Republicans prevailed only after their leaders made new concessions on the issue to hold their party's moderates.


A Struggling G.O.P. Contender
Gov.
Pete Wilson likes to boast that he is a come-from-behind campaigner who does best when the odds are longest.
And, in fact, he has made a habit of winning elections with a closing rush, most recently in last year's re-election race when he spurted past his Democratic challenger, Kathleen Brown, at the wire.


In a Hell of Drugs and Despair
Perched atop a bench in the middle of a housing project, 19-year-old Strike Dunham (Mekhi Phifer) surveys his domain.
Flanking him are his crew of penny-ante drug dealers, nicknamed "clockers" because they work at any hour.
Showing up to hassle these black teen-agers are white cops, who seem to take excessive enjoyment in their work.
Cruising by at a safe distance is Rodney (Delroy Lindo), Strike's mentor in drug-dealing, who is both devil and father figure for his protege.
And watching raptly are young boys like Tyrone (Pee Wee Love), who may grow up with no better idea than Strike's about what to do with their lives.
This is the spellbinding set-up for "Clockers," a story told with mournful, epic vision that rises high above its grim setting.
Based on Richard Price's bravura book, one of the most ambitious and penetrating American novels in recent years, "Clockers" takes a truly panoramic view of the forces that shape its characters.
Beyond its grit and nonchalance, this story has a resigned, reflective, hard-earned wisdom that's unusual in an American film about such familiarly lurid subject matter.
It's even more unusual in a film by Spike Lee.


Mr. Bush Stumbles in China
George Bush inexplicably seems to be amused by China's benighted handling of the international women's meeting in Beijing.
On his own visit to China this week, the former President told a gathering of food executives, "I feel somewhat sorry for the Chinese, having Bella Abzug running around in China."
The thoughtless remark is insulting to Ms.
Abzug, but more broadly it betrays a baffling insensitivity to China's crude efforts to muzzle the women.
It undercuts Hillary Rodham Clinton's strong criticism of the Chinese conduct last week.


New Jersey to Get Drought Rules As Region's Water Crisis Worsens
With reservoir levels dropping fast throughout the region, government officials are stepping up the pressure to save water.
Today, Gov.
George E. Pataki is expected to declare a drought warning for New York City and much of the lower third of the state.
In New Jersey, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman will go further: imposing a drought emergency and mandatory water-use rules on more than 100 northern New Jersey communities.
The restrictions, the first in New Jersey since 1985, will affect lawn watering, car washing and other daily activities.
Both Governors are acting because precipitation has been in short supply for more than a year, through a mild, largely snowless winter and a hot, dry summer.
And replenishing reservoirs is going to take more than the handful of scattered showers last weekend and the rain in the forecast for the next few days.


G.O.P. Plans $90 Premium For Medicare
House Republicans said today that their plan to overhaul Medicare would raise monthly premiums to at least $90 by the year 2002, about $30 more than the amount that would be charged then under current law.
On Sunday, Speaker Newt Gingrich described the Republican proposal in terms that were widely taken to mean that beneficiaries would be paying only $7 a month more.


METRO DIGEST
DROUGHT CONDITIONS INTENSIFY IN REGION
With reservoir levels dropping fast throughout the region, government officials are stepping up the pressure to save water.
Governor Pataki is expected to declare a drought warning for New York City and much of the lower third of the state.
In New Jersey, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman will go further: imposing a drought emergency.  [ Page A1. ] 2 WITHDRAW IN SEARCH FOR CHANCELLOR
A day after Mayor Giuliani said he would support only those candidates for schools chancellor who agreed that he should control the finances and security of New York City's schools, two more candidates withdrew abruptly from consideration.  [ A1. ]


Emanuel Geltman, An Editor of Dissent, The Journal, at 81
Emanuel Geltman, a founding editor of the political journal Dissent, died last Wednesday at his home on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
He was 81.
The cause was heart failure, said Frances Sosnoff, with whom he had lived for 23 years.


Executive Changes
ACTION INDUSTRIES, Pittsburgh, said R. Craig Kirsch had resigned as chairman, president and chief executive.
The company said its board had elected T. Ronald Casper acting president and chief executive and Joel Berez chairman.
JOS.
A.
BANK CLOTHIER INC., Hampstead, Md., named David Ullman chief financial officer.


Elderly and Can't Sleep? Try Scent of Lavender
LAVENDER, which was used to perfume the baths and underwear of the Romans and employed for at least 1,000 years in various folk remedies, may help older people overcome insomnia, a small study suggests.
The researchers, who reported the findings in the current issue of The Lancet, a medical journal, noted that doctors often prescribed powerful hypnotic drugs for older patients with insomnia.
They said the drugs could have serious side effects and were often prescribed for long periods, even though they were recommended only for short-term use.


International Briefs; Fisons Has Big Gain In First-Half Earnings
Fisons P.L.C. yesterday reported a strong increase in first-half pretax profit in the face of a hostile $2.6 billion takeover bid by Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc.


Florida's Brown Retires
Florida Panthers defenseman KEITH BROWN, a 16-year National Hockey League veteran, said yesterday that he would retire because of a chronic problem with his left knee.
Brown, 35, who was unable to attend the Panthers' training camp in Greensboro, N.C., made the announcement from his Boca Raton, Fla., home.


Dow Surges to Reach a High of 4,747.21
Blue-chip stocks rose sharply yesterday, pushing the Dow Jones industrial average to an all-time high.
The Dow jumped 42.27 points to close at 4,747.21, topping its previous record of 4,736.39 on July 17.


A Risotto Dish Gains Bright Accents With Yellow Tomatoes
Yellow tomatoes provide a sunny contrast with the white rice in this beautiful risotto dish, and green basil adds punctuation.
Corn and Yellow Tomato Risotto With Shrimp  4 to 5 cups no-salt-added vegetable or chicken stock 2 ounces ( 1/2 cup chopped) onion 2 teaspoons olive oil 3 large ears of corn (2 cups corn kernels) 1 cup arborio rice  1/2 cup dry vermouth 8 ounces ripe tomatoes -- yellow if possible  Several sprigs fresh basil to yield 1/4 cup chopped 2 ounces Parmigiano Reggiano ( 1/2 cup plus 2 tablespoons coarsely grated)  Freshly ground black pepper to taste 10 ounces cooked peeled shrimp.
1. Bring stock to a simmer in a saucepan.
2. Chop the onion.
3.
Heat the oil in a nonstick pot, and saute the onion until it takes on a little color.
4. Meanwhile, start scraping corn off the cobs.
5. When the onion is ready, stir in the rice until it is well coated.
6.
Stir in the vermouth, and cook until it has evaporated, a couple of minutes.
Continue scraping corn off the cobs.
7.
When the wine has evaporated, add about a cup of the stock to the rice and cook over medium-high heat, stirring often, until liquid has been absorbed.
Repeat until rice is tender but firm.
8. Meanwhile, finish scraping corn; wash, trim and coarsely chop the tomatoes.
9.
After adding next to the last cup of stock, wash, dry and chop the basil.
About 2 minutes before the rice is cooked, add corn kernels, tomatoes and basil, and stir well.
You may not need to add all of the stock.
10. Grate the cheese, and stir into the rice just before serving. Season with pepper.
Arrange the risotto on a platter, and surround with shrimp.
Yield: 3 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 590 calories, 12 grams fat, 210 milligrams cholesterol, 460 milligrams sodium, 40 grams protein, 80 grams carbohydrate.


CBS to Buy Rights to HBO Programming
Reaching for another source of programming to reinvigorate its prime-time lineup, CBS has signed a deal with Home Box Office giving CBS the first rights to HBO programming developed for broadcast networks.
Under the two-year agreement, announced yesterday by Leslie Moonves, president of CBS Entertainment, and Jeffrey Bewkes, HBO's president and chief executive, CBS will also pay to broadcast at least two original HBO films after they appear on HBO, a unit of Time Warner Inc.


Baby Sitter Charged in Death
A 23-year-old man has been charged with fatally beating a 15-month-old baby whose cries were annoying him while he was trying to play a video game, authorities said yesterday.


Dollar Is Back Over 100 Yen, As Washington Takes a Bow
After nine months of midnight strategy sessions, emergency meetings with allies and psychological warfare against hotshot currency traders, the Clinton Administration today put to rest, at least for now, one of its lurking foreign policy crises: the dollar was back above 100 Japanese yen for the first time since January.
Even before the markets closed in New York today, Administration officials were celebrating.
They gave much of the credit for the dollar's recovery to Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin, who in recent months has frequently used skills honed on Wall Street to catch speculators off balance -- often during their summer vacations -- making them increasingly wary of placing billion-dollar wagers that the dollar would resume its decline.


At the Nation's Table: Marble Falls, Tex.; Dolphin? No, Mahi-Mahi: A Hit in the Hill Country
When Jane and Bill Allen, along with her brother, John Erickson, decided to open a Caribbean restaurant in the Hill Country town of Marble Falls, Tex., two years ago, they had no idea that success would be so hard to come by.
"I think our first mistake was including our menu in the first ad we placed in a local paper," Ms.
Allen said.
"People saw foods like Stamp and Go salt cod fritters, conch fritters, dolphin and jerk chicken and thought, 'I don't think so.' "


Book Notes
Ever since Russia's archives were reopened and the remains of Czar Nicholas II's family were discovered, publishers have hastened after all things Romanov.
This fall, readers will find several new Romanov books, including "The Fall of the Romanovs" (Yale University Press), by Mark D. Steinberg and Vladimir M. Khrustalev, "The Romanovs: The Final Chapter" (Random House), by Robert K. Massie, and "The Romanov Legacy" (Viking), by Zoia Belyakova.


After Fumigation, Office Workers Gasp, Tear and Evacuate


Met Museum Gets Gift for Renovation
The Metropolitan Museum of Art announced a $20 million gift yesterday from Leon Levy and his wife, Shelby White, philanthropists and collectors.
The gift will finance the renovation of the Roman Court, a new gallery space that will occupy the current site of the museum's restaurant.
The money will also go toward refurbishing the mezzanine level for works from the Greek and Roman art collection.
The renovation and expansion of the museum's new Greek and Roman Galleries is a 10-year undertaking that will encompass about 10 percent of the Met's entire exhibition space.
"This gift cannot be underestimated because it moves us significantly toward finally making the broad spectrum of our Greek and Roman holdings accessible to all visitors," said Philippe de Montebello, the Met's director.


Fatal Flooding in the Philippines


Market Place; A new choice for Rockefeller Center's unlucky investors.
TEN years ago yesterday, underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company sold 37.5 million shares of Rockefeller Center Properties Inc. to investors.
The price was $20 a share, and the shares opened for public trading on the New York Stock Exchange at $20.375.
It was downhill ever after for the unfortunate buyers.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday about the $1.06 billion loss reported by Daimler-Benz A.G. misstated the dollar amount of the charge that the company took to reflect the weakness of the dollar.
As the article noted elsewhere, the charge, at current exchange rates, was $816 million, not $816 billion.


Rap Family Values: Golden Rule Rules
BEHIND the facade of a traditional-looking four-bedroom house in Jamaica Estates, Queens, the soothing sound of the "Christian pianist," Dino Kartsonakis, plays on an elaborate stereo system.
"At home we listen to cool-out music," says the owner, the Rev.
Joseph Simmons -- Reverend Run of the rap group Run-DMC.
Mr.
Simmons, at the breakfast counter of his black, white and red art-deco-style kitchen, is trying to get his 5-year-old son, Jo-Jo, to stop gulping fruit juice.
Nearby are his daughters, Vanessa, 12, and Angela, 7, and his 5-month-old son, Daniel.
Jo-Jo starts to cough.
"Stop drinking it so fast," Mr.
Simmons admonishes him, as his wife, Justine, pats the child's back.


Corrections
An article on Monday about the closing of the Dean Street subway station in Brooklyn included an erroneous statistic from the Transit Authority about station closings.
Dean Street was the first station on an operating line to close since 1962; many stations have closed when lines were eliminated.


The Pop Life
New Dead
The first Grateful Dead album since Jerry Garcia's death is to be released on Saturday.
"Grayfolded" (Swell/Artifact) is not a typical Dead record, however.
It is one song that lasts 136 minutes, stretching through two compact disks, recorded over 25 years.


Donald White, 80, Decorated Admiral
Donald M. White, a highly decorated retired rear admiral who served as a Navy aviator in both World War II and the Korean War, died on Monday at Baptist Hospital in Pensacola, Fla.
He was 80 and lived in Pensacola.
The cause was complications from abdominal surgery, his son Michael said.


Power Agency to Try to Meet Deadline for Plan to Cut Rates
The new chairman of the Long Island Power Authority pledged today to try to meet Gov.
George E. Pataki's 12-week deadline to develop a plan to lower electricity rates on Long Island that would include dismantling the Long Island Lighting Company.
But the chairman, James F. Gill, a lawyer from Rockville Centre, said that doing so was a tall order because of the "massively and enormously complicated" task involved.


A Twentieth of an Inch Fell? That's Teasing, Not Raining
When the Rev.
Bruno Daniel looked out the window of Holy Face Monastery in Clifton, N.J., yesterday morning, he was sure his prayers had been answered.
Only two days after the monastery had put up a sign saying, "Lord, give us rain," it was indeed raining.
The raindrops may have been sent from heaven -- well, from four to six miles above the earth, according to a National Weather Service estimate -- but there were not that many of them.


Big Grow Bigger in Italy's Corporate Deals
Corporate Italy is generally closed in August, but this summer a group of bankers and industrialists braved the heat of Milan, the financial capital, and quietly hatched two big deals that highlight how deals are done here.
In a public announcement last Saturday, the group, led by Italy's most powerful investment bank, Mediobanca, agreed to guarantee a $1.5 billion cash call to save Olivetti, the hugely unprofitable computer giant.


Pacific Physician Services Inc.(PPSI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jul 31


Moderate Weight Gain Risky For Women, a Study Warns
The evidence continues to accumulate: for health and longevity, it pays to be thin -- considerably thinner than current guidelines for middle-aged Americans recommend.
A major new study suggests that even a moderate gain, of 22 pounds or more above a woman's weight at age 18, incurs a greater risk of earlier death.
Though the risks of serious overweight are well known, there is still medical disagreement whether moderate weight gain poses a risk to health.
The new study, conducted among more than 115,000 women nurses who were followed for 16 years, sought to clarify the question by excluding people who were lean because of smoking or pre-existing diseases.


AEP Industries Inc.(AEPI,NNM) reports earnings for 3rd qtr to Jul 31


Grenade Fired From Street Into U.S. Embassy in Moscow
A rocket-propelled grenade fired from a busy Moscow street blasted through a wall into the United States Embassy here today, destroying a copying machine in an office inside but causing no injuries.
There were no arrests or immediate claims of responsibility for the attack, which took place at 4:25 P.M. local time.
But the question on the minds of American and Russian officials was whether it was a violent manifestation of the increasing tension between the United States and Russia over NATO's bombing campaign against the Bosnian Serbs.


Bosnian Serb Civilians Flee Joint Muslim-Croat Attack
Fleeing a major offensive by the combined forces of the Bosnian Government and the Bosnian Croats, as many as 40,000 Bosnian Serb civilians are leaving a large section of western Bosnia and moving north to the Serbian stronghold of Banja Luka, according to relief workers and United Nations officials.
"We understand towns are being evacuated in panic and the roads are clogged with refugees who fear they will be overtaken by advancing soldiers," a United Nations official said.


Bowne &amp; Co. (BNE,A) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 31


NATO COMMANDERS FACE GRIM CHOICES
NATO commanders say that they are rapidly running out of military targets in southeastern Bosnia, and that political constraints are barring broad attacks on ground troops and strategic sites like civilian factories and power plants.
The alliance's two-week bombing campaign has so far failed to force the Bosnian Serbs to withdraw their artillery around Sarajevo -- a main condition to end the attacks -- but Western officials are expressing doubts about how far to push the air strikes to meet that goal.


American Greetings Corp.(AGREA,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Aug 31


Star at Conference on Women: Banker Who Lends to the Poor
If there is one man who has achieved stardom of sorts at the United Nations Fourth World Conference on Women, it is the soft-spoken economist from Bangladesh who wandered into a desperately poor village 20 years ago and got an idea that is changing the face of banking.
"Capital does not need to be the handmaiden only of the rich," said the economist, Muhammad Yunus, who founded the Grameen Bank to help poor people, especially women, by lending them small amounts of money so they could become self-sufficient entrepreneurs.


Buford Stars, but Mets Learn Pulsipher Is Out for Season
The good news for the Mets last night was that they collected two home runs from leadoff hitter Damon Buford and pummeled Houston 10-5 behind the concussive power of four homers and 14 hits at Shea Stadium.
The overriding bad news is that they have lost the rookie pitcher and future hope Bill Pulsipher for the remainder of the season with a sprained ligament in his left elbow.
Pulsipher, who last pitched on Monday, will not throw for eight weeks as a precautionary move.
No surgery is planned, Manager Dallas Green said.
Pulsipher underwent a magnetic resonance imaging test that he said revealed no tear.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Avalon Properties, New Canaan, Conn., is selling $100 million of senior notes due in 2002 through J. P. Morgan Securities and Paine Webber.
The notes are priced at 99.84 to yield 7.405 percent.
The issue is noncallable and is rated Baa3 by Moody's Investors Service and BBB- by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


Rash of Arrests Has Nebraska Reeling and Rethinking
The athletic director at the University of Nebraska said today that the continuing legal problems of high-profile athletes will lead to an evaluation of the risks the school has taken in its recruiting decisions.
The official, Bill Byrne, acknowledged that an investment of more than $600,000 in extensive counseling, tutoring and drug programs for athletes has not prevented the development of serious problems that include assault charges against the star running back Lawrence Phillips, who has been dismissed from the football team.


School Board Will Retain All 2,500 Jobs in Jeopardy
After months of threatening to lay off teachers and other school staff to meet budget cuts imposed by City Hall, the Board of Education yielded yesterday to the Mayor's demand that it retain all 2,500 employees whose jobs were in jeopardy by spending most of its emergency reserve fund.
The agreement's effect will be felt immediately as almost 1,000 teachers who were without permanent assignments because of the budget cuts are returned to the classroom, in some cases alleviating class sizes swollen above 40 students.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Muster Defeats Pioline
Top-seeded Thomas Muster recovered from a slow start to rout Cedric Pioline, 7-5, 6-3, yesterday in the second round of the Romanian Open on clay in Bucharest.
Muster, ranked third and already the winner of 10 clay-court titles this year, will next play Arnaud Boetsch, who breezed past Renzo Furlan, 6-2, 6-2.
A day after beating Michael Stich, Jeff Tarango fell to Christian Ruud, 6-2, 7-6 (9-7). (AP)


Clinton Tells the Young to Say No


Liberties; Candidate From Random House
I was sitting in my office, feeling left out.
Was I the only person in the country who had not been slipped an advance copy of Colin Powell's book?
Then I heard a hum.
Mirabile faxu!
Someone at Random House remembered me.
And they were leaking me something even more valuable than the book -- a confidential memo about the book, typed on the pooh-bah's stationery:
Date: Aug. 1, 1995
From: Harry Evans
To: Colin Powell
Re: The campaign


House Panel Opts to Kill Agency Giving Legal Advice to the Poor
The House Judiciary Committee voted today to abolish the Legal Services Corporation, which provides lawyers for poor people in a wide array of civil cases like landlord-tenant disputes, domestic-violence cases or legal battles affecting the homeless, the mentally handicapped and migrant workers.
By a vote of 18 Republicans to 13 Democrats, the committee voted to eliminate the agency, which this year had a budget of $415 million, and replace it with $250 million in block grants next year to the states.
The bill would also impose significant new restrictions on lawyers who are paid from the block grants, barring them from filing class-action lawsuits and challenges to the constitutionality of any laws.


Electronic Meeting Places Include Some Dark Alleys
If America Online took physical form as a city, it would be one of the largest metropolitan areas in the United States, with 3.5 million residents.
Like any big city, America Online has scores of public parks and theaters, thousands of bars and cafes, and -- as the Justice Department crackdown on child pornography made clear yesterday -- some dark alleys and back rooms where a few unsavory characters conduct illicit business.


Baltimore Mayor Is Triumphant in Primary
Mayor Kurt L. Schmoke looked more than dapper this morning, in khaki pants, tennis shoes, no socks and a polo shirt.
On the day after an unexpected big victory in the city's Democratic mayoral primary, a race that independent polls had forecast to be close, he also looked relieved.
With stunning ease, Mayor Schmoke defeated Mary Pat Clarke, the City Council president, 59 percent to 39 percent, a margin that virtually assures him election to a third term in November.
About 85 percent of Baltimore's 339,000 registered voters are Democrats.


Davis Water &amp; Waste Industries Inc.(DWW,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 31


From Norway, With a Flourish
IT is a long way, physically and spiritually, from Doris Holvik Jensen's small red-brick walk-up in the Bay Ridge section of Brooklyn to traditional Norwegian farmsteads hewn of fir and caulked with moss.
But just past midnight, when the city and her household settle into semblances of silence, you can often find Mrs.
Jensen seated at her dining-room table, paintbrush in hand, practicing the once-forsaken but now-resurgent Norwegian folk art of rosemaling, relishing the quiet.


Upper Peninsula Journal; Yes, They're Yoopers, and Proud of It
The last copper mine on the Upper Peninsula of Michigan closed this summer at the town of White Pine, putting a thousand people out of work and ending an era.
Back in the 1920's, this region produced 80 percent of the world's copper.
Another, briefer era ended in August, when the Air Force shut down its K. I. Sawyer Base 15 miles south of here.
After Marquette, "Sawyer was the U. P.'s second-largest city, with 12,000 people," said David Edwards, managing editor of The Mining Journal here, using the common appellation for the peninsula.
"We're heading for difficult times." The only thing booming on the peninsula now, Mr.
Edwards added, is casino gambling on the reservations of the Chippewas, the Ojibwas and the Sioux.


Roger W. Heyns, 77, Head of Berkeley in the 60's
Roger W. Heyns, the former Chancellor of the University of California at Berkeley during some of the most turbulent days of student protest in the 1960's, died Monday in Volos, Greece, while on a three-week tour that began in the Middle East.
He was 77 and lived in Atherton, Calif.
The probable cause was a heart attack, said a statement released yesterday by the university.


Rome Shouldn't Honor an Anti-Semite
To the Editor:
Anti-Semitism fueled the mass murders, misery and destruction wrought by the Holocaust just before and during World War II.


Calendar: Exhibitions And Talks
Eight Gardens  345 West 22d Street; (212) 929-2477.
On Saturday, from 4 to 6 P.M., there will be a guided tour of eight private gardens, followed by a reception and lecture, from 6 to 7 P.M., to benefit P.S. 11.
Tickets, available starting at 3 P.M., $15.


Bannister Offers Speculation About 'Advantages' for Blacks
SIR ROGER BANNISTER, the first runner to break four minutes for the mile, said yesterday that black athletes have fundamental physiological advantages over their white rivals.
Speaking at a science conference in Newcastle, England, Bannister said the vast number of all-black sprint finals and a high proportion of black athletes in other events at the recent world championships lead to interesting speculations.
"As a scientist rather than a sociologist, I am prepared to risk political incorrectness by drawing attention to the seemingly obvious but understressed fact that black sprinters and black athletes in general all seem to have certain natural anatomical advantages," said the 66-year-old Bannister, who is a doctor.
"Perhaps there are anatomical advantages in the length of the Achilles' tendon, the longest tendon in the body. I do not know the true reasons."


QE2 Finds Its Port After Storm


Talks Set on F.A.A. Noise Plan
A five-member Congressional delegation from New Jersey will meet today in Washington with the head of the Federal Aviation Administration to discuss the agency's near-final noise plan for Newark International Airport.
The delegation members say the F.A.A.'s plan, which would make slight changes in flight patterns to reduce noise, does not go far enough.
David R. Hinson, the F.A.A. administrator, refused to meet with the group last week but reversed himself on Monday.


Genesee Corp.(GENBB,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 29


For Jets and Jaguars, Identity Hotline Needed
They seem suspiciously alike.
Even their nicknames start with the same letter.
And the Jets and Jaguars, who will meet on Sunday, have been making the same mistakes in flopping to identical 0-2 starts.
But the Jets' growing pains are a function of an older franchise being reinvented -- again -- while the Jaguars of Jacksonville are trying to forge an identity.
Both are suffering through the changes.


With Pen in Hand, Not in a Vein
A ballpoint pen designed to look like a hypodermic needle has drawn the ire of clergy members and Jersey City officials.
Last night, the City Council unanimously approved an ordinance to ban these novelty items from stores.
"It's telling kids that this is something amusing," said Tom DeGise, the president of the Council, in explaining the reaction to the realistic-looking pens.
Penalties will include confiscation of the pens and, after a second offense, a $500 fine.
TERRY PRISTIN


More Details Are Sought On ABC Deal
The Walt Disney Company and Capital Cities/ABC Inc. disclosed yesterday that the Justice Department had asked for additional information before it ruled on the proposed merger of the two companies.
A spokesman for Disney, John Dreyer, said the companies were cooperating with the request and did not expect it to derail the $19 billion deal, which was announced last month.


CIBA-GEIGY TO ADD ISIS PHARMACEUTICALS SHARES
Ciba-Geigy A.G. said yesterday that it would buy $7 million more of shares in Isis Pharmaceuticals Inc. and acquire marketing rights for two drugs it is developing with Isis.
A Ciba spokesman said Ciba's stake in Isis would increase to about 10 percent.
The two companies said they had revised their five-year collaboration agreement to give Ciba the global marketing rights for two anti-tumor drugs and pay Isis royalties based on sales.
Isis shares rose $1.125 yesterday, to $13.675, in Nasdaq trading.


Esiason Defends Early Exit
Boomer Esiason, the most approachable Jet for the news media, today defended his uncharacteristic petulance after Sunday's overtime loss to the Colts and his early exit from camp before interviews on Monday.
"It was a horrible defeat," he explained.
"I just felt like taking a vacation. I just felt I'm entitled to one of those sooner or later."


Arrest in Killing of a Bicyclist
A Hackensack man charged with shooting a bicycle rider five times in the back on Sept. 2 was arrested on Tuesday in Baltimore, the authorities said yesterday.
James Santulli, an assistant prosecutor for Bergen County, said the bicyclist, Michael Coombs, had been robbed at gunpoint two hours before he was fatally shot.
Mr.
Santulli said the suspect, Michael D. Roberson, killed Mr.
Coombs with the same handgun used in the robbery.


School Vote on Fate of Sports and Clubs
For as long as anyone can remember, Danny McMaster has lived to play basketball.
Before he was old enough to enter Roy C. Ketcham High School here, he played on the junior varsity.
By ninth grade, he was a starter on the varsity team.
This summer, Danny, now a high school senior, was scouted by five Division I college basketball coaches.
They were impressed by his scoring -- 25 points a game on average -- and his composure on the court.
We're going to keep an eye on you, they told Danny.
Show us what you can do in your senior year.


Fox Network Gets Big Hound: Tyson Bout
The Fox Television Network will announce today that it has acquired the network rights to the Nov. 4 Mike Tyson-Buster Mathis Jr. fight, shifting it from pay-per-view on KingVision/Showtime Event Television, according to two executives familiar with the agreement who asked not to be identified.
Now, instead of two pay-per-view fights being broadcast simultaneously, there will only be one: the third Riddick Bowe-Evander Holyfield bout.
And TVKO will have to consider the possibility of moving the fight to Nov. 3 to avoid losing business to Fox's telecast of the Tyson fight.


To Russian Democrats: Don't Unite
Fragmented and weakened, Russia's many democratic parties are being urged by Western advisers to unite into one front for the parliamentary elections in December.
President Boris Yeltsin, stung by his party's defeat in an election in his home province last month, says such a bloc is the only alternative to authoritarianism from the left and right.
But forging a coalition would be a mistake for democrats, who disagree with the Government over everything from the war in Chechnya to the direction of economic reforms.
The divisions in the democratic camp do not merely express conflicting ambitions among its leaders.
They result from, among other things, the Government's failure to allow most citizens to acquire property and from its capitulation to a small business elite that is getting rich on its economic policies.
As a result, democratic reforms have become associated in too many minds with robbing the people and imposing hardship on the many for the benefit of the few.


Agency's Report Provokes a Revolt
Representative Henry Bonilla, a San Antonio Congressman in his second term, was home for a visit early this year when he received a small stream of visitors who wanted to complain about a Federal agency.
The visitors were local back surgeons and some physical therapists angry over a study by the agency that said most back surgery and much physical therapy used by Americans for back pain was unnecessary.
As a Republican member of the Appropriations Committee's panel that deals with the agency's budget, Mr.
Bonilla was a good choice for the surgeons' complaints that the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research was a waste of money.
Mr.
Bonilla, his aides said, looked into its work, concluded it was inefficient and duplicated the work of other Federal agencies and became a leader in the effort to abolish the agency by eliminating its financing.


Executive Changes
SALOMON BROTHERS INC., New York, a unit of Salomon Inc., named Wesley C. Walraven to head its West Coast mergers and acquisitions department as a director; he will be based in Los Angeles.
Also, Mauricio Reveco was named as a Latin American equity analyst, specializing in the steel and mining industries; he will be based in New York.
TESORO PETROLEUM CORP., San Antonio, said Michael D. Burke had resigned as president and chief executive, to be replaced by Bruce A. Smith, who is chief operating officer and chief financial officer.


AAR Corp.(AIR,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Aug 31


Peace Prize For Scholar Stirs Anger In Germany
Germany's most prestigious cultural prize will be given to a scholar of Islam despite protests that she is too sympathetic to fundamentalism, administrators of the prize said this week.
The Peace Prize of the German Book Trade is to be presented next month to Annemarie Schimmel, 73, one of the world's leading experts on Islamic mysticism.
In announcing her selection in April, the selection committee described her as a symbol of tolerance who has worked toward "a synthesis of Islam and the modern."


Berlin Unveils a Rescued Otto Dix of 1920
A 1920 painting by Otto Dix that German art historians consider one of the country's most important 20th-century treasures was unveiled today as the newest acquisition of Berlin's National Gallery.
The picture, "The Skat Players," was about to be sold in New York City when a group of Berliners started a highly unusual fund-raising campaign to bring the work here.
They have collected most of the $4.4 million purchase price and expect to pay off the rest within a few months.


Famous Sons, Famous Sires In the Futurity at Belmont
For people searching the Super Saturday list at Belmont Park for clues to next year's Kentucky Derby winner, search no more: The Futurity may not include Hennessy, a son of Storm Cat and the leading candidate among 2-year-old colts, but it does include a herd of other famous sons of famous sires.
There is his stablemate Honour and Glory, a son of Relaunch, who won his debut by 10 1/2 lengths at Saratoga.
There is Editor's Note, a son of Forty Niner, who broke his maiden by nearly seven lengths at Monmouth.
There is Louis Quatorze, a son of Sovereign Dancer, who won at Saratoga by 5 1/2 lengths.


At Edgy Border, Rwanda Army Kills 100 Hutu
It began late Monday night with an ambush near the Zaire border that left a Rwandan Army lieutenant dead, United Nations officials said.
The army immediately swept into the hills and nearby villages in the Kanama District to search for the killers.
Shots were heard in the night.
By dawn on Tuesday, more than 100 bodies of men, women and children littered the Hutu village, in northwest Rwanda, United Nations military observers said.


Celebration, Jubilation Cause Tribulations
You'd think that Rick Diggs would be a big supporter of the National Collegiate Athletic Association move to crack down on the creative celebrating that accompanies big plays and touchdowns.
As head football coach of Morgan State University for the last four years, Diggs has seen virtually every manner of post-touchdown boogaloo, highstep and somersault.
In their first two games this year, Diggs's Bears have been outscored, 109-17, including a 76-7 loss to James Madison in the opener.


Clinton, Wary of Riling China, Sees Dalai Lama Only Briefly
Seeking to show his concern for Tibet without igniting new tensions with China, President Clinton dropped in briefly to see the Dalai Lama today while the Tibetan spiritual leader was meeting with Vice President Al Gore.
White House officials said Mr.
Clinton had this "drop in" meeting with the Dalai Lama for the third year in a row to avoid an official Oval Office meeting that would anger Beijing.


2 American Balloonists Die When Shot Down in Belarus
In an incident recalling the most violent excesses of the cold war, Belarussian combat aircraft have shot down a sport balloon that flew over the border from Poland while competing in a race.
The two American crewmen were killed when Belarussian fire ignited their hydrogen-filled balloon, which blew up.
Two other American-crewed balloons competing in the annual Gordon Bennett Balloon Race also flew into Belarus and were forced to land.
The four passengers were apparently taken prisoner.


Best Buy Co. (BBY,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Aug 26


Disgraced, Ex-Lawman In Rockland Avoids Jail
In a ruling that brought him and his family visible relief, Kenneth Gribetz, for 20 years the flamboyant District Attorney of Rockland County, was sentenced today to five years of probation and 500 hours of community service for not paying taxes on referral fees he received from negligence lawyers and for using investigators for personal errands.
"I'm deeply, deeply sorry for my acts," Mr.
Gribetz, his voice breaking, told the court before the sentence was pronounced.
"I'm deeply sorry for what I've done to the people of Rockland County; I'm deeply sorry for what I did to my family. I was wrong. I let the people of the county down and the people of the state down and I'm deeply sorry."


INSIDE
U.S. Embassy in Russia Is Struck by a Grenade
A rocket-propelled grenade fired from a busy Moscow street blasted through a wall into the United States Embassy in Moscow, destroying a copying machine in an office inside but causing no injuries.
Page A3.
What's in a Name?
A Fee
Maintaining an elite address for electronic mail and other computer services will now cost some Internet users $50 a year.
Page D1.


Payless Cashways Inc.(PCS,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Aug 26


Greece to Lift Embargo Against Macedonia if It Scraps Its Flag
Greece agreed today to take steps to lift its 19-month trade embargo against the former Yugoslav republic of Macedonia, in return for concessions from Macedonia that include scrapping the country's existing national flag.
The two neighbors have yet to settle a more intractable dispute over the name of Macedonia, which Greece contends belongs properly to its northern province.
But the interim agreement, which came together after 28 months of shuttle mediation by Cyrus R. Vance, a former United States Secretary of State, defuses the longstanding threat of violence in a region already ravaged by ethnic warfare.


A Hime-Furnishing Shoppers' Guide to SoHo; The Malling Of Lower Broadway
TOTO, it feels as if we're not in SoHo anymore.
Peri Wolfman, the partisan of the all-white plate, is frantically buying cream and khaki-colored pottery for her store, the Wolfman Gold and Good Company.
At Portico Bed and Bath, the signature minimal white-and-cream look is being supplanted by linens dyed in emphatic jewel tones.
Portico Home is altering its image, too, gearing up for near-instant delivery (one week instead of eight) of its best-selling sofas and chairs.


Bratton Regrets Fare-Beating Jailing
WILLIAM J. BRATTON, New York City's Police Commissioner, chose his words with obvious care and took a while warming up to the task.
But he finally did it.
He used the "A" word.
Said the Commissioner: "I may find myself apologizing" to a 68-year-old black woman who spent a night in a city jail on fare-beating charges that were later dismissed.
The fiercely defensive Commissioner only went so far.
He says he is apologizing for a lack of common sense on the part of the police officers who held the woman, Mary Moody, and says maybe the officers were constrained by a deliberately rigid policy that needs revising.


No Headline
"No one in the balloon community can understand how anyone would do such a thing to peaceful balloonists who must fly where the wind takes them." ERIN PORTER, who coordinates the exchange of information among balloonists, on the shooting down of a balloon in Belarus.  [ A1:2. ]


CHRONICLE
An update on CHRISTOPHER REEVE: the actor's wife, DANA, said yesterday that he had called his agents at the William Morris Agency about future directing jobs and speaking engagements and that he is hoping to attend a benefit in New York in October.
Mrs.
Reeve spoke at a news conference at the Kessler Institute for Rehabilitation in West Orange, N.J., where Mr.
Reeve is recuperating from a horseback riding accident in May that broke his neck and damaged his spine.


Corrections
A film review yesterday about "Clockers," directed by Spike Lee, misstated the starting date of a retrospective series of his films at the American Museum of the Moving Image.
It is Saturday, not today.


Chief of Forbes Attacks Dole Over Tax Policy
Malcolm S. Forbes Jr., president and editor in chief of Forbes magazine, has attacked Senator Bob Dole's record on taxes in an exchange of letters that some of Mr.
Forbes's aides say presages his entry into the Republican Presidential campaign.
The exchange was prompted by an interview, published in USA Today on Sept. 6, in which Mr.
Forbes said that "Bob Dole has never been an advocate of tax reform."


23 Held in Drug and Gun Deals
Twenty-three men and women were arrested yesterday after a Federal grand jury indicted them on charges of trafficking in heroin and weapons at two public housing projects in Newark's West and North wards.


Expert Witness Says New DNA Tests Link Simpson to One Victim
In a brief return to the world of alleles and autorads, a prosecution expert testified today that newly obtained results of a widely accepted DNA test confirmed that blood found on the center console of O. J. Simpson's Ford Bronco came from Mr.
Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman.
The results corroborate conclusions gleaned from a more controversial DNA test, known as PCR, that a defense expert had said was too risky to be trusted, at least in criminal cases.
The prosecution expert, Gary Sims of the California Department of Justice, said blood from three console stains had to be combined for testing.


National Beverage Corp.(POPS,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 29


Marcus Corp.(MCS,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Aug 17


George T. Kalaris, 73, Official Who Changed C.I.A.'s Direction
George T. Kalaris, the officer assigned in 1974 by the Central Intelligence Agency to clean up one of its worst internal messes, a seemingly endless hunt for a Soviet agent in its own ranks, died on Monday at Suburban Hospital in Bethesda, Md.
He was 73 and had been under treatment for cardiac and kidney problems.
Until his appointment in 1974 as chief of the counterintelligence staff, running the innermost sanctum of the agency, Mr.
Kalaris had spent most of his career as a clandestine operations officer in Greece, Indonesia, Laos, the Philippines and Brazil.
He won special admiration, for his central role in acquiring a warhead and operational manuals for a Soviet SA-2 anti-aircraft missile in Indochina.


Companies pursue electronic ways to insure that sports advertisers get the best sites in the house.
TELEVISION sports viewers who have just gotten used to rotating billboards behind home plate and at basketball scorers' tables might soon have to make another visual adjustment: ads inserted electronically during the action that appear to be part of the actual background.
Before the year is out, a television network that has not been identified plans to offer its advertisers the option of having their ads appear in places where no ads have gone before or to have them superimposed over existing ones.
The network will be able to do that through a digitalized system that maps landmarks, or optimal spots for ads, on the playing field.
The system is being developed by Princeton Electronic Billboard, which is based in Princeton, N.J.


Gov. Wilson Shuffles Staff For Campaign
Seeking traction for his struggling Presidential campaign, Governor Pete Wilson is shaking up his campaign organization, including a change of duties for the chairman, Craig Fuller, people close to the campaign said today.
According to those people, Mr.
Fuller, a former White House aide and experienced national campaign operative, will soon move his base to Washington from Sacramento, Calif., and surrender most day-to-day overseeing of Mr.
Wilson's effort to capture the Republican nomination.


U.S. Reports Economy Up But Not Prices
Economic growth, while still spotty, perked up in the late summer even as inflation stayed firmly in check, two Government reports showed today.
The Labor Department said consumer prices edged up a scant one-tenth of 1 percent in August, leaving the Consumer Price Index up just 2.6 percent over the last 12 months.
And price pressures have eased in recent months.
The three-month compound annual rate was a mere 1.9 percent.


Campaign Records Are Criticized
The New Jersey chapter of United We Stand America, a group founded by the former Presidential candidate Ross Perot, said yesterday that campaign contribution records need to be computerized if election finance reporting laws are to be of any use to the public.


Foodarama Supermarkets Inc.(FSM,A) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 29


City Bar Association Celebrates Its 125th Year
To the taped music of Dvorak's "New World" Symphony, 2,500 lawyers and judges filed into Avery Fisher Hall last night to celebrate the 125th anniversary of the city's major bar association and, in essence, to pay tribute to themselves.
One theme of the festivities was the ascendance of women in the profession.
In perhaps the evening's most striking tableau, at a cocktail reception before the speeches, Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg of the United States Supreme Court huddled in a corner with Barbara Paul Robinson and Roberta Cooper Ramo.
This year Ms.
Robinson became the first female president of the City Bar Association, and Mrs.
Ramo has that same distinction at the American Bar Association.
The three traded war stories about their difficulties getting first jobs, and balancing the demands of new lawyering with new mothering.


Samuelsson in Charge Of Player Development
Ulf Samuelsson was only half-kidding about the blood.
It flowed from the forehead of a teammate, Pavel Komarov, who had been cut by the stick of Rick Willis during a scrimmage at the Rangers' training camp.
"Like a shark, I saw the blood on the ice, and . . .," said Samuelsson, ending the sentence with a sharp forward thrust of his hands and a hissing sound that suggested an attack by a predatory fish.
Samuelsson came to Komarov's aid by cross-checking Willis twice, earning what will most likely be the first of many penalties of aggression this season.


Discount Auto Parts Inc.(DAP,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Aug 29


Asian Stylization and a Play of Form
Shannon Hobbs and Leslie Partridge are modern-dance choreographers who sometimes present joint concerts but also go their own esthetic ways.
Each offered two premieres in a series that closed on Sunday at Dance Space's Evolving Arts Theater, 622 Broadway.
The program's title, "Traditions in Balance," referred possibly to the complementary nature of two independent-minded artists, but Ms.
Partridge's program notes also suggested that the balance sought was spiritual harmony.


Mentor's Roots
To the Editor:
William Safire (column, Sept. 11) makes an etymological gaffe when he uses the term "mentee" as the apparent reciprocal of a mentor.
Unlike a vendor, who vends something to a vendee, a mentor "ments" nothing.
Why?
Because it is not a noun derived from a verb.
Rather, Mentor was a Greek, who was entrusted by Odysseus with the education of his son Telemachus.
JOSEPH P. BAUER  Professor of Law Notre Dame Law School Notre Dame, Ind., Sept. 12, 1995


Throwback to an Era of Skits and Puns
Like another music hall legend of sorts, the weary title character of John Osborne's "Entertainer," Bette Bourne is now on the very far side of 40 and feeling, frankly, used up.
The whisky-voiced founder of Bloolips, the British vaudeville drag troupe, initially appears in the company's latest offering, "The Island of Lost Shoes," so low on energy and so high on regrets that he (or she: take your choice) puts coins in two parking meters and lies down between them.
It's only a matter of time, it would seem, before the tow truck arrives.


Democrats Vow to Slow G.O.P. Plan For Medicare
The House Democratic leader, Representative Richard A. Gephardt, said today that Democrats would do "everything we can" to slow Republican legislation to make vast changes in Medicare, the Federal health insurance program for the elderly and the disabled.
Republican leaders say they will unveil their Medicare proposals in the next few days and take the legislation to the House floor early next month, as part of a sweeping bill to balance the Federal budget and prevent Medicare's Hospital Insurance Trust Fund from going bankrupt.
The bill would slow the growth of Medicare spending and create incentives for elderly people to join health maintenance organizations and other private health insurance plans.


Bosnian Serb General Manages to Defy All
By refusing to remove heavy weapons from around Sarajevo despite heavy NATO bombing, Gen.
Ratko Mladic, the Bosnian Serb commander, is defying not just the NATO allies but also his own political leaders and the President of Serbia.
General Mladic says he needs his heavy guns to protect Serbs living near Sarajevo.


20 Arrested in Drug Dealing In a Brooklyn V.A. Hospital
Federal prosecutors charged yesterday that 12 employees and 17 patients at a veterans hospital in Brooklyn were dealing or buying heroin and crack cocaine and, in other cases, sold large doses of methadone to the very patients being treated in the hospital's drug addiction program.
United States marshals and agents from the Department of Veterans Affairs burst into a first-floor cafeteria at the hospital with their guns drawn yesterday morning and arrested several members of two loose-knit drug rings, investigators said, along with a hospital police sergeant, who was charged with accepting bribes to allow the drug sales to continue.


Irish Priest's Tale Stirs Furor About AIDS and Unprotected Sex
A Roman Catholic parish priest has stirred a wave of national concern by asserting that an Irishwoman infected with the AIDS virus sought to avenge her condition by deliberately having unprotected sex with dozens of Irishmen in the south of the country and -- in an assertion that the medical authorities doubt -- transmitting the virus to 14 of them.
Whatever the facts of the case, it has raised a furor about AIDS that the country has never encountered before.
AIDS in Ireland is at about the same level as in other European countries, moderate by comparison with the United States or Africa.


COMPANY BRIEFS
WISCONSIN ENERGY CORP., Milwaukee, and Northern States Power Co., Eau Claire, Wis., a unit of Northern States Power Co. in Minneapolis, said their shareholders had voted to approve their $6 billion consolidation, which would create the nation's 10th largest investor-owned utility.
RANCHMENS RESOURCES LTD., Calgary, Alberta, a crude petroleum and natural gas concern, said its board was recommending that shareholders accept a $199.1 million takeover offer from Crestar Energy Inc., and oil and gas company also based in Calgary, Alberta.


India Nationalists Oppose Presence of a U.S. Chain
India's first Kentucky Fried Chicken restaurant was closed today by local authorities, then swiftly reopened under a court order, as nationalists pressed efforts to curb the entry of foreign corporations into India under its four-year-old program of economic liberalization.
City authorities in Bangalore ordered the restaurant closed after weeks of protests by a local farmers group allied to a wider campaign across India against foreign investments.
The city's order cited what was termed an infringement of Indian health rules, but officials of an Indian subsidiary of Pepsico, the corporate parent of Kentucky Fried Chicken, said the closing was politically motivated.


Man of Mountains Scales a New One
As one of the best young downhill skiers in the United States, good enough to be on the same national team as Tommy Moe and A J Kitt, Eric Keck felt that the only thing that might stand between him and an Olympic medal or at least a World Cup victory was his size.
At 245 pounds, Keck was not only the heaviest member of the United States team in the late 1980's and early 90's but also the heaviest in the history of World Cup racing.
Indeed, Keck was a skier in a football lineman's body, swift and agile but not fast enough to keep up with the skiing world's elite.


W. J. Wilkins, 98; Was Judge at Trial Of Nazi Industrialists
William J. Wilkins, a member of the panel of judges that convicted leading Nazi industrialists during the Nuremberg war crimes trials, died on Saturday at his home in Bellevue, Wash.
He was 98.
Mr.
Wilkins, a Superior Court judge in Washington State's King County for more than three decades, is believed to have been the last survivor of the 32 judges appointed to the Nuremberg trials by President Harry S. Truman, said Brig.
Gen.
Telford Taylor, the chief prosecutor at the trials.


Points and Polls at Fla. State
Coach BOBBY BOWDEN of No. 1-ranked Florida State has sent a letter of apology to Duke's FRED GOLDSMITH, who said the Seminoles ran up the score for poll voters in a season-opening victory over the Blue Devils.
The letter followed a 70-26 victory over Duke on Sept. 2 in which the Seminoles scored 10 touchdowns, including a fourth-quarter scoring pass by the starting quarterback, DANNY KANELL, with the game well in hand.


Economic Scene; Without a two-war script, arms spending could really be cut.
THE fight over military spending is heating up as the House and Senate duel over funds for key weapons and President Clinton threatens to veto any appropriations bill that includes money for arms the Pentagon says it does not want.
Well, that is the standard story, anyway.
And it is indeed true that the futures of three gee-whiz weapons systems -- the B-2 Stealth bomber, the Seawolf attack submarine and a pared-down Star Wars missile defense -- are under attack by deficit fighters.
"Everyone is rummaging around in the basement now, looking for programs to trash," said William Hartung, a senior research fellow at the New School's World Policy Institute.


Sports of The Times By DAVE ANDERSON; The Giants' $4.8 Million Mystery
AFTER giving Herschel Walker $4.8 million, the Giants have forgotten to give him the ball.
Ever since the 33-year-old running back signed a three-year contract as a jack rabbit of all trades following David Meggett's departure, Coach Dan Reeves has touted Walker's versatility: despite his age, still fast and quick with a talent for catching passes as a slotback or a wide receiver, even as a tight end.
And he has always been a premier kickoff-returner.


Lone Star Steakhouse Saloon (STAR,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Sept 5


Election Poll Is Called Illegal
Newark will hold a special election Nov. 7 to fill a vacant City Council seat, and the Council agreed last month to include a Presidential preference poll called Cityvote on the ballot.
The nonpartisan straw poll, sponsored by the United States Conference of Mayors, would ask voters to indicate their choices among 20 possible Presidential candidates.


21 Companies to Expand a Dependent-Care Project
Expanding a program that began three years ago, 21 of the nation's largest corporations will contribute to a $100 million, six-year project to help their employees provide care for children and aging relatives.
The companies, a collection of blue-chip corporations that includes the AT&amp;T Corporation, Johnson &amp; Johnson, Citicorp and the Exxon Corporation, will formally announce a plan today to finance more than 1,000 projects ranging from training for day-care providers to a money-management program for the elderly.


Prime Internet Address Will Now Cost $50 a Year
For many computer users, it is as if the Postal Service is charging them an annual fee for a mail address and refusing to deliver unless they pay up.
Beginning today, Internet users will have to pay to register their so-called domain names -- key components of the Internet addresses used by tens of millions of people for electronic mail and other data services on the global computer network.


Race for the Cure
To the Editor:
As the Susan G. Komen Breast Cancer Foundation's Race for the Cure approaches on Sunday, Sept. 17, I could not be more supportive of trying to raise money and awareness for this terrible life-threatening disease.


Farther East, the Mood Is Dizzy
BROADWAY in SoHo may have gone grandly mainstream, but the excitement has just moved east, to a one-and-a-half-block stretch of Lafayette Street just below Houston Street.
Stylewise, SoHo's eastern border has suddenly become a stretch of white water in an otherwise placid industrial zone.
In this neighborly enclave of home furnishings and clothing shops, one can find the dizzying iconoclasm that used to characterize SoHo.


Raise the Roof Beams, Japan; A Boom in 'Imported' Housing Built the Western Way
It has been nearly a year since Yoko Miyamoto ordered her two-story cedar house from a company in Seattle, and more than four months since the pieces started arriving on flatbed trucks at this cool mountainous resort.
But the three-bedroom alpine house is now nearly complete, and it is American through and through: stained cedar on the outside, panoramic windows, a sturdy wood frame.
Even the insulation and sheetrock were shipped from Seattle.


Military Plane Goes Down Off Sri Lanka, Killing All 75
After a succession of reverses in their war with the Tamil Tiger rebels, Sri Lanka's armed forces suffered a new blow today when a newly acquired transport plane plunged into the sea near Colombo, killing all 75 troops and crew members aboard.
It was the third time in five months that a troop-carrying plane bound for the rebel stronghold on the Jaffna peninsula had crashed with the loss of all aboard.


G.O.P. Medicare Logic Needs a Closer Look
To the Editor:
Speaker Newt Gingrich (letter, Sept. 10) euphemistically calls the Republican proposal to cut $270 billion out of Medicare "an increase, not a reduction." Mr.
Gingrich's reasoning, however, is inconsistent with arguments he has made in the past.


Kathleen Battle, Jazz Headliner
What was Kathleen Battle doing as the headliner in the first concert of the season for Jazz at Lincoln Center?
She was singing spirituals and lullabies, mostly.
In what qualified as a pops concert for the jazz series, she was drawing a crowd to Avery Fisher Hall on Tuesday night (and performing at Lincoln Center after a public falling-out with the Metropolitan Opera).
She was promoting her new album, "So Many Stars" (Sony), which was produced by Robert Sadin, the conductor of the Lincoln Center Jazz Orchestra.
She was employing jazz musicians.
But she did not overcome the vast gap between European and African-American vocal traditions.
The European style, Ms.
Battle's unquestioned dominion, is plotted in detail and steeped in earnestness; the African-American approach leaves room for improvisation, playfulness and parody.
European songs call for instrumental support; African-American ones expect interaction.
The European style floats free of gravity; the African-American style dances toward swing.


Things Are Erotic, Sinister And Odd. Hmm.
Against a picture-perfect Mediterranean sunset, a beautiful woman sings a song from Wagner's "Flying Dutchman" about a ship with blood-red sails guided by a pale mariner searching the seas for his true love.
Moments later, the strand of the song lyric is picked up by a narrator named Edouard Nordmann (Charles Tordjman), a self-described screenwriter living on a tiny, isolated island whose hub is a brothel and casino where the specialty is mah-jongg.
In the screenplay Nordmann is writing and continually revising, the mariner is a supernatural sailor named Frank whose annual visits to the island are said to be his ritual atonement for a terrible crime.
Gradually the myth assumes a more personal and immediate dimension as the screenwriter recalls the death of his young stepdaughter, Santa (Sandrine Le Berre), possibly at the hands of a sailor named Frank (Fred Ward).


Empire Co. reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 31


For a Garden Party Inspired by the Past
JOHN DANZER'S passion for historic garden furniture began five years ago, when he was living in England and collecting antique garden pieces.
Along the way he negotiated 17 licenses with museums to reproduce their pieces.
Now, Mr.
Danzer has opened a furniture showroom, called Munder-Skiles (named after his grandfathers).
The 800-square-foot space in what was once a third-floor apartment is a cross between a freshly decorated living room and a breezy pergola.
Above: the Xylo settee, a copy of one of Mr.
Danzer's auction finds, $1,700; the Emblem table, with its Gothic feeling, $650; side tables inspired by fruit-tree boxes at Mount Vernon, $875 each, and Swan metal furniture, $600 to $1,200.
Munder-Skiles is at 799 Madison Avenue (68th Street); (212) 717-0150.


METRO DIGEST
EX-M.T.A.
They said they were eager to see how he played this year.


Islanders' Flatley Knows All About Lean Seasons
Think of Patrick Flatley as something of a poor man's Don Mattingly.
Like his Yankee counterpart, the captain of the Islanders has toiled for well over a decade trying to bring some glory back to a once-proud franchise.
Like Mattingly, Flatley has come agonizingly close to the only goal that really keeps him going after all these years: a championship ring.


Avoiding Mission Creep
NATO's bombing campaign in Bosnia has two legitimate and narrow purposes -- to get the deadly Bosnian Serb siege guns pulled back from Sarajevo and to encourage all sides to negotiate seriously about a compromise peace.
President Clinton should resist pressure to terminate the bombing before it achieves those goals, but he must also avoid the temptation to escalate the attacks into a open-ended NATO intervention.
Senator John McCain has rightly warned of the dangers of "mission creep," namely the imperceptible passage from limited intervention to extensive NATO involvement in Bosnia's war.


ABM Industries Inc.(ABM,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 31


Acklands Ltd. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 31


As Chancellor Search Goes On Mayor Pursues Ex-M.T.A. Head
Richard Ravitch, the former chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, is Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's leading candidate for chancellor of New York City's schools, but he has so far refused to say whether he would accept the job, administration and school officials said yesterday.
Mr.
Ravitch, a lawyer with a long record in government service who ran unsuccessfully for the Democratic nomination for Mayor in 1989, has been talking with the Mayor's office and the Board of Education, the officials said, to discuss conditions under which he might take over the nation's largest school system.


Port Authority Won't Soon Abandon Economic Forecast Role
To the Editor:
In "New York Is, or Was, a Model for London" (Op-Ed, Sept. 8), Tony Travers chastises the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey for announcing that it will not be raising tolls and fares, claiming this will lead to a diminution in the agency's economic forecasting, one of its functions.


Yankee Bash at Jacobs Field Is Finally Broken Up
Not every night at Jacobs Field is joyous and wonderful for the Yankees.
It only seemed that way.
The Indians, angry and embarrassed by the punishment the Yankees had inflicted upon them over two straight nights, finally gave their visitors a close look at why they are considered the finest team in the major leagues.
Charles Nagy pitched a three-hit shutout and showed why Cleveland leads the American League in numerous pitching categories.
Albert Belle rocked a prodigious home run and showed why the Indians top the league in homers.
Omar Vizquel, the tiny shortstop who is in the lineup for his golden glove, showed how deep the Indians are with three runs batted in.
Jose Mesa, who has more saves than all 27 teams, was not even needed to secure Cleveland's 5-0 victory.


Labor Agreement Ratified by N.B.A. Players
The National Basketball Association lockout is almost history.
By a margin of 25-2, the league's player representatives voted today to ratify a new six-year labor agreement.
The lockout, which started July 1, is expected to end Monday, after the league's owners vote on the new contract.
David Stern, the commissioner, has guaranteed that the owners will ratify, and they need a three-fourths majority to do so during a conference call Friday afternoon.


S.E.C. Accuses a Company Of Misusing I.R.A. Money
The Securities and Exchange Commission accused a California company yesterday of violating Federal securities laws and misappropriating at least $4.5 million from individual retirement accounts and other retirement plans that had been entrusted to its care by more than 14,500 savers across the country.
The charges were made in a civil complaint filed in Federal District Court in Washington, D.C., against Qualified Pensions Inc. of Glendale, Calif., and its founder and president, Jerry G. Allison.
The S.E.C. further accused the company of failing to register with the commission, as required by law.


After Being No. 1, What? Ask Tim Allen
Tim Allen, who in the past year has rewritten the standard for success in show business by headlining a No. 1 television show, writing the No. 1 best-selling book and starring in the No. 1 movie all at the same time, said he had been thinking a lot about despair lately.
And he's not setting up a punch line.
"Time magazine did a cover story on despair a few weeks ago," he said.
"This is the most creative time I've ever had in my life and yet I feel like I'm half empty, the tank is half empty."


Being White in America
To the Editor:
Anthony Williams (letter, Sept. 7) believes that "white students have legacies rich with tradition," including parents who have gone before them and football outings with alumni.
Some do, but many more do not.


Removing Roadblocks to Computer Use
IN a bare cinderblock room in the Stanley M. Isaacs Senior Center on East 93d Street, Peggy Abbott sat before a computer, responding to the directions on the screen.
Ed Costello, her instructor for the beginners' computer course, monitored her progress.
"Do you believe it?" he said. "Abbott and Costello!"


Transactions
Auto Racing
PLAYERS LTD./FORSYTHE RACING -- Named Richard Spenard consultant.
Baseball  National League
FLORIDA MARLINS -- Purchased the contract of Tony Castro, pitcher from Duluth-Superior of the Northern League.
Football  National Football League
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Signed Dirk Borgognone, kicker.
Waived Russell White, running back.
JACKSONVILLE JAGUARS -- Signed Brad Goebel, quarterback.
Waived Gordon Laro, tight end-running back.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Re-signed Alcides Catanho, linebacker.
Placed Daivid Green, running back, on injured reserve.
Canadian Football League
HAMILTON TIGER-CATS -- Released Marcus Cotton, defensive end.
SASKATCHEWAN ROUGHRIDERS -- Signed Dwayne Provo, defensive back.
Hockey  National Hockey League
NEW YORK ISLANDERS -- Returned Andrew Taylor, left wing, to Detroit and Gord Walsh, left wing, to Kingston of the Ontario Hockey League.
WINNIPEG JETS -- Agreed to terms with Teemu Selanne, right wing. Colonial Hockey League
SAGINAW WHEELS -- Named Dennis Desrosiers assistant general manager-assistant coach.
Agreed to terms with Lee Giffin, forward Mark Donohue, right wing; Shawn Yakimishyn, left wing; Bob Jones, Jason Stos and Geoff Simpson, defensemen; and Kevin Butt, goalie.
Southern Hockey League
WINSTON-SALEM MAMMOUTHS -- Named Patrick Doyle general manager and John Anderson coach.
Horse Racing
NEW YORK RACING ASSOCIATION -- Elected Kenneth Noe, Jr. chairman of the board of trustees.
Soccer
U.S. SOCCER FEDERATION -- Named Rob Beck executive director. Major League Soccer
COLUMBUS -- Named Joel Pizzuti director of operations; John Borozzi marketing director; and Mark Morris director of ticket operations.
College
ALBANY STATE -- Named Michael Piro men's assistant soccer coach.
ARMSTRONG STATE -- Named Calvain Culberson assistant baseball coach.
FRANCIS MARION -- Named Kelvin Wymbs men's assistant basketball coach.
INDIANA, PA. -- Named Michael Lorenzen gymnastics coach.
MANHATTAN -- Named Jerry Searles men's assistant basketball coach.
Named Stivin Misevic women's assistant soccer coach.
PRINCETON -- Named Bill Carmody associate head baseball coach.
SANTA BARBARA -- Named John H. Wade men's basketball coach.
VENTURA -- Named Virgil Watson men's basketball coach.
WAKE FOREST -- Named Perk Weisenburger associate athletic director for internal operation.


Celestial Seasonings Picks an Agency
Celestial Seasonings Inc., the maker and marketer of herbal teas, said yesterday that it had selected Citron Haligman Bedecarre in San Francisco to handle its account, previously at Grey Advertising in New York.
The billings were estimated at more than $5 million.


Plan to Overhaul Farm Subsidies Is Gaining Support in Congress
A plan for the broadest revamping of the nation's farm subsidy system since the Depression is gathering backers in the House and received strong support today from the chairman of the Senate Agriculture Committee.
Senator Richard G. Lugar of Indiana, the committee chairman and a candidate for the Republican Presidential nomination, announced today that if the House approved the plan, as appears increasingly possible, he would back a similar approach.


Riser Foods (RSR,A) reports earnings for Yr to Jul 1


Accord Is Set On Bank Bill In the House
Two House chairmen have reached a tentative compromise that could eliminate an obstacle to removing barriers separating the banking and securities industries, Congressional aides said today.
The elimination of the Glass-Steagall Act rules that separate the two industries has become entangled in a dispute over whether banks should also be allowed to merge with insurance companies.
Democrats and conservative Republicans on the House Banking Committee added a provision allowing such mergers to a bill this summer that would reduce banking regulations.
The regulatory bill is linked to the Glass-Steagall revision bill.


Coliseum Reopens After Decade in Limbo
For more than 10 years it has largely been an empty shell on Columbus Circle, an unattractive, windowless block of a building that was the subject of bitter battles among environmentalists, developers and city officials.
Today, something is finally happening with the New York Coliseum, but not the gargantuan residential and commercial project that Mayor Edward I. Koch and Mortimer B. Zuckerman proposed a decade ago.
The Coliseum is reopening as what it was designed to be in 1954, a home for commercial trade shows in Manhattan.


Illegal Price-Fixing Charged In Danbury Hospital Lawsuit
In the first antitrust lawsuits of their kind, the Justice Department charged yesterday that hospitals with local monopolies in Danbury, Conn., and St.
Joseph, Mo., had joined with doctors in illegal price-fixing schemes to keep out lower-cost managed-care companies.
In both cases, Justice Department officials have obtained tentative consent decrees that they said would end the price-fixing while allowing the doctors and hospitals to work together in new ways that could cut health-care costs.


M.T.A. Calls Tunnel Track Badly Flawed
Six years after the Transit Authority opened the 63d Street subway tunnel and concluded an agonizing history of delays and construction problems, the agency will soon have to replace nearly all of the track in it, at a cost of $46 million.
The track -- 17,000 feet of it -- was undermined by an innovative but flawed design that Transit Authority planners settled on in the late 1960's for attaching the rails to the tunnel floor, said Peter B. Fisher, an assistant vice president with the authority.
In addition, he said, poor work by contractors and the flooding that plagued the tunnel for years before it opened probably worsened the problem.


Reader's Digest Association Inc.(RDA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


In Reversal, Doctor Barred From Practice
Reversing his earlier decision, a judge yesterday barred a Manhattan gynecologist from practicing medicine while the state holds hearings into whether the doctor's medical license should be revoked over his handling of abortions.
Justice Richard B. Lowe 3d of State Supreme Court in Manhattan ruled last month that Dr.
Herbert Schwarz could continue practicing medicine although he could not perform abortions, prompting a furious protest from the State Heath Commissioner, Dr.
Barbara A. DeBuono.


A Phantom Exposed: Concrete at Carnegie
Ever since Carnegie Hall was rebuilt in 1986, critics and musicians have complained that the lush, warm sound for which the hall was renowned had been deadened by a layer of concrete under the stage.
And for just as long, the hall's administration, with the assurances of the architects who did the renovation, have denied that any such concrete layer existed.
Isaac Stern, the president of Carnegie Hall, went so far at one point as to offer to rip up the stage on the condition that critics pay to replace it if no concrete was found.
But over the last two years, hall officials noticed that the stage floor had begun to warp.
And when workers took the stage apart to correct that problem last month, during the annual maintenance period, they discovered that there was indeed concrete under the stage, several hundred pounds of it in a layer that varied from one to four inches thick.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the slaying of a bond trader, Christina Jung, misidentified her employer.
It is Daiwa Securities America Inc., not its parent, Daiwa Securities.


Corrections
A picture caption in some copies on Tuesday about a memorial service for Jimmy Keyes, the co-writer of the doo-wop classic "Sh-Boom" and a member of the Chords, misidentified the woman shown.
She is Arlene Foote-Patterson, who was Mr.
Keyes's friend, not his wife.


Scientologists Lose a Battle on the Internet
Upholding free speech on the Internet, a Federal judge has ordered the Church of Scientology to return computers and files seized here last month from two men who used a computer bulletin board to disseminate information critical of the church.
"The public interest is best served by the free exchange of ideas," the judge, John Kane of Federal District Court, said on Tuesday in Denver.


Jeremy Brett, an Unnerving Holmes, Is Dead at 59
Jeremy Brett, who incarnated Sherlock Holmes in the long-running "Mystery!" series on Public Television, died on Tuesday in London.
He was 59.
The cause was heart failure, according to Granada Television, which produced the series.


On Vietnam, Kennedy White House Flew Blind
To the Editor:
Re "McNamara's War, and Mine" by Louis G. Sarris (Op-Ed, Sept. 5):


A New Chintz, Hold the Blooms
IF your eyes glaze over at the thought of flowered chintzes, Hinson &amp; Company's recently introduced Corinthian-vase chintz may inspire a flurry of new decorating.
Greek vessels are adorned with scenes and motifs from antiquity in three color combinations.
But the origin of the design is more modern.
It came from a 1950's English fabric.
The fabric is $66 a yard at Hinson, 979 Third Avenue (58th Street).


2 Lives: Attack, Injury, Hope, Death; Officer Forgave Troubled Youth Who Shot Him
Police Officer Steven McDonald and Shavod Jones met only once, nine years ago and for just a few seconds.
But the echoes of those moments are with Officer McDonald still, in the mechanical sighs of the respirator that allows him to breathe.
On a misty, muggy July afternoon in 1986, Shavod Jones shot Officer McDonald three times in Central Park.
Mr.
Jones, who was only 15, was sentenced to up to 10 years in prison; Officer McDonald, who was only 29, was left a quadriplegic.


Job Training Costs More Than Welfare
To the Editor:
"Congress Returns" (editorial, Sept. 6) states of welfare: "Everyone wants to put able-bodied recipients to work. But no one knows how to institute that pleasant-sounding reform." Many recipients lack the skills, information and transportation to obtain and keep private-sector jobs.


A Hanger Design For Tight Spots
FOR Ken Siegel, a 29-year-old Californian, the proverbial light bulb went off in his head about five years ago when he found himself struggling to get a sweater off a wire hanger.
"The threads got caught and I got a better idea," Mr.
Siegel said.
Thus was born the Close Hanger, a plastic hanger in black or white that folds so it can be inserted and removed through the collar of a garment.
A spring allows it to snap back to its original shape, and a button tab keeps it folded for traveling.
A set of three hangers is $29.95 from the Hammacher Schlemmer Skymall catalogue: (800) 424-6255.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14 BELARUS SHOOTS DOWN BALLOON In an incident recalling the most violent excesses of the cold war, Belarussian combat aircraft shot down a sport balloon that crossed the border, killing two Americans.
A1 NATO RUNNING OUT OF TARGETS NATO military commanders say that they are running out of military targets in Bosnia and that political constraints are barring attacks on troops or civilian targets.
A1 SERBS FLEE BOSNIAN OFFENSIVE As many as 40,000 Bosnian Serb civilians fled an offensive by the combined forces of the Bosnian Government and the Bosnian Croats.
A10 Gen.
Ratko Mladic defies NATO and Serb political leaders.
A10 TENSIONS EASE OVER MACEDONIA Greece agreed to take steps to lift its 19-month trade embargo against the former Yugoslav republic of Macedonia.
A11 GRENADE HITS EMBASSY IN MOSCOW A rocket-propelled grenade fired from a busy street blasted through a wall into the United States Embassy in Moscow, causing damage but no injuries.
A3 CRASH KILLS 75 IN SRI LANKA Sri Lanka's armed forces suffered a new blow when a newly acquired transport plane plunged into the sea near Colombo, killing all 75 troops and crew members aboard.
A7 Amman Journal: A kosher restaurant has no takers.
A4 National A16-24, B12-14 WELFARE PROVISION IS KILLED Democratic and moderate Republican Senators eliminated a bitterly contested requirement of the welfare bill, intended to deny additional benefits to women who have more children while on welfare.
A1 WEIGHT GAIN IS TIED TO DEATH A major new study suggests that even a moderate gain, of 22 pounds or more above a person's weight at age 18, incurs a greater risk of earlier death.
A1 ARRESTS IN ON-LINE PORNOGRAPHY The nation's largest computer network has been illegally used to distribute child pornography and arrange sex with children, the F.B.I. said after making a dozen arrests and searching 120 homes.
A1 RULING ON ON-LINE FREEDOM A judge has ordered the Church of Scientology to return computers and files seized last month from two Colorado men who used a computer bulletin board to disseminate information critical of the church.
B14 LOBBYING AGAINST REGULATION Back surgeons have mobilized to eliminate the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research, which is supposed to evaluate the effectiveness of medical treatments.
A16 SIMPSON DNA REDUX A prosecution expert said new results of a more widely accepted form of DNA testing confirmed that blood found in O. J. Simpson's Ford Bronco came from Mr.
Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman.
A20 VOTE TO ABOLISH LEGAL HELP A House panel voted to abolish the Legal Services Corporation, which provides lawyers for poor people in an array of civil cases.
B12 ENERGY PROGRAM IS REVIVED A Senate subcommittee restored money for a $1 billion energy assistance program for the poor and dozens of other programs.
B12 Mayor Kurt Schmoke of Baltimore won the Democratic primary.
B13 Upper Peninsula Journal: They're Yoopers and proud of it.
A16 A satellite that grows semiconductor film had more trouble.
A17 Spanish researchers say they have evidence of a "brown dwarf." A24 Metro Digest B1 MAYOR'S CHOICE FOR CHANCELLOR The former chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority is Mayor Giuliani's leading candidate for New York City schools chancellor but has refused to say whether he would take the job, administration and school officials said.
A1 Business Digest D1 Arts/Entertainment C13-20 CARNEGIE HALL UNVEILS PHANTOM After denying for years that a layer of concrete lay under its stage, Carnegie Hall has discovered that it was there after all.
Musicians had long argued that hidden concrete from a renovation was muffling the hall's legendary sound.
A1 Berlin unveils a rescued Otto Dix work.
C13 Tim Allen reflects on being No. 1.
C13 Theater: "The Island of Lost Shoes." C17 Film: "The Blue Villa." C17 Music: Kathleen Battle.
C13 Dance: "Traditions in Balance." C17 Books: "Panama," by Eric Zencey.
C18 Obituaries B15 The Home Section C1-11 Rap family values.
C1 Sports B16-23 Baseball: Indians defeat Yanks.
B17 Mets beat Astros.
B19 Braves clinch N.L.
East.
B19 Basketball: N.B.A. lockout near an end after player reps vote.
B17 Boxing: Fox Network lands Tyson-Mathis fight.
B17 Columns: Anderson on Giants B17 Hockey: Rangers ask Samuelsson to help younger players.
B19 Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27 Editorials Belated response to the drought.
Avoiding mission creep.
Steven R. Weisman: Rockefeller.
Letters William Safire: Stop computer slots.
Maureen Dowd: Candidate from Random House.
Grigory A. Yavlinsky: To Russian democrats -- don't Unite.
J.
Brent Walker: Separating church and state.
Chronicle D20 Bridge C17  Crossword C18


Crown Books Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Finding Henry Adams's Lost Years
PANAMA  By Eric Zencey  375 pages. Farrar Straus &amp; Giroux. $24.
In Henry Adams's famous autobiography, "The Education of Henry Adams," one of the significant omissions is the seven-year period after the suicide of Adams's wife, Clover, in 1885.
Now, into that gap has rushed the fertile imagination of Eric Zencey, a professor of history at Goddard College, in Vermont, and a contributing editor of The North American Review.


Stocks Rise, With Indexes Again at Highs
The stock market surged again yesterday, with the major indexes all establishing new records, but advancing stocks barely topped decliners on the New York Stock Exchange, the American Stock Exchange and the Nasdaq market.
"The most significant factor was that the market differentiated among stocks, not among groups," said Louis Ehrenkrantz, president of Ehrenkrantz King Nussbaum.


Turner Cancels Board Meeting
Turner Broadcasting System Inc. has canceled its regularly scheduled board meeting tomorrow, according to several people close to the company, indicating the continuing complications in the plans for Time Warner Inc. to acquire the company.
Turner's chairman, Ted Turner, had hoped that Time Warner would have reached a preliminary agreement with the Liberty Media Corporation concerning the takeover by the time the board met, but negotiations continue without resolution.


Guilty Plea in Detective's Death
The final defendant in the 1993 killing of a Newark detective in the Essex County Courthouse pleaded guilty yesterday to conspiracy to murder, The Associated Press reported.
Kevin Mattox of Newark admitted that he had agreed to drive the getaway car for Al-Damany Kamau, who was convicted in May in the murder of Detective John Sczyrek, said Clifford J. Minor, the county Prosecutor.


Market Place; Just How Far Is I.B.M. Going to Fall?
Was Jerry York on to something?
Many I.B.M. investors and analysts have been asking that question since Jerome B. York, the company's highly respected chief financial officer, left earlier this month to help Kirk Kerkorian, the billionaire investor, in his attempt to wrest control of the Chrysler Corporation.


Captain's Language Irks Fans
MIKE KEANE, newly installed as captain of the Montreal Canadiens, could not have picked a more sensitive topic to slip on.
With training camp barely begun, he has managed to outrage the team's French-speaking fans by asserting he doesn't need to learn their language.
"Everybody here speaks English," Keane told the French-language newspaper La Presse this week.
"I don't see any problem."


Accounts
*
Quantum Corp., Milpitas, Calif., to Goldberg Moser O'Neill, San Francisco, to handle advertising for the computer company, previously at Winkler McManus, San Francisco.
The billings were estimated at $6 million to $8 million. *
National Vision Associates Ltd., Lawrenceville, Ga., to Pollak Levitt Chaiet Advertising, Atlanta, to handle advertising for the operator of retail vision centers, previously handled in-house.
The billings were estimated at $4 million to $6 million.


Heinz (H.J) Co. (HNZ,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Aug 2


Holtz Is Up and Walking
Notre Dame Coach LOU HOLTZ was up and walking yesterday, one day after undergoing surgery to remove pressure on his spinal cord.
Holtz was moved into a regular room at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., after spending Tuesday night in intensive care for routine observation.
He is expected to be hospitalized through the weekend.


Editorial Notebook; Mr. Rockefeller Regrets
This has not been an easy year for David Rockefeller.
The Chase Manhattan Bank, long associated with his family, has been swallowed up by Chemical Bank, forcing Mr.
Rockefeller to expressions of gratitude that its name would be kept.
Now Rockefeller Center is in financial ruins, up for grabs in a bidding war.
In February, Mr.
Rockefeller had the unpleasant experience of flying to Japan to plead with the people to whom he sold the world's most prestigious office complex not to declare bankruptcy.
But before the meeting began, he fell on the sidewalk and broke his leg.
In financial terms, however, the Chase deal has strengthened the value of the substantial Rockefeller holdings in that bank, and the Rockefeller Center debacle has left the Rockefeller family with a huge financial return.
The bankruptcy flowed, after all, from the fact that the Rockefellers managed to sell Rockefeller Center at an inflated price -- not once, but in effect twice.
In 1985, the family mortgaged it for $1.3 billion, pocketing an estimated $300 million for themselves.
A few years later it sold 80 percent of the property itself to Mitsubishi Estate in Tokyo for $1.4 billion.
As a result, $1.7 billion was reaped from properties that are now said to be worth a fraction of that sum.


CHRONICLE
It was partygoers' gridlock at the KARL LAGERFELD show on Tuesday night at the Industria Superstudio in TriBeCa, but guests were not there to see the prolific designer's latest fashions.
More than 800 people converged to gaze upon an exhibition of Mr.
Lagerfeld's photographs.
"It's a good thing to be able to view the world with other eyes," he said.
"My fashion and my photography are now mixed up in such a way that I don't know where one ends and one starts."


SENATE KILLS PLAN TO LIMIT WELFARE IF A FAMILY GROWS
Democrats and moderate Republicans joined forces in the Senate today to eliminate one of the most bitterly contested requirements of the Republican welfare bill, intended to deny additional benefits to women who have more children while on the welfare rolls.
Later in the day, in a related vote, they also rejected a move to deny cash benefits to teen-agers who have children out of wedlock.
The votes enraged some conservatives.
Calling the measures essential to reduce illegitimacy, they vowed to restore them in a conference committee that will resolve differences between the Senate bill and the version passed by the House.


Thousands of Serbian Refugees Flee Western Bosnia


A Fugitive Novelist Faces a New Charge
Like a character in one of her romance novels, Barbara Joslyn has been a fugitive since fleeing more than a month ago from a prison sentence for the burglary of a wealthy friend's apartment.
Yesterday, there was a new plot twist.
The Manhattan District Attorney's office announced that a grand jury had indicted her for jumping bail of $25,000.
If caught and convicted, she faces up to four years in jail, on top of her sentence of four and a half years for the burglary case.


Senate Panel Breaks With House Cuts
In a sharp break with the House, a Senate Appropriations subcommittee today restored financing to a $1 billion energy assistance program for the poor, to President Clinton's education overhaul project and to dozens of other labor, health and education programs that had been either killed or severely cut by the other chamber.
And, in another departure from the House spending plan, moderate Republicans on the Senate subcommittee joined the minority Democrats to strip away dozens of provisions that would have changed policy as well as spending.
Among those provisions were restrictions on Medicaid payments for most abortions and a ban on lobbying by organizations that receive Federal grants.


Corrections
An article on Sept. 1 about the funeral of the union leader Cleveland Robinson referred imprecisely to his role in District 65 of the United Auto Workers.
In 1950, Mr.
Robinson was elected vice president, and in 1952 secretary-treasurer; he held that post until his retirement in 1992.
He did not hold the top position in the union.


Ann Belcher, 100, a Physician To Shop Clerks and Rockefellers
Dr.
Ann S. Belcher, an ear, nose and throat specialist who practiced in the same Manhattan building for more than two-thirds of a century, died at her home in Seattle last month at 100.
For 68 years, from 1924 to 1992, Dr.
Belcher's office at 20 East 53d Street attracted patients ranging from neighborhood shop clerks to corporate executives, several generations of Rockefellers and Jacqueline Onassis.


Competing Electronics Camps Near Videodisk Compromise
Two competing camps of electronics manufacturers are nearing a compromise to prevent a standards battle over the new digital videodisk, industry officials said today.
Under the plan being discussed, the industry would adopt the physical disk structure proposed by the camp led by the Toshiba Corporation and Time Warner Inc.
That structure can store more information than the disks proposed by the other camp.


Reitman's (Canada) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 29


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
4.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.00
5.65
4.78
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.29
5.28
4.56
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.29
5.28
4.93
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.18
6.15
7.39
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.52
6.50
7.67
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.50
7.47
8.50
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.99
5.99
6.45
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Insurance Chief Resigns in Trenton Under a Financial Cloud
New Jersey's Insurance Commissioner resigned today just hours after the release of a report by the State Attorney General saying he acted improperly in divesting one of his insurance businesses when he took the job.
The Commissioner, Andrew J. Karpinski, who took over the post on March 3, 1994, became the first member of Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's administration to leave under a cloud.
It was unclear today what effect his resignation would have on the investigation that Mr.
Karpinski initiated in April into the marketing practices of the Prudential Insurance Company of America, the nation's largest life insurer.


McGriff's Homer Helps Braves Clinch N.L. East Title
Braves 9, Rockies 7
The Atlanta Braves clinched the National League East championship last night when the Philadelphia Phillies lost to the Montreal Expos, 5-4.
Earlier, the Braves defeated the Colorado Rockies, 9-7.
The Braves thus became the first N.L. team to win four consecutive division titles; Oakland won five in a row in the American League West from 1971-75.
Expos 5, Phillies 4
Rondell White went 3 for 4 with two runs batted in as host Montreal beat Philadelphia to gain a split of the two-game series.
Cubs 7, Dodgers 6
Shawon Dunston drove in a run with a bases-loaded chopper in the 13th inning as Chicago topped Los Angeles despite blowing a three-run lead in the ninth.
Padres 8, Pirates 7
Pinch-hitter Roberto Petagine's two-run double keyed a four-run seventh inning that carried San Diego to the victory over host Pittsburgh.
Cardinals 8, Giants 4
David Bell homered and drove in three runs as St.
Louis completed a three-game sweep of San Francisco at Busch Stadium.
Reds 6, Marlins 0
Pete Schourek took a no-hitter into the sixth inning and Barry Larkin slammed his 14th home run as host Cincinnati beat Florida.
Schourek (16-7) joined Atlanta's Greg Maddux as the only 16-game winners in the N.L.
Mariners 7, Twins 4
Jay Buhner homered in his fifth straight game, hitting a three-run shot that capped an eighth-inning comeback, and host Seattle moved back into first place in the wild-card race by beating Minnesota.
Red Sox 2, Orioles 0
In Baltimore, Tim Wakefield (16-4) allowed only two hits and the rookie Dwayne Hosey hit his first major league homer as Boston ended its five-game losing streak.
Rangers 3, Blue Jays 2
Ivan Rodriguez had an r.b.i. single in the 11th inning as Texas scored its fourth straight victory.
Athletics 6, Royals 5
Mark McGwire hit his 30th homer as the Athletics defeated visiting Kansas City.
McGwire's homer was his 268th, tying him with Reggie Jackson for first place on the Oakland career list.
Tigers 5, Brewers 3
Lou Whitaker's three-run homer in the ninth inning lifted Detroit past visiting Milwaukee to extend the Tigers' winning streak to five games.
Whitaker and Alan Trammell played in their 1,915th game, breaking the A.L. record for games played by teammates held by George Brett and Frank White of the Royals.
White Sox 6, Angels 1
Frank Thomas became the fifth major leaguer to drive in 100 runs in each of his first five full seasons, hitting two homers night as Chicago beat host California.
Only Joe DiMaggio, Al Simmons, Al Rosen and Hal Trotsky previously had reached 100 r.b.i. in their first five years.
Padres' Roberts Breaks Leg
Outfielder Bip Roberts of the San Diego Padres broke a bone in his right leg yesterday when he was hit by a pitch in the bullpen.
Roberts's fibula was fractured when he was struck by a pitch thrown by his teammate Andy Ashby.
Ashby was doing his regular work between starts and Roberts was standing at the plate.


State-of-the-Art Gym: Slick and Groovy, but Cozy
THE paint is barely dry and there's plenty of that luscious upholstery still to come in, but lots of people are already busily pumping iron at David Barton's new 14,000-square-foot gym at 30 East 85th Street.
Tufted padding in pewter-hued vinyl reminiscent of vintage wrestling mats covers the walls.
Huge pale-wood-framed mirrors lean against columns, and a silver-leaf painting by Nancy Lorenz can be appreciated in the weight-lifting area.
It's Mr.
Barton's second Manhattan gym (his first is at 552 Avenue of the Americas, at 16th Street), and his gym at the Delano Hotel in Miami Beach is nearly ready.
"Gyms are the bars of the 90's," decreed Mr.
Barton, who sees exercise and bodybuilding as the social activity of our time.
He's shown above (he's the one with the muscles) with Thomas O'Brien, a partner in Aero, the SoHo architectural firm that designed the space.
Not that it was easy translating Mr.
Barton's feelings into three dimensions: "I wanted something warm, that was somehow new and groovy and slick," and that would combine the feelings of "weather-beaten white driftwood and of going up to a cozy attic where you go and work."


For Now, No Change In Lineup For Giants
Dan Reeves hinted on Monday there could be personnel changes after the Giants' collapse at Kansas City.
Today, before the first practice of the week in preparation for Green Bay on Sunday, Reeves said he was standing pat.
It's just as well, because for the second straight week they will play a team that runs a variation of the West Coast offense.
And facing the Packers at Lambeau Field might not be the best time to go with a shuffled lineup.


Jerome Foods Reviews an Account
Carmichael Lynch in Minneapolis and Jerome Foods Inc. have decided after 12 years to end their relationship on the account for Jerome's branded retail division, with billings estimated at $2 million.
As a result, Jerome, which sells the Turkey Store line of products in supermarkets, has placed the account in review.
Steven C. Frank, retail marketing director for the Turkey Store in Barron, Wis., said yesterday that a decision was expected by December.


Amman Journal; Kosher in Jordan, an Idea Whose Time It Wasn't
If peace between Israel and Jordan was meant to radiate warmth, it did not work out that way for Khalid al-Hindi and his Israeli partner, Pinchas Sela, at the first and only kosher restaurant in this part of the Arab world.
A year after a peace treaty between the two countries was signed with fanfare, Mr.
Hindi glanced sadly at two dozen empty tables at Istanbul, his modest, somewhat seedy, restaurant, and the patio outside.


Judge Blocks Newark's Bid To Halt Water
The city of Newark began shutting off water to two housing complexes last night in a dispute over $2.3 million in unpaid water bills, but a judge quickly halted the move.
The dispute involves 800 apartments, occupied by between 1,500 and 2,000 people, from young families to senior citizens, that are operated by the New Community Corporation, the largest nonprofit agency in the state.


Bridge
Players from the New York area will be at the forefront next month in Beijing when the World Women's Team Championship is held.
One team with New York roots has been slightly dislocated by the withdrawal of Judi Radin for personal reasons.
She has been replaced by Kerri Shuman, who will play with Karen McCallum.
Carol Simon will partner Kitty Munson, and Sue Picus will play with Rozanne Pollack.


Brady (W.H.) (BRCOA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jul 31


Stern Works Magic and Keeps His Perfect Mark
David Stern is so good, management people in other sports were rooting for him to fail.
David Stern is so good, people are trying to give him credit for a successful lockout strategy that he says wasn't even a strategy.
Barring an objection to the decertification election by one or more of the players who initiated it, which now seems unlikely, the National Basketball Association season will be played like all of the others under Stern: completely, interestingly, profitably.


Use of Computer Network For Child Sex Sets Off Raids
The Justice Department today announced a dozen arrests in a two-year investigation into the use of America Online, the country's largest computer network, to distribute child pornography and to lure minors into sex.
The searches of 125 homes and offices around the country represented the largest investigation by Federal agents into the misuse of a nationwide computer network, in which information is exchanged between computers.


CKE Restaurants (CKR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Aug 14


BUSINESS DIGEST
Inflation News Lifts Stocks Into Record Territory
The stock market surged again, buoyed by several Government reports indicating that inflation remained in check.
All the major indexes set records, but winners barely topped losers.


Price Fixing Charged In Health Care Suits
In the first antitrust lawsuits of their kind, the Justice Department charged yesterday that hospitals with local monopolies in Danbury, Conn., and St.
Joseph, Mo., had joined with doctors in illegal price-fixing schemes to keep out lower-cost managed care companies.


Belated Response to the Drought
A teasing sprinkle of rain Wednesday morning served to remind everyone that vast areas of the Northeast are desperate for more.
Some parts of the region have suffered several droughts in recent years, but for New Jersey this is the worst one since 1985.
Last winter's light snowfall and the summer's light rainfall -- including the driest August on record -- were clear warnings of trouble to come.
Reservoir levels have dropped precipitously in both New York and New Jersey, to roughly 58 percent of capacity where they should be 20 percentage points fuller.
That should have triggered extra conservation measures before now.
But people and politicians tend not to respond to water shortages until the well is almost dry, too late to save the crops and fish, as well as the trees and shrubs, that have already been wiped out.


Essay; Stop Computer Slots
At last: a candidate for the Republican Presidential nomination has come up with a moral issue that the next President and Congress can actually do something about.
The issue is state-sponsored gambling, a $40 billion-a-year cancer ravaging society, corrupting public officials and becoming the fastest growing teen-age addiction.


Is It a Murder on a Set? A Witness Can't Speak
Anthony Waller's "Mute Witness," a crafty thriller with a fine taste for the sinister, loves to remind its audience that appearances can be deceiving.
So it has Billy (Marina Sudina) and her sister Karen (Fay Ripley), two young American women involved with a film crew working in Moscow, comparing notes about the cameraman.
They think he's cute.
You won't.
The handsome cameraman looks friendly as he shoots the long, very fake-looking death scene that Billy has helped prepare.
But when she sees him again later that same day, it's a different story.
Billy forgets something on the job, quietly returns to the film studio and walks in to see the cameraman filming a porn film after hours.
While she watches, the blowsy blonde feigning sexual ecstasy is suddenly butchered by her partner, who wears a ski mask. (The gore is mostly left to the imagination.) And the cameraman treats this snuff film as if it's all in a day's work.


Wilkinson Arrested for Domestic Dispute
Cincinnati Bengals defensive lineman DAN WILKINSON pleaded not guilty yesterday to a charge of domestic violence for allegedly punching his girlfriend, who is four months pregnant, in the stomach.
The 6-foot-4-inch, 315-pound lineman, last year's top pick in the National Football League draft, issued a statement asking for people to leave him alone while he tries to resolve the fight with his live-in companion, Shawnda Lamarr, 20.


City Hall Is a Happy Trail for Roy and Dale


Dam Would Pose a Real Threat to Yellowstone
To the Editor:
Joseph J. Baylis's assertion (letter, Sept. 8) that Crown Butte's New World mine won't threaten Yellowstone National Park smacks of technicians' hubris than scientific certainty.
Mr.
Baylis asserts that the dam that would hold acid-forming "tailings" wastes from the mine would survive all threats.


For Apprentices, All the Sea's a School


Brilliant Strategist or Just Lucky?
MY AMERICAN JOURNEY  By Colin Powell  With Joseph E. Persico  643 pages.
Random House. $25.95.
For months now, Gen.
Colin L. Powell has been America's favorite phantom candidate, racking up points in Presidential polls, even as he has primed the market for his much-ballyhooed book.
Given General Powell's reticence about specific issues, his popularity has been based almost entirely on his character and his life experience: his image as a strong, no-nonsense leader during the Persian Gulf war, and his Horatio Algeresque rise from the not-so-mean streets of New York to the meaner streets of Washington.


Tenured Professor Is Dismissed
In what is believed to be the first dismissal of a tenured professor at a state college in New Jersey, the Rowan College Board of Trustees on Wednesday dismissed a sociology professor who had taught at the institution for 26 years.
The professor, Manju Sheth, was accused of verbally attacking students and faculty, missing appointments with students and arriving late at meetings.
Thomas Wirth, a spokesman for the Council of New Jersey State College Locals, said he thought that Ms.
Sheth was the first tenured professor ever to be dismissed from a New Jersey state college.


Sending Patients to Manhattan
Doctors at Jersey City Medical Center will be able to refer their managed-care patients to the Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York for liver and heart transplants and other sophisticated procedures, officials of the two hospitals announced yesterday.


'Megan's Law' Reactivated, With Offenders' Protections
After nearly seven months' delay for legal challenges and court rulings, New Jersey has reactivated "Megan's Law" and is resuming evaluation of about 2,100 sex offenders subject to the law's new community-notification provisions, officials said today.
Attorney General Deborah T. Poritz said her office had given the state's 21 county prosecutors new guidelines to assess an offender's risk of committing another sex crime and to determine how broadly information about the offender's presence can be circulated.


Another Executive Is Leaving Creative Artists to Join MCA
In a sign of further uncertainty at the powerful Creative Artists Agency, Sanford R. Climan, an executive involved in business deals and film financing, told his colleagues today that he was departing to take a top post at MCA Inc.
MCA, the entertainment giant now controlled by the Seagram Company, said Mr.
Climan would serve as one of three executive vice presidents reporting to Ron Meyer, the former president of Creative Artists, who recently became MCA's president.


CHRONICLE
Is there doctor in the house -- or the Senate?
Senator BILL FRIST, a Tennessee Republican who is also a heart surgeon, came to the rescue of a man who collapsed yesterday while visiting the Capitol, The Associated Press reported.
The man, who was not identified, dropped to the floor outside the office of Senator John H. Chafee, a Republican from Rhode Island.


Home Video
A Bouquet for a Princess
"Give Hollywood a kick in the right direction," says the letter from Peggy Charren to 50 children's groups.
The founder of Action for Children's Television, a nonprofit advocacy group, Ms.
Charren was putting in an unsolicited good word for the film "A Little Princess," which is to be released by Warner on Tuesday.
As for this particular movie, as Ms.
Charren is the first to acknowledge, Hollywood was definitely headed in the right direction.
Warner has given the film not one but two theatrical releases and now a well-promoted third chance on videocassette.


CHRONICLE
When GLENN DICTEROW, the concertmaster of the New York Philharmonic, picks up a violin to play Fritz Kreisler's Recitativo tomorrow, he will not be performing on his usual Guarnerius del Gesu.
Rather, he will play a violin made of bed slats and a table leg by CLAIRE CLINE, a B-24 pilot who was shot down and imprisoned in Nazi Germany in 1944.


U.S. Says Belarus May Be Holding 2 Balloonists
United States and Belarussian officials traded charges yesterday after a Belarussian helicopter shot down an American balloon competing in a race, killing both pilots.
Four other Americans were forced down, American officials said, and two may have been detained by military officials.
The dead were identified yesterday as Alan Fraenckel, 55, of West Charlton, N.Y., near Schenectady, and John Stuart-Jervis, 68, of Albuquerque, N.M.


For Children
Port Authority Passenger Ship Terminals  West 48th Street and West Side Highway Clinton Recommended ages: 4 and up (212) 765-7437 Saturdays
The Clorox-white cruise ship Dreamward was forced to dock overnight last Saturday at Berth 4, Pier 88, because of Hurricane Luis.
The three-year-old midsize ship of the Norwegian Cruise Line carries 1,242 passengers, was built in France and sails every Saturday through mid-October from these piers to Bermuda.
Last weekend, the cruise line chose caution, leaving passengers in the city for an extra night.


Unbridled's Song to Miss Futurity
Unbridled's Song, one of the most promising 2-year-old colts in the country and an early candidate for next year's Kentucky Derby, was withdrawn from the Belmont Futurity yesterday with an infection.
But 53 other prize horses were entered in the tomorrow's six Grade One stakes at Belmont worth $1.6 million, the first of three blockbuster days of racing that will reach a peak on Oct. 28 with the Breeder's Cup.


Wilson Desir, Consul General And Haitians' Idol, 57, Is Dead
Wilson Desir, the Haitian freedom fighter who served his people as a beacon of hope and a pillar of aid and comfort through two decades of exile in New York, died on Wednesday at Brookdale Hospital in Brooklyn.
He was 57, and at his death he was the Haitian Consul General in New York, a post he had held through further tumult and exile since his appointment by President Jean-Bertrand Aristide in April 1991.


The Devout Raise a City Within a City And Prosper
IN a borough rich in architectural merit, Borough Park in Brooklyn is bereft.
It has no designated city landmarks, nor even a mention in the inclusive A.I.A.
Guide to New York City.
But to the 95,000 Orthodox Jews who constitute more than 80 percent of the population of Borough Park, the ultimate landmark is from long ago and far away.
Their eyes look back -- inwardly, at least -- to the Holy Temple in Jerusalem.
Next to it, even the most imposing city landmark is just a shack.
It was out of reverence for the memory of the temple that, one summer evening, a counterman at Amnon's kosher pizza shop on 13th Avenue apologetically refused to sell a slice for eating on the premises.
It was the anniversary of the breaching of Jerusalem's walls by the Romans in A.D. 70.
Three weeks later came the destruction of the temple on the solemn day known in the Hebrew calendar as the Ninth of Av.
Highly observant Jews mark both dates by fasting.
Even in Borough Park, however, compromises are made between religious dictates and commercial necessity.
At Amnon's, you couldn't dine "publicly" that day, but you could take out.


In America; Killer Cops
Ha Vu is said to have knelt in prayer on the floor of her parents' restaurant as her executioners stood over her.
One of the executioners was a uniformed New Orleans police officer named Antoinette Frank, who was just 24 years old -- the same age as Ms.
Vu.
The other was Ms.
Frank's 18-year-old nephew and accomplice, Rogers Lacaze.
By the time Ms.
Frank and Mr.
Lacaze left the Kim Anh Restaurant last March 4, three people were dead -- Ms.
Vu, her brother, Cuong, 19, and a New Orleans police officer named Ronald Williams 2d, who had been moonlighting in the restaurant.
To get a sense of how twisted the New Orleans Police Department has become, consider that Ms.
Frank was one of the police officers who responded to the emergency call about the murders in the restaurant.


Notoriety Could Mean a Big Year in Little Italy for a Street Fair
Standing behind a steaming pan of cheese tortellini in marinara sauce as disco music blared over Mulberry Street, Lori Taverna gave thanks to a Federal grand jury and the mob for what may be one of the best years ever for the Feast of San Gennaro.
The feast is the city's largest street fair, but she figured that with all the publicity over mob involvement, this could be one of the all-time great years for Little Italy's 11-day feast of ziti, sausage sandwiches and fried calamari.


TV and Radio Museum Creates a Second Self
Perhaps the only museum capable of duplicating its entire collection, the Museum of Television and Radio, is doing just that in order to open a second museum in Los Angeles next March.
The museum's leaders took pains to say that the Los Angeles museum will not be a branch of the original, but virtually a replica.
"We think of it as one institution with two locations," Robert M. Batscha, the museum's president, said at a news conference at the Manhattan building, 25 West 52d Street.


Pettitte Pays More Early Dividends
Perhaps Buck Showalter should ponder pitching Andy Pettitte on three days' rest.
Why not?
Showalter has discussed starting Jack McDowell and David Cone on shorter rest if it is necessary in the wild-card scuffle, but lately Pettitte has almost been as stellar as the remarkable McDowell and better than the inconsistent Cone.
Pettitte was precise again tonight.
Not shaken by Bobby Bonilla's two-run homer in the first inning, Pettitte calmly stifled the Orioles on three hits until the ninth and led the Yankees to a 5-4 victory at Camden Yards.
The Yankees climbed into a first-place tie with Seattle, which did not play, in the ever-tightening and unpredictable American League wild-card race.
Texas, which defeated Toronto, 6-1, is one game behind.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Another Peak for Dow As Industrials Top 4,800  The Dow industrials closed above 4,800 for the first time, up 36.28 points to 4,801.80, as stocks continued to ride an economy of slow growth and stable interest rates.
The Dow's surge this year has been relentless since it pierced the 4,000 barrier on Feb. 23.
But previously strong technology issues slumped, while financial stocks that do well with low interest rates rose.  [ Page D6. ] The yield on the 30-year Treasury bond fell to a 19-month low of 6.46 percent.  [ D16. ] Retail Sales Rise 0.6 Percent  Retail sales rose 0.6 percent in August to a seasonally adjusted $197.3 billion.
Consumers spent cautiously during the hot summer month except on steeply discounted 1995 model cars.
Separately, the Labor Department reported an unexpected surge of 21,000 new claims for unemployment pay last week, to 362,000.  [ D2. ] Magazine Ordered to Pull Article  Business Week magazine was ordered by a Federal judge in Ohio to pull an article from its current issue as it was about to go to press, or be held in contempt.
The article contained information from documents that had been filed in Federal court in Ohio as part of litigation between Procter &amp; Gamble and Bankers Trust.  [ A16. ] F.C.C.
May Relax Phone Rules  The F.C.C. proposed relaxing rules on how much local telephone companies can charge long-distance carriers to connect their calls.
Market Place.  [ D6. ] Oracle Reports Disappointing Profit  Oracle reported that its operating earnings rose 42 percent in its first fiscal quarter as sales growth slowed.
A $15 million campaign from the S.U.N.
Health Core unit of the WPP Group in New York, will seek to graft softer, New Age-style imagery onto a brand with a hard-sell heritage.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D5. ] A Departure at Creative Artists  Sanford R. Climan, an executive with the Creative Artists Agency, is departing to join MCA.
He will become one of three executive vice presidents reporting to Ron Meyer, the former president of Creative Artists, who recently became MCA's president.  [ D5. ]


Boards Involved in Turner Deal Expect to Meet Early Next Week
Turner Broadcasting System, Time Warner Inc. and Tele-Communications Inc. are aiming to hold board meetings as early as Sunday to approve the sale of Turner to Time Warner, several executives close to the discussions said yesterday.
These executives said that many key points in the proposed $8 billion deal had been resolved and that there was increasing momentum to complete it.


International Briefs; Bankruptcies Rise in Japan
Japan recorded 1,408 bankruptcy cases in August, the highest number in 10 years, a private research company said yesterday.
The total debt of Japanese companies declaring bankruptcy soared 65.9 percent in August from a year earlier, to 820.21 billion yen ($8.04 billion), the Tokyo Commerce and Industry Research Company said.
The number of bankruptcy cases jumped 30 percent in August, it said.


F.B.I. Chemist Says Experts Are Pressured To Skew Tests
An F.B.I. chemist today accused officials at the agency's crime laboratory of pressuring forensic experts to commit perjury or skew tests to help secure convictions in hundreds of criminal cases.
The chemist, Frederic Whitehurst, had testified about his concerns last month at the conspiracy trial in the World Trade Center bombing in New York.
But the breadth of his accusations was not apparent until Tuesday, when lawyers for O. J. Simpson said they wanted Mr.
Whitehurst to testify to the laboratory's prosecutorial bias, and thus to cast doubt on one of the F.B.I. experts called by the prosecution in the Simpson case.


Richard Taylor, 56; Determined How Kangaroo Survived
C.
Richard Taylor, a biology professor who studied why prehistoric kangaroos survived the advent of man (it is all in the hop) and why certain antelopes almost never drink, died on Sunday at Emerson Hospital in Concord, Mass.
He was 56 and lived in Concord.
The cause was a heart attack, a family friend said.


Chrysler Insiders Sold 179,728 Shares Following Tender
Chrysler Corporation insiders were big sellers of the auto maker's stock in August, shortly after Kirk Kerkorian closed his tender offer for 14 million shares, according to Federal filings.
Eighteen officers of the company sold 179,728 shares in the Aug. 1-14 period, at prices of $48 to $52.19.
Mr.
Kerkorian had offered $50 a share for stock tendered by July 25.


Theory on Second Footprint Is Rebutted
Two prosecution witnesses today challenged defense claims in the O.J.
Simpson case that the mysterious parallel lines on Ronald L. Goldman's blue jeans and on two pieces of paper found at the scene were the shoe prints of a second killer.
One witness said the lines were probably something else, and the other said they almost certainly were.
As prosecutors neared the end of their truncated rebuttal case, they squared off, in effect, against Dr.
Henry Lee, a defense expert and the nation's pre-eminent forensic scientist.
It was Dr.
Lee who testified last month that the lines could be a shoe print, bolstering arguments that a second person helped kill Mr.
Goldman and Nicole Brown Simpson.


Signing Is Delayed
The signing of a 12-year lease to keep the Devils at Byrne Meadowlands Arena in East Rutherford, N.J., which was scheduled for today, will be delayed until Oct. 13.
Superior Court Judge Peter Ciolino granted the extension yesterday.
When the two sides reached agreement on the lease in July, Judge Ciolino suspended the authority's request for a temporary restraining order to keep the Devils from moving to Nashville.


Water Bill Bares Tensions Between Newark and Civic Group
For years Newark's elected officials and the leaders of the New Community Corporation, the largest nonprofit agency in the state, have stood shoulder to shoulder while cutting ribbons on projects intended to erase the blight left by the 1967 riots.
But the fracas that erupted over New Community's overdue $2.3 million water bill this week has exposed deep tensions between the two forces.
City officials are threatening to cut off the water at two housing projects run by the corporation, which is considered a national model, unless New Community comes up with a decent part of the money.


The World of Goya At the Met, C30.


Sale of the A's Is Approved
Major league baseball team owners today unanimously approved the $85 million sale of the Oakland Athletics from the Haas family to a group headed by the developers Steve Schott and Ken Hoffman.
The sale is set to close on Oct. 31.


Networks Wage Latest Battle for the 'First' Powell Interview
The tightly orchestrated media campaign for Gen.
Colin L. Powell's autobiography, "My American Journey," took another unscripted turn today when Tom Brokaw, the NBC News anchor, said that he would broadcast an interview with the General on Friday evening, a few hours before a much-publicized meeting with Barbara Walters appears on ABC.
Mr.
Brokaw's decision to broadcast his interview three days earlier than planned was greeted with howls of protest at ABC, which had been pursuing General Powell for more than a year and had obtained an agreement granting the network his first interview.


Kodak Selects Ogilvy &amp; Mather
The Eastman Kodak Company in Rochester said yesterday that it had selected Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide in New York, a unit of the WPP Group, to handle a new worldwide corporate brand advertising and marketing campaign, separate from campaigns for Kodak cameras and other products.
Though the billings were not disclosed, trade publications have estimated them at $30 million to $50 million.
Ogilvy, which handles Kodak's digital and applied imaging account, was awarded the new assignment after a five-and-a-half-month review that was narrowed to Ogilvy and BBBO Worldwide in New York.
To participate in the review, BBDO, owned by the Omnicom Group, had resigned the account of the Polaroid Corporation, with billings estimated at $30 million.


Colombia Arrests Raise Price Of Cocaine in New York City
Only a few months after the Colombian Government began arresting the top leaders of the Cali drug cartel, law enforcement officials said the supply and potency of cocaine in New York City is dwindling, forcing wholesale and street prices to soar.
In what officials described as the most precipitous shift in almost six years, the wholesale price of cocaine has increased nearly 50 percent since May, while retail prices have gone up 30 to 60 percent or more.
Similar increases, they said, are evident in other big Eastern cities dependent on New York-based Cali operatives for supplies.


Islanders Acquire Ex-Devil Semak
Coming into training camp, the Islanders' most glaring need was at the center position.
It still is, but less so after today.
General Manager Don Maloney made a minimum-risk move to shore up the middle of his squad by trading for Aleksandr Semak, the former Devils center.


Tom Helmore, 91, Actor Known Best for Comedy
Tom Helmore, a debonair Broadway and film actor in the 1940's and 50's, died on Tuesday in Longboat Key, Fla.
He was 91.
On stage and in films, Mr.
Helmore specialized in comedies, playing opposite Katharine Cornell, Ginger Rogers and Jane Wyman, among others.
He was the standby to Rex Harrison as Henry Higgins in the original production of "My Fair Lady" and later toured in the musical.
He also appeared in Alfred Hitchcock's "Vertigo" with James Stewart and Kim Novak.


Probation Sentence In Corruption Case
A former New York City police sergeant who turned in several undercover narcotics officers in corruption cases after he was arrested in 1993 for selling heroin escaped a prison term yesterday at his sentencing in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
Judge Louis L. Stanton gave the former officer, Joseph Termini, four years of probation and 400 hours of community service -- a relatively lenient sentence in light of the Federal sentencing guidelines, which suggested the former undercover officer should receive between 46 and 57 months in prison.


Art in Review
Michael St. John  Caren Golden Fine Art 39 Wooster Street SoHo Through Oct. 21
Michael St.
John has more ideas than he knows what to do with, most of them deadeningly generic.
His current one-man show is a scattershot affair that moves from painting to object to drawing to cryptic textual artworks ("No You Drive" is the totality of one of them), at the rate of about a joke a minute.


On My Mind; If He Can, Can I?
For some time I have been trying to think and act like the Dalai Lama.
I figured that if the way he behaves is good enough for him, as the spiritual and national political leader of his country, then as a supporter of Tibet's struggle for life and freedom, I would do the same.


Urawa Journal; To Pinch Yen: Freeze Rice and Save Bath Water
Yumiko Sakurai violates a cardinal principle of Japanese cooking by refrigerating unused rice from one meal and then reheating it in the microwave.
Compared with keeping rice warm in a rice-cooker, this saves about eight cents a meal.
Mrs.
Sakurai also keeps a thermos of iced tea on the counter in the summer, so her children will not keep opening the refrigerator.
And when a sale comes, she buys a year's worth of clothing for them


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  SERBS AGREE TO PULL BACK GUNS  The Bosnian Serbs have agreed to withdraw their heavy guns out of firing range of Sarajevo, ending -- at least temporarily -- NATO's bombing campaign against the Serbs, U.S. officials said.
A1


Foes in Angola Still at Odds, Over Diamonds
Along the steep banks of the Luachimo River here, barefoot runners thread their way between 15-foot-deep mining holes hauling sackfuls of dirt down to the river's edge.
There, men wearing only bikini briefs stand in the water, turning it coffee-colored as they wash and sift the clay soil, inspecting the leftover stones for the glimmer of a diamond.
Everywhere are teen-agers on patrol with AK-47's.
The people in charge wear Government uniforms.
A little north of here, the scene is the same, only instead of the Government, rebel Unita soldiers control the area.


Art in Review
'Seeing Things' 'Photographs From 1844 to 1995'  Andre Emmerich Gallery 41 East 57th Street Manhattan Through Oct. 7
While not broad enough to be a real historical survey, this star-studded exhibition is far more venturesome than the usual gallery group show.
The show, organized in cooperation with Jeffrey Fraenkel, a leading San Francisco photography dealer, offers a diverse selection of images, from 19th-century landscapes to works by Richard Misrach, Henry Wessel, Nicholas Nixon and other contemporary artists.
What the show lacks in scope is more than made up for by the consistently high quality of the works.
Historical standouts include Carleton Watkins's shimmering 1867 view of Cape Horn, on the Columbia River in Oregon.


New Jersey Is Said to Have Plan To Build Stadium for the Yankees
The State of New Jersey, already home to what were once New York's two professional football teams, has drawn up a proposal to build a 50,000-seat baseball stadium in the Meadowlands Sports Complex for the Yankees, state officials said yesterday.
One official, who spoke on the condition that he not be named but who was familiar with the plans of the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority, said yesterday that the authority was "definitely interested" in having the Yankees in New Jersey.


Big Plans for a Riverfront
What is now a vacant, debris-strewn stretch along two miles of the Passaic River in Newark would be transformed into a promenade with picnic areas, bike paths, concert sites and a boat basin under a design scheduled to be unveiled last night by the United States Army Corps of Engineers.
The river's bank, damaged and eroding after a severe 1992 storm, would be restored under the $70.9 million proposal, which would be financed by Federal, state and local governments.
If all phases of the plan are approved, construction could begin in 1998.


Enron Delays Buying North Sea Gas From Phillips
In an unusual move to put pressure on a supplier to renegotiate a long-term contract, the Enron Corporation said yesterday that it would delay buying natural gas from a $1.2 billion project in the North Sea headed by the Phillips Petroleum Company.
Phillips said yesterday that Enron's decision could postpone the start of production from the North Sea oil and gas fields.
Production was to have begun early next year, the company said, and a delay would depress its earnings for 1996.


Tyson Deal: More Strategy Than Charity
A few weeks ago, Don King said yesterday, a revelation "from the heavens" visited him while aboard the Concorde from Europe.
The vision told him: Take the Nov. 4 Mike Tyson-Buster Mathis Jr. fight off pay-per-view and sell it to the Fox Network.
Fox's payout of $8 million to $10 million was much less than Tyson could earn from Showtime Event Television Pay-Per-View.
But King, Tyson's promoter, calculated the positive impact of having the former heavyweight champion seen broadly on free TV.
He also thought Tyson could couch the Fox deal as a gift to fans irked at the disqualification that ended his Aug. 19 fight against Peter McNeeley after 89 seconds.


Wildcat Oilman and His Cat
Robert Duvall burrows so deeply into the role of an itinerant wildcat oilman in "The Stars Fell on Henrietta" that he nearly disappears into the richly drawn character, a penniless 1930's promoter known only as Mr.
Cox.
Roaming the Texan landscape and making deals, Cox is a caricature of an eternal optimist, and the scraggly tribe of prospectors who have descended on the state at the height of the oil rush regard him as an eccentric fool.
Too poor to afford geological surveys, Cox relies solely on his senses and on the instincts of his cherished cat, Matilda, to intuit the possible presence of oil.
One afternoon, while standing in a field behind a dilapidated gas station near the north Texas town of Henrietta, Cox "smells" oil under his feet.
After an impoverished local farmer, Don Day (Aidan Quinn), shelters him during a sudden dust storm, Cox presses his ear to the ground on Day's property and imagines he hears an ocean of oil sloshing below.
Cox eventually wheedles Day into becoming his partner in an exploratory drilling operation that he names Phoenix 38.
Only after the operation is well under way does Day learn that Cox's 37 previous probes have come up dry.


Convicted of Armed Robbery
Kenny O'Donnell, who informed on so many confederates in organized crime that he was known as "The Rat," was convicted yesterday of armed robbery in a 1990 holdup of a Fort Lee travel agency.
Mr.
O'Donnell is already serving a 60-year term in Trenton State Prison for three armed robbery convictions in Passaic County and faces additional charges for another robbery, one successful jail escape and another failed breakout, said James W. Donohue, an Assistant Prosecutor for Bergen County.


Key Points From Women's Conference
Following is an excerpt from the final declaration of the Fourth World Conference on Women, adopted today, and a New York Times summary of the central provisions:
The objective of the platform of action, which is in full conformity with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and international law, is the empowerment of all women.
The full realization of all human rights and fundamental freedoms of all women is essential for the empowerment of women.


3-Strikes Law Works
To the Editor:
Re "First Federal 3-Strikes Conviction Ends a Criminal's 25-Year Career" (front page, Sept. 11):


Chunnel's Money Crisis Is Growing
In a step signaling its growing financial crisis, the British-French company that operates the Channel tunnel announced today that it would not pay interest on the bulk of its crushing loans for up to 18 months, while it attempts to revamp itself.
The announcement reflects the fact the while the tunnel's traffic had grown over the crucial summer travel season, it had not generated enough money to meet expenses and pay interest on $12.1 billion of debt.
The move was also a serious blow to the company that fulfilled an age-old dream of politicians, business leaders and engineers: linking Britain and France by a 31-mile tunnel.
But faced with staggering loans and stiff competition from ferries, the project has been unable to compete at a profit.


Looking to the Next Century


Uncertainty Will Haunt Post-Season
Baseball has spent the second half of the 20th century digesting the wit and wisdom of Yogi Berra.
However, no one who jogged out of the latest meeting of major league club owners here yesterday was heard repeating Berra's well-chronicled verse: "It gets late early around here."
Too bad.


Panel Sees a Corrected Price Index as Deficit-Cutter
Opening an arcane but politically painless door to budget balancing, a bipartisan Congressional panel has calculated that the Consumer Price Index overstates inflation and that a correction of that bias could reduce the Federal deficit by $634 billion over the next 10 years.
The five economists appointed to study the index said in an interim report made public today that their best estimate of the overstatement was one percentage point for coming years.
If this is not corrected, the report said, in 2005 the total amount of the overstatement will exceed all but the top three items in the Federal budget.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL REPORT
Ivy League  Dartmouth-Penn
As the Ivy League starts its 40th season since the beginning of round-robin play in 1956, Pennsylvania looks to be dominant again.
The Quakers bring a 21-game winning streak, the longest in college football, into tomorrow's opener at home against Dartmouth, 2-5 in league play and 4-6 over all a year ago.


The Latest Craze on Campus: Learning to Do the McNamara
You don't need felons carrying the ball for an exciting football season, not when the Lions are ready to begin a tradition tomorrow, when the male and female athletes of Brown have been pitched against each other and when the former dictator of the National Collegiate Athletic Association is doing the McNamara.
You can start this story at least a century ago when football was promoted as an antidote to the feminizing of American men, but it didn't really get serious until the N.C.A.A.'s original executive director, Walter Byers, made a Faustian bargain with television and created an enforcement system so erratic and whimsical that it consolidated his power; the N.C.A.A. rarely punished football programs that accepted his stewardship of the status quo.
In any case, it was individuals rather than institutions who took the hardest falls.
Generations of athletes -- and of coaches, to be sure -- were trapped in what turned out to be a gold-plated meat grinder.


Those Wacky Teen-Agers and Their Crazy Fads
The title characters in "Hackers" are such hip and brilliant young pirates that they can tamper with any computer system without breaking a sweat.
What's more, they are skilled Rollerbladers loaded with eclectic fashion sense, and they can also act as crime-stopping detectives when the occasion demands.
They're so clever, in fact, that some of us are thrilled to know that the actors in "Hackers" had to take a crash typing course to get through the film's keyboard scenes.
Remember when teen-agers who wanted to do something cool started rock-and-roll bands?
Iain Softley does, and so he made "Backbeat," his resonant film about the Beatles' early days.
But now Mr.
Softley turns his attention to a different kind of counterculture, the one ruled by technology-mad nerds.
They speak lovingly to their laptops.
They write in the language of the person formerly known as Prince ("Leave B 4 U R expunged").
They show off posters and stickers bearing words like Hackstock.
Hackstock?
That must be the festival where everybody turns on their monitors and stays home.


2 Interactive Pacts Are Established
Two interactive alliances have been announced.
Spyglass Inc., a developer of World Wide Web technologies in Naperville, Ill., and Group 121, the direct and interactive marketing unit of Ingalls, Quinn &amp; Johnson in Boston, said yesterday that they had combined their interactive media operations to form a business-development venture aimed at marketers interested in interactive and other new technologies.
The terms were not disclosed.
Also, Spyglass named Group 121 as the first agency of record to handle its direct and interactive marketing.
The billings have not been determined.


BellSouth to Sell Its Paging Unit To Mobilemedia
In the biggest acquisition ever in the paging-service industry, Mobilemedia Communications Inc. agreed yesterday to pay the BellSouth Corporation nearly $1 billion for its Mobilecomm subsidiary.
The deal would make Mobilemedia, of Ridgefield Park, N.J., a solid No. 2 in the paging industry, trailing only Paging Network Inc. of Plano, Tex.


Before Changing the Rules, Try Changing the Attitudes
Big Brother -- two of them, actually -- will visit National Hockey League teams Friday with the best of intentions.
In a conference beamed by satellite to coaches and general managers, league officials will warn players to stop holding and hooking and getting in each other's way.
The telecast will be co-anchored by Brian Burke, the league's senior vice president and director of hockey operations, and Bryan Lewis, the director of officiating.
They want to crack down on interference tactics that squeeze the excitement from the world's fastest team sport.


G.O.P. ANNOUNCES PLAN TO OVERHAUL MEDICARE SYSTEM
House Republican leaders unveiled their proposal to redesign Medicare today, but it was surprisingly short on details and had none of the expected financial incentives for elderly people to join health maintenance organizations or other private health plans.
The package is supposed to cut projected Medicare spending by $270 billion, or 14 percent, over the next seven years, and Republicans had hoped to achieve much of the savings through greater use of H.M.O.'s and other forms of managed care.


Bushes Speak at Tokyo Rally of Group Linked to Moon Church
Former President George Bush was speaking at the Tokyo Dome tonight, but that is not who 60-year-old Chieko Haneda was coming to see.
"The true mother will be attending," she said excitedly.
The true mother is Hak Ja Han Moon, wife of the Rev.
Sun Myung Moon, founder of the Unification Church.
Tonight, Mr.
Bush and his wife, Barbara, were the warm-up speakers for Unification Church followers who had come mainly to hear Mrs.
Moon extol the virtues of her husband and his religion.





Rancid Human Wreck Versus a Decrepit Drone
Not since "Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?" have a man and woman bounced withering insults off each other as gleefully as Michel Serrault and Jeanne Moreau do in Laurent Heynemann's glossy camp comedy, "The Old Lady Who Walked in the Sea."
This cheerfully depraved film stars Miss Moreau and Mr.
Serrault as Lady M and Pompilius, a pair of retirement-age con artists and ex-lovers who are nearing the end of a highly profitable career spent preying on the rich.
Although their passion has long since faded, these partners in crime remain jealous and sexually competitive.


In Mayor's Report on City, An Emphasis on the Positive
The first full fiscal year of the Giuliani administration produced significant improvements in public safety, citywide cleanliness and health, but a self-evaluation released by the Mayor yesterday also showed the damaging effects of budget cuts in such areas as road repairs, enforcement of city regulations, and services to the homeless.
The annual management report, required under the city Charter and prepared by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's staff, was more self-congratulatory than reports in previous years.
The report was split for the first time, with one volume given over to the administration's accomplishments, complete with charts and graphs.
Problem areas were part of a separate volume, with no explanatory graphics, and were not readily apparent.


City Worker Is Charged In Attacks On 2 Women
A city hospitals worker who the police said had boasted to a colleague about having sex with two women was charged yesterday in sexual attacks on two Swedish visitors on the Upper East Side.
The police said that the suspect, Alphonso Jones, 27, may also have been responsible for another sexual attack, on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, although he has not been charged in that case.


For Many, Echoes of an Injustice in Connecticut; Convicted Slayer's Backers Say His Confession, Like One 20 Years Ago, Was Coerced
When Peter A. Reilly's conviction for killing his mother was overturned two decades ago, it was a lesson to many in Connecticut and the nation on how the police can abuse the powers of interrogation to elicit a false confession from a naive suspect.
At the time, Mr.
Reilly's many supporters, including most notably the playwright Arthur Miller, hoped their efforts on his behalf would put an end to leading questions, sleep deprivation and other coercive tactics that had led to what a state judge declared "a grave injustice."


Pataki Introduces New Inspector General


International Briefs; Germany's Adidas Plans to Go Public
Adidas A.G., the German maker of athletic shoes and sportswear, said yesterday that it was planning an initial public stock offering this year.
The offering would value Adidas at 2.5 billion to 3.5 billion marks ($1.68 billion to $2.35 billion), people close to the deal said.
About 40 to 50 percent of the shares in Adidas will be offered to the public.
The company will list its shares on the Frankfurt stock exchange and might also list shares in Paris and the United States.


Warner-Lambert's new Rolaids campaign seeks a softer image in the face of a changing market.
FOR years, consumers have been inculcated with the lesson to spell relief R-O-L-A-I-D-S.
But how does the Rolaids brand spell relief?
The answer, to paraphrase the slogan of a competitor, might be just a restaging away.
The Warner-Lambert Company, which has marketed Rolaids since 1954, is overhauling the product's formula, advertising and packaging.
A $15 million campaign that begins on Monday, from the S.U.N.
Health Core unit of the WPP Group in New York, seeks to graft softer, New Age-style imagery onto a brand with a hard-sell heritage.


Plea Deal Is Struck In a Subway Crime
A man charged in three subway purse-snatchings, including one in which a woman lost both her legs beneath a train, has struck an agreement with a State Supreme Court justice, Charles J. Thomas, in exchange for pleading guilty to the crimes, the Queens District Attorney, Richard A. Brown, said yesterday.
In a plea-bargain, the man, Kenneth Timber, 36, is to receive a 4- to 12-year prison sentence instead of the state-recommended sentence of 13 to 39 years, the District Attorney said.


When Lockout Lifts, Coleman Wants Out
Derrick Coleman will ask the Nets to trade him as soon as the National Basketball Association lockout ends, his lawyer said yesterday.
The league plans to resume operations Monday, assuming the owners, who planned a conference call for today, ratify the tentative labor agreement that has already been ratified by the players union.


Sarajevo Pact: Diplomacy on a Roll
After nearly two years of half-measures and failed initiatives in Bosnia, today's agreement to lift the siege of Sarajevo marks a significant -- although not necessarily durable -- achievement for President Clinton and his beleaguered foreign policy team.
Coming on the heels of the successful American-led negotiation last week that achieved agreement, in principle, to the creation of a Serbian entity within the Bosnian state, the agreement today adds to the impression that Mr.
Clinton's luck may be changing for the better in solving the most intractable foreign policy crisis of his Presidency.


Child Support System Still Lets Men Off Easy; Dads, Not Deadbeats
To the Editor:
I agree with your Sept. 8 news article on fathers and the child support system, but take exception to a term used too widely, "deadbeat dads."


Company Says Electronic Mail Was Opened to Find Pornography
Responding to court orders related to a nationwide crackdown on the electronic transmission of child pornography, the America Online information service gave law enforcement agents access to the private electronic mailboxes of an unknown number of its subscribers, company officials confirmed yesterday.
By reading and tracing electronic mail messages as they coursed through the America Online system, agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation were able to identify several thousand users of the service who viewed digitized images of children in sexual poses.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Ivanisevic Regroups to Win
The top-seeded Goran Ivanisevic of Croatia shook off a lack of concentration and beat Radomir Vasek of Czechoslovakia, 6-4, 6-3, yesterday at the $400,000 Passing Shot tournament in Bordeaux, France.


Corrections
An article on Sept. 6 about law firms that collect art misstated the name of the organization that provides information on such collections.
It is the Artnews International Directory of Corporate Art Collections.


Before Skeptical Senators, 8 F.B.I. Agents Defend Tactics in Idaho Shootout
Appearing before a skeptical and sometimes incredulous Senate panel, eight agents from the Federal Bureau of Investigation today defended the procedures they used in a deadly standoff in 1992 with a white separatist that ended with the killing of his unarmed wife.
The eight members of the F.B.I.'s Hostage Rescue Team were on the Idaho mountaintop known as Ruby Ridge in August 1992 where they had been dispatched to help arrest Randall C. Weaver, who was holed up in his cabin with his family.


Now, G.O.P. Head of Tax Panel Seeks End to Some Loopholes
The Republican chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, among the most enthusiastic defenders of corporate tax breaks in all Congress, reversed field today and said he wanted to close some two dozen of the loopholes to raise $30 billion more in tax revenues over the next seven years.
The proposals are the biggest surprise in a draft version of tax legislation that the chairman, Representative Bill Archer of Texas, gave to committee members late today.
Barely five months ago, Mr.
Archer openly scuttled efforts by Republican fiscal conservatives seeking to wipe out $25 billion in business tax breaks.


COMPANY BRIEFS
SCHERING A.G., Berlin, said the antitrust waiting period had expired for its $180 million tender offer for Medrad Inc., Pittsburgh.
MULTICARE COS., Hackensack, N.J., a provider of long-term care and speciality medical services, said it had agreed to acquire five long-term care centers from affiliates of Great American Nursing Centers Inc., Warwick, R.I., for $37 million.
CIBA-GEIGY A.G., Basel, Switzerland, said it had acquired a minority stake in closely held IDUN Pharmaceuticals San Diego, a biotechnology company.
The terms were not disclosed.


Mayor Giuliani and the Teachers
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and the New York City Board of Education show no signs of letting up in their brawl over the selection of the next schools chancellor.
But this week they took time out to reach an important budget agreement to avert layoffs of teachers and other school personnel, at least for now.
The accord should be taken as a pattern for cooperation among all the parties to bring the city's school system back from chaos and acrimony.
The agreement means first that 1,000 teachers without permanent assignment can be deployed to ease the tremendous overcrowding in the schools, where class sizes have risen to more than 40 students in many cases.
The teachers will be able to carry out their jobs in a more stable atmosphere, and the Board of Education has won a commitment from City Hall to try to protect it from further demands for spending cuts later in the year.


Inside Art
Galleries vs. Auctions
This week's announcement that PaceWildenstein gallery is handling the modern art collection from the estate of Mark Goodson, the television producer, demonstrates an interesting development in the art market.
In past seasons, art dealers both here and abroad have tried to compete head-to-head with auction houses for major estate property.
Many have even offered executors some of the attractive financial packages that Sotheby's and Christie's provide, like guarantees (an undisclosed minimum price that an auction house promises the seller regardless of a sale's outcome).
But in almost all cases, auctions have been the selling method of preference for major estates, in large part because executors feel that selling in a public arena is a safer way to carry out their fiduciary responsibilities.


FORUM ON WOMEN AGREES ON GOALS
The Fourth World Conference on Women reached agreement early this morning on a wide-ranging declaration calling on world governments to raise the economic circumstances of women, protect them from increasing levels of violence and improve the status of girls throughout the world.
The "platform for action" is to be presented for ratification later today, and the vote is expected to be unanimous.
Some states, including the Vatican and other countries with large Muslim or Roman Catholic populations, may register objections to specific sections.


Malvin R. Goode, 87, Reporter Who Broke a TV Color Barrier
Malvin R. Goode, the first black correspondent on network television news, died on Tuesday at St.
Margaret's Memorial Hospital in Pittsburgh.
He was 87.
Mr.
Goode lived in Pittsburgh, where he got his start in print and television reporting.


Ravitch Is Still a Contender, School Board President Says
As Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani offered hearty praise for Richard Ravitch, the former chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority and a candidate for New York City's Schools Chancellor, the Board of Education's president said yesterday that she had not ruled him out for the job even though she described his lack of experience as an educator as "a minus."
The board's president, Carol A. Gresser, said that Mr.
Ravitch was on the board's list of candidates to interview over the next few days.
He still has not told the board whether he is interested in the job, although officials say he has emerged as the Mayor's leading candidate.


METRO DIGEST
ARRESTS RAISE THE PRICE OF COCAINE
Only a few months after the Colombian Government began arresting the top leaders of the Cali drug cartel, law enforcement officials said the supply and potency of cocaine in New York City is dwindling, forcing wholesale and street prices to soar.  [ Page A1. ] IF NEW JERSEY BUILDS IT, WILL THEY COME?
The State of New Jersey, already home to what used to be New York's two professional football teams, has drawn up a proposal to build a 50,000-seat baseball stadium in the Meadowlands sports complex, state officials said.
One official familiar with the plans said the authority was "definitely interested" in having the Yankees in New Jersey.  [ A1. ]


Corrections
A report in the International Briefs columns of Business Day on Saturday about the expanding production capacity of European semiconductor makers referred incorrectly to the ownership of SGS-Thomson Microelectronics N.V.
It is a publicly traded company controlled by two consortiums of French and Italian shareholders; it is not a unit of Thomson S.A.


In Jersey City, a Syringe-Shaped Pen Hits a Raw Nerve
THE syringe-shaped pens, $1 each, cropped up on the counter of the Value King store just in time for the back-to-school supply rush.
Jaime Vasquez, a City Councilman, could hardly believe his eyes.
He bought the store's remaining supply, 10 pens.
Then he wrote a bill to ban them.
"I'm a civil libertarian," Mr.
Vasquez said.
"So it takes a lot to make me talk about bans. But I worked in a drug program for five years. If this law prevents just one kid from becoming interested in drugs, it's worth it."


Tattoo Moves From Fringes To Fashion. But Is It Art?
THE most startling, not to say painful, twin fashion fads of the last few years must be body piercing and tattooing.
Once the seedy province of old salts, sideshow freaks and biker molls, tattoos have clearly gone mainstream now that models like Christy Turlington, actresses like Melanie Griffith and athletes like Michael Jordan have got little flowers, pears and fraternity emblems inked into their bodies, inspiring a whole generation of impressionable kids to do the same.
You can be sure tattoos have become fashionable when art galleries get into the act, which they have, with shows of tattoo designs.
The latest and most ambitious, "Pierced Hearts and True Love: A Century of Drawings for Tattoos," opens tomorrow at the Drawing Center, which is always stretching the outer reaches of what constitutes a drawing.
That exhibition dovetails neatly with an excellent historical survey, also about tattoos, called "The Devil's Blue: American Tattoo Art and Practice Through the Port of New York (1840-1961)" at the South Street Seaport Museum.
Why tattoos now?
It's easier to understand why the art world has cottoned to the subject than why young people get them in the first place.
Tattoos relate to many trendy art topics.
Cartooning, for one.
Body art, for another, which means not just art about the body, of which there has been so much (too much) lately, but also art involving the body: the sort of stuff artists like Vito Acconci and Chris Burden did in the 1960's and 70's has become important again to many young artists.
Mr.
Acconci pressed bottle caps into his skin and burned hair off his chest, which left temporary marks, while Mr.
Burden went so far as to have himself shot and crucified, which left very permanent ones.
It mattered that those marks could not be bought and sold; whatever else they signified, they were partly about making art that wasn't a commodity like a painting or sculpture or drawing.
Plenty of recent art consisting of temporary installations and ephemeral materials wants to make much the same point, as can tattoos.
Add to this mix the prominence of performance artists like Bob Flanagan, whose body is elaborately pierced, and Ron Athey, who is covered with tattoos, and what you have is a quasi art whose time has come.


They Meet, They Love, He's a Boor, She's Dim
Jeffrey Miller (Gregg Edelman) is a writer for a television sitcom.
Ellen Henry (Cynthia Watros) is a flutist.
He's Jewish and never stops expressing his feelings, most often in one-liners.
She's a white Anglo-Saxon Protestant who keeps her emotions in check.
They meet cute aboard a flight from Los Angeles to New York, when it's immediately clear that they're made for each other.
Being a two-character play, Norman Barasch's "Standing By" offers them no other opportunities.
The romantic comedy, the season's first production by the usually estimable York Theater Company, opened last night at St.
Peter's Church.
Played without intermission, it runs only 90 minutes but seems much longer.


Brogna Powers The Mets To Victory
Even as they scrambled yesterday to fill a hole left in the pitching rotation by an elbow injury to Bill Pulsipher, the Mets continued their youthful resurgence, driving another nail in the National League wild-card coffin of the Houston Astros.
In taking two of three games against Houston at Shea Stadium, this one by 4-2, the Mets scored with both minimum and maximum muscle last night.
Catcher Todd Hundley collected a pair of hits and scored twice on infield grounders, and then first baseman Rico Brogna delivered his 19th home run of the season, driving a two-run blast off Houston starter Shane Reynolds beyond the center-field fence in the fifth inning.


Restaurants
The day after the legendary California restaurant Chez Panisse was reviewed for the first time, the owner, Alice Waters, received a funeral wreath.
The restaurant's most ardent admirers were certain that it was the end.
It almost was.


Growing Fiscal Crisis For Channel Tunnel
In a signal of its growing financial crisis, the company that operates the English Channel tunnel said this summer's traffic had not generated enough money to meet expenses and pay interest on $12.1 billion of debt.
The British-French Eurotunnel company said it would suspend loan payments for up to 18 months as it attempts to revamp itself.
But it insisted that the move would not lead to bankruptcy and that all services would continue to operate regularly.
Article, page D1.


Diner's Journal
A Younger View
The opening of Motown Cafe this week introduced the restaurant-as-entertainment concept with a bang.
The former Automat has been renovated to look like a set from "Pulp Fiction" and sound like a throwback to the 1960's.
There's live music every hour and a menu that offers everything from hamburgers to shrimp creole.
On the theory that the obvious audience for this restaurant is people young enough to be enchanted by all the sound and motion or old enough to remember the 60's, I asked a 6-year-old critic to give a first impression:


Jets Take Hard Route Without Mitchell
The Jets' most dangerous offensive performer has been praying -- literally -- for his back to be healed so he can return.
As of today, Johnny Mitchell's prayers have not been answered.
They have not helped heal his aching back, and neither has rest.
As a result, the tight end is likely to miss Sunday's game against the expansion Jacksonville Jaguars at the Meadowlands.


INSIDE
Judge Restrains Magazine
In a case that raises the issue of prior restraint of publication, Business Week magazine obeyed a judge and withdrew an article.
Page A16. 56 Pupils, 28 Seats, 1 Mess
Many New York City high schools remained seriously overcrowded as principals tried to deploy 1,000 teachers in limbo.
Page B1.
A Top Admiral Will Retire
The Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, one of the military's most innovative officers, plans to retire in February.
Page A28.


Sports of The Times; The Reverse Tom Osborne Cannot Call
KATE McEWEN missed classes again today.
After the physical punishment she endured early on Sunday morning, it remains unclear whether she will ever return.
As athletic department officials at the University of Nebraska attempt to assure McEwen's family that she can live safely here again, the member of the women's basketball team remains the school's most visible absentee.
It is painful to have to write her name.
But her picture has already appeared here on television and in newspapers, and her name has been transmitted from coast to coast.
This is why: According to a police report and the word of witnesses, she was thrown to the floor of a bathroom and dragged down three flights of stairs to the entry of an apartment complex by Lawrence Phillips, her former boyfriend and a gifted but troubled running back for the Nebraska football team.


Abroad at Home; Peace in Blindness
The hate-filled words of former detective Mark Fuhrman shocked Americans when they were heard at the O. J. Simpson trial two weeks ago.
But they should do more than shock us.
They should make us look into ourselves and face the tenacious reality of racism in our country.
The problem is not just Mark Fuhrman or the Los Angeles police or those other police forces that still manifest bigotry.
It is the vast range of obstacles that black Americans must overcome to get an equal chance in life.


CHRONICLE
The sight of thousands of bicyclists rolling into Los Angeles from San Francisco to raise money for AIDS was, DOUG SAVANT said, "the most devastating and emotionally powerful thing I've ever seen."
For the last two years, Mr.
Savant, an actor best known for his portrayal of Matt, a gay social worker in "Melrose Place," served as a volunteer for the fund-raising event, which benefited organizations providing services to people with AIDS.
This weekend, he will lend a hand along the way to 3,500 cyclists in a three-day ride from Boston to New York.
Mr.
Savant, who will travel by van, will also be the host at closing ceremonies on Sunday at the waterfront park at Christopher Street and the West Side Highway.


A Boy Who Doesn't Fit In, Some Bullies and a Prom
"Moo," Angus Bethune (Charlie Talbert) retorts to all the fellow freshman who tease him about his shape and name.
He's a smart, friendly high school kid, but all his classmates care about is his size: big.
At least Angus knows enough to scorn such peer pressure, since he comes from a family of strong characters, with Kathy Bates as his truck-driving mother and George C. Scott as his crusty grandpa.
The Bethune family has a favorite rude motto.
"Angus" illustrates the popularity problems its hero faces with the standard devices of a novel for young readers, the kind of fiction in which a prom can be the central event in a story.
Sure enough, "Angus" has a prom, a pretty girl (Ariana Richards from "Jurassic Park"), her jealous boyfriend, his spiteful buddies and a chance for Angus to prove his mettle.The film, which starts out pleasantly before veering into victory overkill, could have shown Angus to be a royally nice guy without literally handing him a crown.


Critic's Choice/Music; To Implore and Exult
Unified by the Arabic language and, to a lesser extent, by the Islamic faith, the cultures of the Arab world can seem monolithic to outsiders.
But visitors to the two-day festival called Mahrajan al-Fan will find considerable variety, with a multinational assortment of music, dance, poetry, crafts, food and art.
The first Mahrajan al-Fan, organized by the Ethnic Folk Arts Center and a New York Arab-American coalition, was a one-day event last year.


The Spoken Word
KATE MILLETT, A Different Light, 151 West 19th Street, Chelsea.
The author will read from her new book, "A. D.: A Memoir." Tonight at 7.
Free.
Information: (212) 989-4850.
JOHN GRAY, Carnegie Hall.
A lecture by the author of "Men Are From Mars, Women Are From Venus." Tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $20 to $45.
Information: (212) 247-7800.
RAYMOND ALVIN, Barnes &amp; Noble, 1280 Lexington Avenue, at 86th Street, Manhattan.
A reading by the author of "The New York City Get-a-Grip Gripe Book: Raising Hell and Getting Satisfaction With the 51 Most Maddening Hassles." Tonight at 7:30.
Free.
Information: (212) 423-9900.
ART AT THE MET, Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82d Street.
TOMORROW: "Passion for Portraits: An English Romance," by Lora Rempel, 11 A.M.; "The Grand Tour: Rome and Venice in the 18th Century," by Elinor Richter, 7 P.M.
SUNDAY: "The Modern City: 20th Century," by Pearl Ehrlich, 11 A.M.
Free with museum admission: $7; $3.50 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 535-7710.


Accounts
Milk-Made Inc., New York, to Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos, New York, to handle Cool Cow, a milk product, previously at Soho Advertising, New York.
The billings were estimated at more than $1 million.
The Greater New York Savings Bank New York, to Culver Moriarty Glavin, New York, to handle its account, previously at Emmerling Post, New York.
The billings were not disclosed.


Leetch Hopes to Practice With Rangers
BRIAN LEETCH, recovering from a hairline fracture in his right foot, skated yesterday for the first time at the Rangers' training camp in Burlington, Vt., and said he hoped to practice with the team this morning before camp breaks.
Coach COLIN CAMPBELL said Leetch would probably not play in the first two exhibition games on Monday and Tuesday.


Calm, Excitement, Calm: Pace Quickens in Game 3
In chess as in hockey or soccer, a tie can be more exciting than a clear-cut victory.
Yesterday's clash in Game 3 of the world championship between Gary Kasparov, the champion, and Viswanathan Anand ended in a draw, but the plot was right out of "The Perils of Pauline."
At first, the grandmasters analyzing the game at the World Trade Center criticized Anand for playing passively and falling into an inferior position.
Then, the challenger stunned everyone by launching a brilliant attack.
But then, just as he had convinced the critics that he had a chance to win, he let Kasparov off the hook and agreed to the draw.


Budget Shortcut Plan
A Congressional panel suggested that a quick repair of the Federal budget might be achieved by recalculating inflation, which could ease many automatic Government costs.
Article, page A30.


Plans for the Yankees
The state of New Jersey, already home to what used to be New York's two professional football teams, has drawn up a proposal to build a 50,000-seat baseball stadium in the Meadowlands sports complex for the Yankees, state officials said yesterday.


Keeping Utility Rates Down
New Jersey regulators are trying to make the state's utilities more competitive, and Jersey Central Power and Light Company thinks it has a way to do it.
Dennis Baldassari, president of Jersey Central, said yesterday that the company has recommended that an independent agency be set up to run a pool of power provided by utilities and other companies in New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Maryland.
The three states already have a system to transfer power among utilities as needed.


She Was a Russian Countess, Until the Revolution
Weekly series come and go, but no new season would be complete without a television adaptation of a Danielle Steel best seller.
NBC obliges this Sunday with the first two-hour installment of "Zoya." Make that "Danielle Steel's 'Zoya.' " The second half will be broadcast on Monday night.
This sort of lavish production is becoming something of a dinosaur on a schedule dominated by sitcoms about wisecracking friends and movies shakily based on fact.
Much to my surprise, I'm somewhat saddened to see the gradual phasing out of such projects on prime time.
Like Sidney Sheldon and Judith Krantz, Ms.
Steel may specialize in trash, but it's not garbage.
The distinction in television is subtle but unmistakable.


Nuttiness As Solace In a Son's Moment Of Grief
Diane Keaton's "Unstrung Heroes" is a warm, surprising, gently incandescent film that discreetly describes a family tragedy.
It's about a husband, Sid Lidz (John Turturro), who "would say there was nothing broken that science couldn't fix," and his wife, Selma Lidz (Andie MacDowell), who has the bad luck to prove him wrong.
All this is seen, with sweet eccentricity and even improbable joie de vivre, through the eyes of the couple's worried young son, who during Selma's terminal illness turns for help to his crazy uncles.
At any other time in the life of the Lidz family, the film makes clear, this would be a last resort.
One a pack rat (Maury Chaykin) and the other a paranoid (Michael Richards), these uncles live together in a more artful version of the Collier brothers' domestic style.
But as busy as they are saving newspapers and collecting clown pictures, they somehow find the sanity to help their nephew through an extremely difficult time.


Art in Review
Jose Morales  El Museo del Barrio 1230 Fifth Avenue (at 104th Street) Manhattan Through Jan. 7
The large, multipaneled paintings in this ambitious show are formally traditionalist: half abstract but figurative, executed in a fluid, well-schooled draftsmanly brushwork, joining apparently incompatible art-historical influences, from Francis Bacon to Minimalism.
What gives them distinction, though, is their imagery, a stream-of-consciousness melange of the dreamlike and the everyday.


Packwood's Pension Isn't Golden Parachute
To the Editor:
The departure of Senator Bob Packwood should lay to rest the old canard that public officials are rewarded more liberally in retirement than their counterparts in industry.


Don't Blame I.R.A. for Stalling Talks
To the Editor:
Re Henry Laurence's Sept. 9 letter, stating that the Irish Republican movement, not the British Government, is throwing a monkey wrench into the talks process:


23% Increase In Federal Express Net
The Federal Express Corporation reported today that its fiscal first-quarter earnings rose 23 percent on higher package-delivery volume.
The results, which were released after the stock market closed, far exceeded Wall Street's expectations.


Showdown for Legal Services
Equal justice for all may be an American ideal but not to the Republican-controlled Congress, where measures advanced ominously this week to abolish the Legal Services Corporation, the federally financed program to help poor people with legal problems.
The corporation, which was created in 1974, managed to survive previous attacks on its mandate and financing during the Reagan and Bush Administrations, aided by powerful Democratic friends in Congress and some Republicans, like former Senator Warren Rudman of New Hampshire.
But its continued existence is now in jeopardy.
Not satisfied with the disabling funding cut already approved by the full House, or pending provisions in both chambers that would greatly restrict the types of cases that may be handled, the Republicans who control the House and Senate are moving to dismantle the program entirely.


Senators Gain On Welfare Bill But Delay Vote
With the Senate putting the final touches on its plan to overhaul the welfare system, its leaders reached a bipartisan agreement tonight on adding money for child care for poor women, one of the last hurdles to passage.
But they put off a final vote on welfare until next week, saying more time was necessary for drafting, for members to review a complicated web of compromises that had been reached and to insure that everyone is on hand for a vote regarded as historic.


Savings and Smoke
In 1981, when officials in the Reagan Administration were preparing their first budget, they came up $44 billion short of the spending cuts they needed.
So David A. Stockman, the budget director, invented what he called the "magic asterisk." The asterisk in the budget table stood for "future savings to be identified."
Neither Mr.
Stockman nor anyone else had the foggiest notion where these savings would be found, and, of course, they never materialized.


Corrections
A report in the Daily Briefing column in New Jersey copies yesterday referred incorrectly to City Council action in Jersey City to ban ballpoint pens that resemble hypodermic syringes.
The Council has not yet taken its final vote.
The pens are the subject of the Our Towns column today, on page B1.


The Dow Soars Over 4,800 for the First Time
Blue chip stocks continued to soar yesterday, pushing the bellwether Dow Jones industrial average past the psychologically important 4,800 level for the first time.
The Dow's upward movement this year has been relentless since initially piercing the 4,000 barrier on Feb. 23.
It first hit 4,500 on June 16, 4,600 on July 5 and 4,700 on July 7.
In the last three weeks alone, this average of 30 blue chip stocks has risen 4.7 percent.
The Dow industrials closed yesterday at 4,801.80, up 36.28 points.


An Exam for Home Health Care
Milagros Palacios has been in and out of New York City hospitals for the last two years for emergency treatment of a perforated intestine.
Each time she is admitted, she says, medical personnel tell her they don't expect her to live.
So far, though, the 62-year-old former medical secretary has just kept going.
Each time, she has been discharged to resume her life in her Washington Heights apartment.
But because she can't keep solid foods down, a condition that has reduced her frame to a frail 85 pounds, she requires several visits each week from nurses and aides who help with intravenous feeding and change her bandages.


Magazine Pulls Article Under Order
In a case that raises the First Amendment issue of prior restraint of publication, Business Week magazine was ordered on Wednesday by a Federal judge in Ohio to pull an article from its current issue as it was about to go to press, or be held in contempt.
The article contained information from documents that had been filed in Federal court in Cincinnati as part of litigation between the Procter &amp; Gamble Company and Bankers Trust Company.
The documents are under seal, but the magazine said its reporter did not know that and had obtained them from a confidential source.


No. 2 Officer At Pentagon Plans to Quit
Surprising many top Pentagon officials, the Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and one of the military's most innovative officers, plans to retire and join private industry when his two-year term expires in February, associates said today.
The official, Adm.
William A. Owens, a former nuclear submarine commander, told Defense Secretary William J. Perry and Gen.
John M. Shalikashvili, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, earlier this summer that he wanted to leave the military's second-highest job, one that often requires 20-hour days and constant travel, in order to spend more time with his family and pursue business interests, associates said.
Many had expected him to serve a second two-year term.


World of Goya and Those Who Would Be Goya
"Goya in the Metropolitan Museum of Art" is two superbly executed but very different exhibitions in one.
The first is exactly what the title promises: a blockbuster-scale display of every last scrap of the artist's work owned by the museum, including one of the largest and finest groups of his drawings and prints to be seen outside of Madrid.
The second, smaller, decidedly odder show is a gathering of paintings, also in the collection, that were Goyas once but have come far down in the world.
Now regarded as wanna-be Goyas, maybe-Goyas and no-way Goyas, and accompanied by labels explaining why this is so, they are dispersed here and there among the real things.


The Balloon Race Disaster
The unprovoked Belarussian attack on a sport balloon this week, which killed the two American crew members, recalls the Soviet downing of Korean Airlines flight 007 in 1983.
In both cases, skittish air defense forces recklessly killed civilians by firing on an intruding aircraft without determining whether it posed a threat.
In the Korean disaster, 269 passengers and crew members perished.
But the attack on the balloon lacked even the veneer of justification the Kremlin claimed in the Korean case.
Belarus, now an independent nation, faces no foreign military threat requiring hair-trigger defenses.
Unlike the Korean plane, the balloon was not obscured by night, it did not look or act remotely similar to a foreign spy plane and the unconventional nature of its flight path had been declared in advance as part of an international balloon race.


Market Place; Caldor's stock jumps, but the company picture is still murky.
SHARES of the Caldor Corporation, the regional discount store chain that has been buffeted by rumors of impending bankruptcy, skyrocketed 31 percent yesterday, rising $1.625, to $6.875, on a report that the company had worked out a new $100 million financing package with its lenders.
The company, however, issued a statement saying the report in Women's Wear Daily, a trade publication, was riddled with inaccuracies.
A spokeswoman for the company said it was continuing to negotiate with its bankers.


Oregon to Elect A U.S. Senator Using the Mail
Oregon voters will choose a successor to Senator Bob Packwood on Jan. 30, 1996, in an election by mail, the first time a United States senator will have been elected with mail ballots, Gov.
John Kitzhaber announced today.
The Democratic Governor said the two major parties would also use mail ballots to select their nominees in separate primaries on Dec. 5.
The special election was required after Mr.
Packwood, a Republican, resigned last week after more than two years of accusations of sexual and official misconduct.
He said he would leave office on Oct. 1.


L. A. Gear Plans to Shrink Work Force and Focus on Niche
L.
A.
Gear Inc., which has struggled to rebound from losses for several years, yesterday unveiled a sweeping reorganization plan that would trim its work force by 30 percent, realign management and refocus the company as a niche player in the athletic footwear market.
The company said it would take a charge of $3 million to $5 million this fiscal year, which ends on Nov. 30, because of the restructuring.
L.
A.
Gear said it hoped to cut operating costs by $25 million a year and focus on its strongest markets -- women's and children's shoes.


Lilco's Chief Opposes Pataki's Call for Demise of Utility
The chairman of the Long Island Lighting Company said today that Lilco was eager to cooperate with Gov.
George E. Pataki's efforts to cut electricity rates on Long Island and that he believed the Governor's goals could be met.
But the chairman, William J. Catacosinos, said he was troubled by Mr.
Pataki's insistence that such a plan include the "dissolution" of Lilco.


Bosnian and Croatian Troops Consolidate Gains as More Serb Refugees Flee


Foe of Public Broadcasting Aid Backs Auction Financing Plan
Senator Larry Pressler, a fervent critic of spending public money for noncommercial broadcasting, endorsed a plan today that would replace Government contributions with a trust fund financed by auctioning off use of the airwaves to commercial broadcasters.
Mr.
Pressler, the South Dakota Republican who heads the Senate Commerce Committee, which controls Federal financing for public broadcasting, vowed earlier this year to end Federal support for it.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about the reunion of Morrison-Knudsen workers who survived the Japanese occupation of Wake Island misstated the island's location.
It is in the North Pacific, not the South Pacific.


Jobs for Elderly Poor Are Targeted for Cuts
Not many people born early in one century go on to master the workday tools of the next.
Carla Roberson, a great-great-grandmother, 86 years old, is one who has.
Each day Mrs.
Roberson slips on her back brace and drives the 13 miles from her farmhouse in Screven to work at the Wayne County library here.
In 10 years, she has been out sick only 15 days, never with more than bad colds.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
4.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.81
5.96
4.79
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.27
5.29
4.56
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.23
5.29
4.93
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.09
6.18
7.33
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.46
6.52
7.63
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.47
7.50
8.47
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.98
5.99
6.44
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


In the Heat of a Race, Sierra Is Complaining
Ruben Sierra's timing to sulk about a paucity of at-bats was atrocious.
While the Yankees are entrenched in a spirited pursuit of the wild card, Sierra's agent called Manager Buck Showalter in his office at Camden Yards before tonight's game with the Orioles to discuss his client.
What was he doing?
Showalter, who had purple bags beneath his weary eyes as evidence of the myriad of other significant matters he is concerned with, barely spoke to the agent because he told him to call General Manager Gene Michael and slammed the telephone down in front of reporters.
The manager's face turned red and he was visibly irritated with the surprise call.


No Headline
"I told them that if this were a college course and they had actually chosen me, I'd be flattered." -- ROBIN KATZ, a high school Spanish teacher with 56 students and 28 seats in her classroom.  [ B1:2. ]


Who Did We Think Would Fight the War on Drugs and Crime?
To the Editor:
"The Rodney King 'Soundtrack' " by Brent Staples (Editorial Notebook, Sept. 11) is surely correct in condemning racist police officers like Mark Fuhrman and in noting the eviscerating effect that such racism has on the rule of law.
But is it enough to treat this as a "police" problem?
I think not.


With New African Flavor, Pope Starts Tour in Africa
On Pope John Paul II's 11th visit to this continent, beginning in Cameroon today, each stop of his four-country tour will include African touches for church ceremonies that even five years ago would have seemed strongly out of place for a Roman Catholic event of this magnitude.
Responding to the wishes of African bishops for a church that is more accessible to the continent's worshipers, the Vatican has worked hard in recent years to put more African flavor into the church's rites offered here, tolerating a growing number of local influences so long as they are not seen to violate any of Roman Catholicism's central tenets.


F.C.C. Proposes Rule Shift On Telephone Access Charges
Clearing another thicket of regulation yesterday, the Federal Communications Commission proposed to relax rules on how much local telephone companies can charge long-distance carriers to connect their calls.
Under the proposal, regional Bell operating companies would be able to reduce these fees, which are called access charges, for large business customers.
After the Bell companies have opened their monopoly markets to competition, the F.C.C. is to stop regulating the charges altogether.


Art in Review
Karen Yasinsky  Casey M. Kaplan 580 Broadway (near Prince Street) SoHo Through Oct. 8
Karen Yasinsky is not exactly working in unoccupied territory.
Sue Williams, Margaret Curtis and a number of other cartoon-inclined feminist artists are almost next-door neighbors, and Nicole Eisenman and Lee Gordon are not far off.
Still, the small paintings on paper glued to linen that form Ms.
Yasinsky's solo debut hold their own, in addition to being a big improvement over the drawings that have represented her in recent group shows.


Hampton Runs Around The Longevity Question
He was lying on a sofa in the Giants' locker room, watching television.
Rodney Hampton then sat up to discuss his opportunity on Sunday to become the second runner in Giants history to rush for 5,000 yards.
The conversation was going smoothly, predictably, until the subject shifted.
He was asked how long he will stay in the game.
"I don't know," Hampton said.
"I just take it year to year. When I first came in the league, I thought I'd only be able to play for three years. Right now I'm on No. 6, so I think I beat the odds. Running backs average about four years in the league.


Investigating Doctors' Bonuses
The State Board of Medical Examiners has agreed to investigate complaints that some health maintenance organizations are giving cash bonuses to doctors who limit the number of times they refer patients to specialists.
The issue was brought to the medical board's attention by the Communications Workers of America, which represents state workers and telephone company employees.
Dale Florio, lobbyist for the New Jersey HMO Association, said that doctors are given financial incentives solely on the basis of their performance.
TERRY PRISTIN


On Stage, and Off
Crazy for Shakespeare
Not since Neil Simon has there been a Broadway playwright with such potent audience appeal.
The name?
William Shakespeare.
In the four days since the box office opened, more than $893,000 in tickets have been sold for the New York Shakespeare Festival's limited run of "The Tempest," starring Patrick Stewart.
It is not only a record for a festival play, but also one of the fastest box-office starts of any Broadway play ever.
The speed with which theatergoers are vacuuming tickets (top price: $65) to a show that was free in the park this summer has astonished even the producers.
Evan Shapiro, the festival's marketing director, said the numbers were becoming outdated almost as soon as they were tallied.
"I called a guy at Tele-charge and during our five-minute conversation, we were up $800," he said.


Capital Slips Into Routine as the Packwood Furor Slips Away
Now that the scandal over Bob Packwood is fading quickly, there is a sort of human letdown, which comes as no surprise to readers of another womanizing diarist, Samuel Pepys, who jotted on Oct. 13, 1660, after witnessing the Crown's hanging, drawing and quartering of Major General Harrison:
"He looked as cheerful as any man could in that condition. He was presently cut down and his head and heart shown to the people, at which there was great shouts of joy."


Tradition in India vs. a Patent in the U.S.
For more than 50 years, Dr.
Vaidya Satya Pal has sat in his apothecary's shop in the teeming heart of this capital, dispensing the 2,000 ancient Indian remedies that cram the cupboards around him.
Often, his treatment of choice is a derivative of the neem tree, a hardwood that is as common in India as a pine is in New England.
So when Dr.
Pal heard that W. R. Grace &amp; Company had an American patent granted in 1992 for a pesticide based on neem, and that the patent was being challenged by an international coalition that regarded it as a piracy of India's knowledge of the neem tree's properties, he rose from his table and pushed out among the throng gathered in the pharmacy.


Packwood's Pension Isn't Golden Parachute
To the Editor:
An early memory comes from 1968, when my mother sat me in front of the television to watch the incumbent Senator from Oregon, Wayne Morse, debate Bob Packwood.
The high point was the moment when Mr.
Packwood pulled out a Morse campaign flier, compared it with Senator Morse's statements from his first campaign and showed how his views had been changed by years in Washington.


Bosnia Serbs Agree to Pull Back Heavy Artillery From Sarajevo
The Bosnian Serbs have agreed to withdraw their heavy guns out of firing range of Sarajevo, ending at least temporarily NATO's two-week-old bombing campaign against them, American officials said today.
The outline agreement, signed by Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader, and Gen.
Ratko Mladic, their military commander, gives the Serbs six days to withdraw the approximately 300 guns that have bombarded Sarajevo steadily since April 6, 1992, the officials said.


Mets and City Discussing a Domed Stadium
While New York City struggles to keep the Yankees, the other big league baseball team in town, the Mets, are quite happy with their current location, but just want a nicer stadium.
After more than a year of discussions with city officials -- and more muted rumblings about leaving the city -- the Mets and the city are talking seriously about plans for a domed ball park to be built right next to Shea Stadium.


Child Support System Still Lets Men Off Easy
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 8 news article on fathers and the child support system paints a somewhat unbalanced picture.
Until recently, legislators, judges and families absolutely refused to hold fathers economically responsible for their children -- whether they were living with their children or not.


Dent and the Bears Are Reunited
Defensive end RICHARD DENT, second on the National Football League's career sack list, agreed to a one-year contract to rejoin the Chicago Bears.
"It was a tough thing to leave, but it's great to be back," said Dent, who left the Bears after the 1993 season in a contract dispute.


Corrections
A chart on Wednesday with an article about military developments in Bosnia misstated the timing of NATO's firing of 13 cruise missiles at Bosnian Serb targets.
It was Sunday, not Monday.


Despite Teachers' Reassignment, Classes Stay Overcrowded
It was standing room only in Robin Katz's Spanish I class at New Dorp High School in Staten Island this week as 56 students made do with 28 desks, a long windowsill and spots on the floor.
"I told them that if this were a college course and they had actually chosen me, I'd be flattered," Ms.
Katz said.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in Manhattan that are to close soon:  Closing This Weekend "LOVE! VALOUR! COMPASSION!," Walter Kerr Theater, 219 West 48th Street, Manhattan.
A play by Terrence McNally.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 2 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $20 to $45.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"THE ONLY THING WORSE YOU COULD HAVE TOLD ME . . ." Actors Playhouse, 100 Seventh Avenue, at Christopher Street, Greenwich Village.
A one-man show about gay culture, written by Dan Butler; starring Greg Louganis; directed by Randy Brenner.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 7 and 10 P.M.; Sunday at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $40.
Information: (212) 307-4100.
"TWO BOYS IN A BED ON A COLD WINTER'S NIGHT," Theater Off the Park, 224 Waverly Place, at Perry Street, Greenwich Village.
A play about the relationship of two gay men who meet in a bar.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 7 and 10 P.M.; Sunday at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $25.
Information: (212) 279-4200.
"MALE DESIRE: HOMOEROTIC IMAGES IN 20TH-CENTURY AMERICAN ART," Mary Ryan Gallery, 24 West 57th Street, Manhattan.
A collection of works, including paintings, illustrations, silk screens and photographs.
Through tomorrow.
Hours: today, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.
Information: (212) 397-0669.
GEORG BASELITZ AND "JOSEF ALBERS: GLASS, COLOR AND LIGHT." Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street.
Both through Sunday.
Hours: today and tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.; Sunday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $7; $4 for students and the elderly; free for children under 12.
Information: (212) 423-3500.
Closing Next Weekend "FOR COLORED GIRLS WHO HAVE CONSIDERED SUICIDE WHEN THE RAINBOW IS ENUF," TriBeCa Performing Arts Center, 199 Chambers Street.
Through Sept. 24.
Performances: Wednesdays through Fridays at 7:30 P.M.; Saturdays at 4 and 8 P.M.; Sundays at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
Information: (212) 346-8510.
"SYLVIA," Manhattan Theater Club, City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan.
The A. R. Gurney comedy about a Manhattan couple and a dog.
Closes Sept. 23 and reopens, with cast changes, on Sept. 29 at the John Houseman Theater, 450 West 42d Street, Manhattan.
Performances: Tuesdays through Fridays at 8 P.M.; Saturdays at 2:30 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 2:30 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $45.
Information: (212) 581-1212.


From Lethal Cause to Artistic One
Few clothes are strong enough to turn mere department store mannequins into heroes.
Yet the Costume Institute at the Metropolitan Museum of Art has assembled those few good clothes, on mannequins, into a rousing exhibition that does just that.
The show, "Swords Into Ploughshares: Military Dress and the Civilian Wardrobe," tracks the impact of military attire on fashion, from the 19th century, when aristocrats wore hand-tailored bright clothing into battle, to the emergence of inconspicuous khaki-clad armies in the 20th century.
Even without the John Philip Sousa marches playing and, just inside the door, the oil portrait of a dashing Capt.
Spencer Derrington from 1852, the catalogue to the exhibition alone would inspire some flag-waving (although which flag, Confederate or French or Russian, is optional, as there are uniforms from many battles).
"War renders heroes; war tenders fortitude," the catalogue notes, but adds, "Moreover, war offers a modern wardrobe the efficacy of virtue-imbued, tested, sentimental, epic dress. Again and again, war's fiery raiment has become a figure for modern apparel."


Concrete Evidence
For nearly 10 years critics and musicians with the kind of ears that can not only hear a violin squawk but the grass grow have been saying there is something terribly wrong with the sound at Carnegie Hall.
To wit: concrete under the stage.
"No, no," its administrators and architects have said.
"Yes, yes," the music mavens have insisted.
Now they can add, "I told you so."
A layer of concrete, recently removed, was indeed under Carnegie Hall's stage, and how it got there nobody seems to know.
It was not in the plans for the 1986 restoration nor does anyone recall having seen it poured.
But poured it was, in a layer that varied from one to four inches thick.


Geoffrey Stokes, 55, A Writer on Music And Sports, Is Dead
Geoffrey Stokes, an author and journalist whose work ranged from politics to sports to music to cooking, died on Tuesday at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
He was 55 and lived in Woodstock, Vt.
The cause was esophageal cancer, his wife, Janice Prindle, said.


Rangers and Royals Keep Pace in the A.L.
Rangers 6, Blue Jays 1
Bobby Witt pitched seven-hit ball and struck out 12 over eight-plus innings yesterday, helping the Texas Rangers move within a game of the American League wild-card lead with a 6-1 victory over the Toronto Blue Jays at Skydome.


Ruling Sets Back Efforts to Limit Street Vendors
Dealing a setback to the Giuliani administration's efforts to restrict sidewalk food vendors, a State Supreme Court judge has struck down rules that would have barred their carts from much of midtown Manhattan.
Justice Fern Fisher-Brandveen ruled yesterday that vendors hawking everything from coffee to hot dogs to roasted nuts could continue to operate on 26 streets that a city panel in August had either closed to vending entirely or restricted.


Battle Over a School Budget


Service for Corliss Lamont
A memorial service for Corliss Lamont, the Socialist author, teacher and civil-rights leader, is scheduled for 2 P.M. on Monday in the Low Library rotunda at Columbia University.
Dr.
Lamont, who died on April 26 at age 93, had been a member of the Columbia Law School faculty.
The tribute, which is open to the public, will be followed by a debate on "Civil Liberties and the Role of Religion in Public Life."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
4.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.81
5.88
4.68
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.27
5.27
4.58
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.25
5.23
5.01
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.12
6.09
7.49
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.48
6.46
7.77
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.47
7.47
8.60
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.00
5.98
6.52
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Tax Preparer Prepares for Jail
A Union City tax preparer who admitted fabricating deductions to get $50,000 in fraudulent refunds on the Federal returns of 36 clients was sentenced to two years in prison and fined $3,000.
United States District Judge Jerome B. Simandle also forbade Carlos Palacios, 30, from preparing tax returns for one year after he leaves prison.


Bridge
c It is normally true that three no-trump is a better contract than five of a minor suit, but this principle can be carried too far.
Experts who have reached three no-trump often wish, when the dummy appears, that they had chosen the minor-suit game.
An example is the diagramed deal from the Regional Swiss Teams played Sunday in Kiamesha Lake, N.Y.
Five diamonds would be an excellent contract and six diamonds would make on a good day.
But three no-trump, reached in both rooms, was virtually hopeless after a heart lead.
It duly went down in one room, but the other declarer, Rob Gordon of Northport, L.I., found a clever way to put pressure on East.


50,000 'Pope Pogs' Ordered
If Roman Catholics still commonly used Latin, they might be saying "pogs vobiscum" in the Camden diocese, which has ordered 50,000 "Pope pogs" bearing the likeness of Pope John Paul II.
The pogs, small cardboard disks used in games, will be distributed to children in 126 South Jersey parishes to mark the Pope's visit to New Jersey next month.
Diocesean officials initially considered holy cards but rejected them as old-fashioned.


San Gennaro: Crowds, Cannoli and a Crackdown
Nothing could make Cha Cha smile.
Not the strains of Caruso soaring above the Feast of San Gennaro, the night lights setting Mulberry Street aglow, or the stream of friends who bent down to kiss his cheek and whisper admiration for his sausage-and-pepper sandwiches.
True, Cha Cha had broken a toe earlier in the day while helping a priest move a refrigerator.
But that wasn't the issue; the cleric had blessed the toe, and it would heal.
What was bothering Cha Cha, he said, was the Giuliani administration's seeming harassment of honest feast merchants in a quest to eradicate the mob from Little Italy.


A Rookie Helps Mets Escape The Cellar
The Mets are beginning to resemble the niece and nephew whom you have not seen in a few years.
They are growing up so quickly, you hardly recognize them.
With Jason Isringhausen, their 23-year-old rookie right-hander, on the mound, the Mets held off the Philadelphia Phillies, 4-1, last night at Shea Stadium and climbed out of the National League East cellar for the first time since July 24.


COMPANY BRIEFS
REYNOLDS METAL CO., Richmond, agreed to purchase an additional 25 percent stake in a Canadian aluminum smelter from a Quebec goverment agency for $390 million.
The purchase will bring Reynolds's interest in the smelter to 50 percent.
LOMAK PETROLEUM INC., Fort Worth, an oil and gas producer, said it had agreed to buy some oil and gas properties in Ohio, Pennsylvania and New York in a stock and cash transaction valued at $21 million.
The identity of the seller was not disclosed.


Corrections
An obituary of the screenwriter Howard Koch on Aug. 18 misstated the given name of a co-writer on the film "Casablanca." The writer was Julius Epstein, not Julian.
The obituary also misquoted a line of dialogue.
It is "Of all the gin joints in all the towns in all the world," not "all over the world."


Senators Formalize Compromise on Child Care
Senate leaders today formalized a bipartisan welfare compromise on providing $8 billion for child care, clearing the way for passage of the overall welfare bill next week with significant Democratic support.
In the aftermath of the compromise, Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the Democratic leader, announced that he would vote for the bill, although with mixed feelings.


Mason and the Knicks Expect Amicable Talks
Although team officials are prohibited from commenting until the National Basketball Association's lockout is lifted Monday at noon, the Knicks and Anthony Mason are bound together by two irrefutable facts: He wants to stay in New York, and the Knicks do not want their moody power forward going anywhere else.
With that in mind, General Manager Ernie Grunfeld and Mason's agent, Don Cronson, are expected to hold serious contract discussions early next week that -- barring a serious breakdown -- will most likely lead to Mason's re-signing with the club.


Mutually Respectful Chess Foes Make Another Quiet Draw
There is a point at which respect turns into wariness, and after four straight draws in the world chess championship, it is clear that Gary Kasparov has great respect for his challenger, Viswanathan Anand, and vice versa.
Yesterday in Game 4, which lasted only 117 minutes, technical virtuosity and professional caution prevailed again in the match at the World Trade Center.
It all adds up to a 2-2 tie, in which the third game was the only one that produced major excitement.
Some spectators feel that $15 a ticket should get more brilliant returns.


An Error Most Foul In Brooklyn Mural; Fresh Woe for Fans of Dem Bums: Right Field Is Painted All Wrong
It might have been a compliment, the way the Brooklyn Diner opened in Manhattan last June to offer egg creams, hot dogs four times the price of Coney Island's, and a 15-foot mural of the 1955 World Series, the only one "dem bums" ever won.
What Brooklyn Dodgers fans got instead was another slap in the face.
The mural, commissioned for $10,000 from a Manhattan artist, contained two unpardonable mistakes.


Motorboats on Glimmerglass?!
Otsego Lake, one of New York State's most beautiful and unspoiled bodies of water and the Glimmerglass of James Fenimore Cooper's "Leatherstocking Tales," is threatened.
The state Department of Environmental Conservation and the Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation plan to put a huge motorboat ramp, with parking for cars and trailers, at Glimmerglass State Park, near the lake's northern end.
This would bring environmental ruin.


Hearing Set on Magazine Article
A hearing has been set for Monday in which The McGraw-Hill Companies will ask an appeals court to reverse an order that blocked Business Week magazine from publishing information contained in sealed court documents.
The hearing, scheduled for 2 P.M. before a three-judge panel in the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit, in Cincinnati, involves a court order issued on Wednesday evening by Judge John Feikens.


Corrections
A headline yesterday about the chairman of the Long Island Lighting Company, William J. Catacosinos, referred imprecisely to his reaction to Gov.
George E. Pataki's call for the dissolution of Lilco.
While he expressed reservations about the proposal, he did not say he opposed it.


Casinos Threaten Pageant As Symbol of Atlantic City
For years the Miss America pageant was the only product -- besides salt water taffy and the Monopoly game -- firmly identified with this city.
But that bond may be loosening, in part because of a revival of the casino gambling industry.
Though some of the old electricity still crackles around the pageant, the real star of the hour here is not a beauty contestant but an energetic casino operator, Stephen A. Wynn, fresh from Las Vegas with a long list of ideas on how to pump up the town's excitement level.


Computer Fires Set Apple Back At Crucial Time
For months, Apple Computer Inc. had been contending that once consumers looked at Microsoft's new Windows 95 software, the comparison would help Apple's own business catch fire.
Now, in a sense, its prophecy has come true, and the company is less than delighted.
Some of Apple's newest portable machines have burst into flames, and the company is recalling them.


Fire Alarm Boxes Prove Their Worth
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 9 news article on an explosion and fire that forced the evacuation of 3,000 workers from a Manhattan office building reinforces the importance of municipal fire alarm service in New York City.


Senate Panel Quickly Completes Action on Spending Bills
The Senate Appropriations Committee completed work on the 1996 spending bills with unusual haste today, approving the last, largest and probably most contentious of the measures, a $263.8 billion outlay for the Departments of Labor, Education and Health and Human Services.
As in its handling of the 12 other spending bills that preceded this one in the last two weeks, the committee engaged in only a 30-minute debate before voting 24 to 3 to advance the huge labor, health and education bill along the legislative treadmill and toward a virtually certain veto from President Clinton.


No Headline
"Who is going to live here in the future -- only wealthy retirees in second homes?" -- MICK KELLY, worrying about Vail, Colo.  [ 6:2. ]


Report to Seek Some Changes In Nasdaq
A long-awaited report on the Nasdaq stock market, the nation's fastest-growing equity market, will call for changes in the market's governance and supervisory mechanisms, but will not call for a major supervisory overhaul, according to people familiar with the new study.
The report by former Senator Warren B. Rudman, a New Hampshire Republican, will recommend increased public representation on the boards of that stock market, and its parent, the National Association of Securities Dealers, as well as a significant boost in the market's enforcement capabilities, according to people familiar with the new study.


Tenneco Is Leaving Houston for Greenwich
Going against the outflow of companies from Frost Belt to Sun Belt, Tenneco Inc. today announced a move in the opposite direction.
Tenneco, one of the nation's 50 largest industrial companies, plans to shift its headquarters to Greenwich, Conn., from Houston, by the middle of next summer.
Only about 70 employees, 30 moving from Houston and the rest to be hired locally, will work in the new headquarters, once the home of Henry R. Luce, the co-founder of Time magazine, and his wife, Clare Boothe Luce, the writer, former Ambassador to Italy and former United States Representative.
The building lies near the New York border and Westchester County Airport.
Tenneco Gas will remain in Houston, and the staff for payroll, accounting and other corporate services will move to the Woodlands, a northern suburb.


Heroes in Outworld, Fighting to Save the Earth
When Mortal Kombat: The Live Tour began its 200-city road trip on Thursday night at Radio City Music Hall, it was clear from the first minute that it would be an action-fantasy spectacle far different from past Radio City events like Teen-Age Mutant Ninja Turtles and Mighty Morphin Power Rangers.
Though all three stage shows are about karate-chopping, preposterously costumed children's heroes, only Mortal Kombat is based on a video and arcade game.
Opening with loud electronic sound effects and laser lights shining in the audience's eyes, Mortal Kombat, which has its last show at Radio City tonight, tried to overstimulate the audience into a hypnoid daze in much the same way the game can.
In the past, it wasn't so easy to develop spinoffs of arcade video games.
Imagine Pong: The Live Tour, with two actors costumed as white vertical lines batting a featureless tennis ball back and forth in imitation of the first arcade video game.
Not very exciting.
But Mortal Kombat is an industry unto itself.
The movie based on the game was No. 1 at the box office in its first weekend, taking in $23 million; the soundtrack to the film is in the top 10 on the pop charts; the home video-game cartridge has made $300 million, and there are more than 100 licensed toys, comics and cards based on Mortal Kombat, many of which were sold at the theater's concession stand on Thursday night.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Electronics Manufacturers Agree on One Disk Standard
Consumer electronics manufacturers agreed on a format for a new disk that the industry hopes will be the successor to both the videocassette and the CD-ROM computer storage disk.


ResultsPlus
TRACK AND FIELD  Johnson Prevails After Tight Finish in 200
Michael Johnson, who has not lost a 200-meter race since July 1994, was nearly nipped at the finish by Frank Fredericks of Namibia in the Toto International Super meet yesterday in Tokyo.
Johnson's time was 20.06 seconds, while Fredericks finished at 20.11.
In third was Koji Ito at 20.71.
In the 100 meters, Britain's Olympic gold medal winner, Linford Christie, ended his season on a winning note, defeating the Canadians Bruny Surin and Donovan Bailey.
Christie was timed in 10 seconds flat, Surin at 10.02 and Bailey at 10.09. (AP) GOLF  A Five-Way Tie for the Lead at B.C.
Open
Jay Williamson bogeyed his final hole yesterday after hitting his drive into the water, settling for a 68 that dropped him back into a five-way tie for the lead midway through the B.C.
Open.
Williamson, the first-round co-leader Skip Kendall, Brad Faxon, Guy Boros and Jeff Leonard were bunched atop the leader board at seven-under-par 135 after two rounds over the par-71 En-Joie Golf Course in Endicott, N.Y. (AP) YACHT RACING  Newport Sailor Wins Without Pushing Off
Betsy Alison of Newport, R.I., was far enough ahead in the standing yesterday of the Rolex International women's keelboat championship in Newport that she and her crew did not need to compete in the last race of the weeklong regatta.
Her team, sailing the J/24 sloop Mookie, won the event.
HORSE JUMPING  Legato Takes First Place
Peter Leone of Greenwich, Conn., piloted Legato to a faultless round in the jumpoff in 36.80 seconds last night to win the $25,000 Welcome Stake, the qualifying event for tomorrow's $85,000 American Gold Cup grand prix for horse show jumpers at Devon, Pa.
Anne Kursinski of Flemington, N.J., took second in the qualifier astride Dynamite, with a clear round in 38.41 seconds.
Tim Grubb of Somerville, N.J. placed third aboard Funny Face with 21 faults in the horse's first major competition in two years after an injury.


Duva Wants Holyfield-Bowe to Stay Put
DAN DUVA does not think that TVKO's EVANDER HOLYFIELD-RIDDICK BOWE pay-per-view bout on Nov. 4 should shift to another date now that the MIKE TYSON-BUSTER MATHIS JR. bout has gone from Showtime pay-per-view to Fox.
"My vote is to stay," said Duva, Holyfield's promoter.
What about SETH ABRAHAM, TVKO's chief?
"I think Seth wants to stay, but I don't know if he'll determine it's the best business decision."
Duva expects a decision next week.


Justice, Delayed, for 'Lawrence of Arabia'
From the Communist world to South Africa, the collapse of old regimes has brought attempts to satisfy the victims of past injustices.
In a quieter vein, some in Hollywood have been trying for years to redress grievances from the old era of blacklisting.
That effort led last week to an honor to the blacklisted screenwriter Michael Wilson; he was awarded credit as co-writer of "Lawrence of Arabia." Mr.
Wilson died 17 years ago, but the Writer's Guild is asking Columbia Pictures to change the credit for all future laser disks, cassettes or new prints of one of the most literate movies ever made.
A decent respect for its own history and integrity demands no less than a thorough accounting of credits by the movie industry.
But the case of "Lawrence of Arabia" shows why doing so is not always easy.
Mr.
Wilson, a hostile witness before the House Un-American Activities Committee in 1951 -- he defiantly refused to say whether he had been a Communist -- contended until his death in 1978 that he had been cheated of screen credit for "Lawrence" because of politics.
But to the end of their days, the writer who got screen credit, Robert Bolt, and the director, David Lean, argued that they had not based the final script on his original work.


Katherine Locke, 85; Actress
Katherine Locke, who appeared on Broadway and in films, died on Tuesday at her home in Thousand Oaks, Calif.
She was 85.
Ms.
Locke made her stage debut in 1928 in "The Joy of Serpents" at the Provincetown Playhouse in Greenwich Village.
She followed that with bit parts in "Firebird" (with Judith Anderson), "Halfway to Hell" and "If a Body."


Jets' New No. 99 Is Looking for That First Sack
Hugh Douglas, the pass-rushing Jets rookie who desperately wants his first sack, was called in for a meeting with the defensive line coach Ray Hamilton today.
"He feels I'm frustrated," Douglas said 20 minutes later.
"You come into the pros and you tend to put things on a time schedule, but it doesn't always work out that way."


F.B.I. Chief Restricts Unit Criticized in Idaho Standoff
The Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, whose agency is under fire over a confrontation with a white separatist in Idaho, said today that he had imposed broad new controls on the elite unit sent to the scene during the standoff.
"It's my position that I should take a much more conservative approach to deployment," the Director, Louis J. Freeh, said in an interview.


Depressed? Don't Go See Dr. Kevorkian
If a patient with multiple sclerosis has bed sores, it means by definition that, for whatever reason, he or she is not receiving adequate medical care," Dr. Randolph B. Schiffer, an adviser to the National Multiple Sclerosis Society, told me when I asked whether that condition could be generally considered normal for such a patient.
Last month, Esther Cohan, who was 46 years old, committed suicide with the help of Jack Kevorkian.
Ms.
Cohan, who had multiple sclerosis, was disabled but not terminally ill.
Esther's sister told reporters that her sister's body was covered with bed sores.
Yet, according to Jack Kevorkian's lawyer, Geoffrey Feiger, Dr.
Kevorkian had been "counseling" Ms.
Cohan since March.
Didn't he know that he was participating in the suicide of someone who, by Dr.
Schiffer's standards, appears to have received inadequate care?


In 3d Vote, After-School Programs Win
Voters in the Wappinger's Falls Central School District have approved spending $800,000 for sports and after-school activities this year.
The vote Thursday eased the anxiety of the district's 11,000 students, who had returned to school last week under an austerity budget after proposals including after-school activities were rejected twice by the voters.


How to Win a Kingdom
Conventional wisdom holds that the Christian Coalition is bent on being the power broker in determining who becomes the Republican Presidential candidate -- an impression reinforced by the group's annual convention last weekend, at which all but two of the eight Republican contenders came on bended knee.
The coalition's leaders have pushed hard to put themselves in this position.
But its committed rank-and-file -- active members working at the local level -- are too busy fighting for the kingdom to worry too much about naming the next king.


Golf Replaces Grazing In Vacation-Rich Vail
His lambs and ewes grazed peacefully in a high altitude meadow here, but Randy Campbell shifted uneasily in his saddle, pondering the golf courses marching down the valley floor below.
With eight golf courses in 20 miles of river valley, spring pasture land is rapidly vanishing for this fourth-generation Colorado sheep producer.


Disgruntled Sierra Starts
One day after Ruben Sierra's ill-timed complaint about not starting against right-handed pitchers, he started tonight against the right-hander Scott Erickson.
It wasn't because Manager Buck Showalter gave in, but because of Sierra's .308 career batting average against Erickson, and Sierra responded by going 2 for 4 with a double and a run scored in the Yankees' loss.
Showalter, who had been irritated when Sierra's agent called him in his office at Camden Yards before Thursday night's game, met with Sierra for two minutes Thursday and tried to put a positive spin on the situation.


Shotgun Shooting to Grand Jury
A Deptford Township man, drunk and depressed about losing his job at the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard, acted deliberately when he shot his wife to death last week, a prosecutor said at a bail hearing yesterday.
Kevin Faherty, 37, is charged with killing his wife, Joann, by firing a shotgun through a bedroom door.
Mr.
Faherty's lawyer called the shooting accidental.
Mr.
Faherty's request for a reduction in the current $100,000 bail was denied.
The case now goes to a grand jury.
JOE SHARKEY


Executive Changes
BAKER HUGHES INC., Houston, named Max L. Lukens president and to the newly created position of chief operating officer.
Mr.
Lukens succeeds James D. Woods as president; he will continue as chairman and chief executive.


Euphoria in Streets As Supply Lines Open
This afternoon, Sabin Dzako heard a roar like thunder that shook the windows and brought tears to her eyes.
Outside, from the clear blue sky, the first of what she hopes will be a long line of cargo jets hit the tarmac of Sarajevo airport, bringing a long-awaited shipment of food and the first installment of psychological relief that citizens of the besieged city have known in months.


Trading Rights for Dollars
The New Jersey Network will receive $4.3 million over eight years for letting the TV Food Network use the valuable slot NJN occupies on Time Warner's cable system in New York City.
The state broadcast network relinquished its right to be carried on the system, giving the TV Food Network better access to the New York market, where only 5 percent of NJN subscribers live.
Under 1992 Federal regulations, cable television systems must carry the signals of all local broadcasters who request it.
Cable operators complain that the law often prevents them from accommodating new channels.


METRO DIGEST
LAYOFFS BEGIN NEW ERA AT PORT AUTHORITY
More than 160 people lost their jobs in the first large-scale layoffs at the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey since the Depression.
The reductions ushered in a new era for an agency that had long seemed able to dodge the kind of sharp cuts in government and industry in recent years.  [ Page 1. ]


All's Quiet For the Irish With Holtz On the Mend
The golf cart remains in park.
It is supposed to be in drive this time of year, zipping Lou Holtz to and from and around the practice field at Notre Dame, where his surprisingly booming voice punctuates the team's preparation.
That was the biggest difference this week as Holtz recovered in Rochester, Minn., from Tuesday's spinal surgery.
"It was quiet," said Lyron Cobbins, an inside linebacker.
The Fighting Irish went about their preparation for Saturday's game against Vanderbilt under conditions that players here had not known since Holtz directed his first Notre Dame team in 1986.
Notre Dame officials said today that Holtz was expected to return Saturday morning before the game.
But he will be going home, not to Notre Dame Stadium, to continue a recuperation expected to last three to four weeks.
Holtz has already accelerated the pace of his return.
This evening, Holtz told the television station WNDU that he hoped to watch the game next Saturday, against Texas, from the press box.
Holtz also described the feeling of uncertainty he experienced last week.
"The worst thing about it is not knowing," Holtz told the station.
"Your legs are going bad. You're losing your coordination. You're losing your strength, and your mind starts playing games, Lou Gehrig's disease, multiple sclerosis, and you think, 'Well, it will go away or we'll just put up with it.' And all of a sudden it reaches a point where you get scared, and you go get an examination."
Notre Dame's leadership has been shared by three coaches: Bob Davie, the defensive coordinator; Dave Roberts, the offensive coordinator, and Tom Clements, an assistant coach who has handled administrative duties.
Davie, who came to Notre Dame last season from Texas A&amp;M, has been designated the acting head coach.
"You can tell Coach Davie has more on his mind than just defense," Cobbins said.
"In practice, as we broke the defensive huddle, I'd look at him and I could see he was thinking."
This will not be the only place where a familiar figure will be conspicuous by his absence Saturday.
In Lincoln, Neb., the Nebraska Cornhuskers will meet Arizona State in their first game since running back Lawrence Phillips was arrested in an alleged assault of a former girlfriend and dismissed from the team.
In Gainesville, Fla., Tennessee, ranked No. 8 by The Associated Press, will be without a three-year starter on its offensive line when its sophomore quarterback, Peyton Manning, is expected to receive the most difficult test of his career: a showdown against No. 4 Florida Gators.
Leslie Ratliffe, who, like Phillips, is alleged to have assaulted a former girlfriend, is being held out of the game while the incident is investigated.
Here, the customary sellout crowd of 59,075 will be in for a strange sight -- an Irish team emerging from the tunnel at the north end without Holtz leading the way.
It was that act, or the absence of it, that helped convince Holtz of the seriousness of his condition two weeks ago when he was unable to run onto the field before Notre Dame's loss to Northwestern.
Notre Dame's 35-28 victory at Purdue last week helped stabilize its situation after the shocking season-opening defeat.
But now the Irish will have to deal with a Vanderbilt team that led Alabama before the Crimson Tide scored 23 points in the fourth quarter to pull out a 33-25 victory.
The Commodores defense, with 10 returning starters, produced four interceptions against Alabama.
Davie, who has coached outstanding defensive teams at Texas A&amp;M and Pittsburgh, felt strongly that a sense of normalcy was especially important for a team as young as the Irish.
Four of Notre Dame's defensive starters and six second-team players are freshmen or sophomores.
"All I am is a caretaker," Davie said.
Tonight, during the pep rally at the Joyce Center, Davie made the team's task clear.
"It's going to be a challenge to beat Vanderbilt without Lou Holtz," he said.
"But we're not going to beat Vanderbilt without Lou Holtz. We're going to beat Vanderbilt for Lou Holtz."
Although he will concentrate on directing the defense, Davie will also listen to the discussions of offensive coaches in his headphones, and he will be responsible for major offensive decisions.
The acting coach laughed when asked if there was ever a temptation to get in the golf cart and go for a ride.
"I'm not going anywhere near that golf cart," Davie said.
"I don't want anybody near that golf cart."


Radio Host Critically Injured
Bob Aaronson, 59, a late-night talk-radio host on WOR, was in critical condition yesterday following surgery at Morristown Memorial Hospital after being injured while riding his bicycle on Thursday.


Karen Finley's Back, In a Cloud of Epithets
There she is, in a low-cut wedding dress accessorized with battered espadrilles and a vacuum cleaner and wearing her cleavage like a sneer.
Her voice is pitched at a level that makes one's adenoids ache in sympathy, and before the evening is over she will announce, in a strangled cry of thanksgiving, "I'm glad I'm getting older so I'm not as pretty anymore."
Consider it as an alternative to this weekend's broadcast of "The Miss America Pageant." Karen Finley is back, offering her own violent vision of womanhood in this country in a new, mixed-media performance piece, "The American Chestnut," which runs through Sunday at the American Repertory Theater here.


Robert J. Dunphy; Times Travel Writer, 76
Robert J. Dunphy, an editor and travel writer for The New York Times for 25 years, died on Thursday at his home in Woodstock, N.Y.
He was 76.
The cause was cancer, his wife, Marie, said.


New Drought Warning Cuts Region's Drinking Water Supply
Water woes for New York City and parts of New Jersey mounted yesterday when a drought warning was declared in the Delaware River Basin and their shares of drinking water from the basin were cut by 15 percent each.
Besides ordering those reductions, the Delaware River Basin Commission, a four-state agency that manages the basin's water supplies, appealed to the seven million people who live in the basin's 13,539 square miles to save water voluntarily.


Bridal Gale


The Lady With an Orchestra That Wasn't
When Shawn McConneloug and Her Orchestra appeared at Dance Theater Workshop on Thursday night, there was no orchestra.
Instead, this was a Minneapolis-based dance group directed by a quirkily imaginative choreographer.
Ms.
McConneloug's dancers did make percussion music of a sort in "Shoes" by letting their shoes thud against the floor in what appeared to be a glorification of clatter.
"Corporal Mortification" also concerned unruliness by depicting pupils at a Roman Catholic school assembling in a rigid order and then twitching through simultaneously comic and disquieting spasms of rebellion.


Leasing the City Hospitals
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani wants New York City to get out of the business of running hospitals.
In February he called for the sale of 3 of the 11 hospitals run by the Health and Hospitals Corporation.
Now, to avoid a lengthy review process and other potentially troublesome hurdles, he wants to lease, rather than sell, the facilities.
Leasing might well be a reasonable course.
But what is most important is that the city get as much rent from the facilities as possible, while insuring the availability and quality of health care for poor residents.
Mr.
Giuliani's proposal to sell Coney Island Hospital in Brooklyn and Queens Hospital Center and Elmhurst Hospital Center in Queens was driven largely by the city's persistent financial problems.
Mr.
Giuliani estimated that selling the hospitals could save the city nearly $2 billion in operating expenses and capital spending over the next decade, although there is little support for that figure.


Celebrity Horses Taking Center Stage at Belmont
Two exceptional horses, Cigar and the filly Inside Information, will tower over the racing landscape today when Belmont Park stages its Super Saturday, the first in a series of race dates that will peak Oct. 28 with the Breeders' Cup and anoint millionaires and champions.
Both stars will be short-priced favorites at 2-5 or better, Cigar going for his 10th straight success in the $500,000 Woodward Stakes as the leading candidate for Horse of the Year, and Inside Information giving away 12 to 18 pounds in the Ruffian Handicap.


Devils Say New Rules Won't Affect Them
The Devils said they would have no trouble adjusting to the new rules adopted today by the National Hockey League.
This season the league will crack down on interference tactics -- primarily the obstruction of players without the puck -- with some emphasis on activity, or lack thereof, in the neutral zone.


Former Dolphin Facing Drug Charges
The former Miami Dolphins running back SAMMIE SMITH was among 11 people arrested on Federal drug-trafficking charges yesterday in a crime-ridden residential area north of Orlando, Fla., the authorities said.
Smith, 28, of Apopka, had about 15 pounds of cocaine in his car when about 100 law enforcement officials moved in at about 8:30 A.M., Orange County Sheriff KEVIN BEARY said.
The drugs have an estimated street value of $155,000, Beary said.
Smith has been charged with four counts of intent to distribute cocaine, he said.
If convicted on all charges, Smith faces up to life in prison. (AP)


A Film Festival Basking in New Glory
A sign in the parking lot of the Toronto airport proclaims a "kiss 'n' fly" zone.
It's a symptom of the endemic niceness of people in Toronto that no one considers this an invitation to open a bordello; instead, passengers are dropped off there for an airport shuttle bus.
In this city of three million people, citizens cross only at the crosswalks, people share taxis with strangers and buses carry the apologetic sign "Sorry . . . Out of Service."
But somehow Toronto's annual film festival has muscled its way past competitors to become the fourth most important in the world, according to Weekly Variety.
In a recently published poll of 100 international film executives, Cannes came in first, Berlin next, then Venice and Toronto, making this event, which began on Sept. 7 and concludes tonight, the most prominent on the continent.


Computer Stings Gain Favor As Arrests for Smut Increase
As arrests continued in a high-tech drive against the peddling of child pornography on the nation's largest computer network, the Federal authorities said today that they expected to apply the same surveillance techniques to fight many other computer-related crimes, from consumer and securities fraud to money laundering.
Going under cover and posing as individuals in search of child pornography, agents this week arrested more than a dozen customers of America Online, including the operator of a child-care center in a Chicago suburb.
According to court papers, the suspect had used a computer to send images of nude preteen-age girls, some of them in sexual situations with adult men.


Forum on Women: Fragile Consensus
In weaving a fragile consensus among more than 5,000 delegates from 185 countries -- a spectrum including militant Muslim fundamentalists, radical feminists and many people in between -- negotiators at the United Nations Fourth Conference on Women in Beijing could not possibly please everyone.
After 12 days of lengthy negotiations, the last item agreed upon at the final session was an affirmation that women's rights should supersede national traditions, arguably the most far-reaching stance on human rights ever taken at a United Nations gathering.


Bishop Emerson J. Moore, 57, An Advocate of Racial Equality
Bishop Emerson J. Moore, an auxiliary bishop of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York who was an outspoken advocate of racial equality, died on Thursday.
He was 57.
He had been ill for several years and died of unknown natural causes, said a spokesman for the archdiocese, Joseph Zwilling.


BIG MAKERS AGREE ON SINGLE FORMAT FOR MULTI-USE DISK
Major consumer electronics manufacturers agreed today on a single format for a new disk that industry hopes will be the successor to both the videocassette and the CD-ROM computer storage disk.
The agreement clears the way for sales to begin late next year of what some see as a universal storage medium, one that may also replace the audio disk.
It also averts a standards battle between two camps of leading consumer electronics manufacturers that would probably have confused consumers and slowed sales, as the videocassette war of the 1970's and 80's did.


Experts Parry Cross-Country Over Footprints in Simpson Trial
A footwear expert for the prosecution in the O. J. Simpson case took aim at a crucial defense theory today, testifying that the mysterious parallel lines and stray footprint that he saw on the walkway at 875 South Bundy Drive were not the treadmarks of a second killer.
William Bodziak, a special agent for the F.B.I., spent the morning on the stand disputing the testimony of the defense's renowned expert, Dr.
Henry Lee, or at least the spin that Mr.
Simpson's lawyers placed on what Dr.
Lee said.
That set up an unusual transcontinental debate, with Dr.
Lee defending himself in a press conference 3,000 miles away.


Controlled Pitch
On Tuesday, Governor Christine Todd Whitman put in a call to George M. Steinbrenner 3d, principal owner of the New York Yankees.
In a brief conversation, Mrs.
Whitman said she had heard that the Yankee owner had been publicly hoping for a phone call from the New Jersey Governor to set in motion a Yankees move from the Bronx to New Jersey.
Mrs.
Whitman told the club owner that New Jersey would be glad to be home to the New Jersey Yankees, according to Whitman administration officials.
However, Mrs.
Whitman is said to have emphasized that Mr.
Steinbrenner should direct his questions to the New Jersey Sports and Exhibition Authority, not her office.


Take the Sales Pitch Out of Antibiotics
To the Editor:
Re "Fears Growing Over Bacteria Resistant to Antibiotics" (Science Times, Sept. 12):


High-Hat Visitors


Monitors to Oversee Finances of Indicted Trash Haulers
A State Supreme Court justice in Manhattan has decided to appoint independent monitors to oversee the financial operations of city garbage haulers indicted in June on racketeering and extortion charges, saying he feared that the carters might try to "hide, dissipate or divert" millions of dollars in assets before they go to trial.
The carters are charged with being part of a Mafia-dominated cartel that used arson and threats of violence to control virtually all of New York City's commercial garbage-hauling industry.


Scouting the Top Teams
Following are scouting reports for the top high school football teams in the Public Schools Athletic League and Catholic High Schools Football League as well as for Long Island, New Jersey and Westchester County.
P.S.A.L.
Jerry Horowitz, who correctly predicted before last season began that his Kennedy team would win the Public School Athletic League championship, did not offer any such bold insight this time around.


Chinese Women Can't Claim Equality; The Women in Black
To the Editor:
" 'Women in Black' Defy China's Police" (news article, Sept. 5), on the forum of nongovernmental organizations at the Fourth World Conference on Women, described Women in Black as an organization of Israeli and Palestinian women "opposing the violence of the intifada, the Palestinian uprising against Israeli occupation that began in 1987."


Agreement in China
The tumult and the shouting have died down.
China, the host country for the Fourth World Conference on Women, has incurred contempt for its ham-handed security measures.
But despite the distractions, the conference produced a final declaration that represents an important advance toward guaranteeing the same rights for women that have long been enjoyed by men.
Ten days of debate in Beijing yielded a document that can show the way to changing legal, economic and educational policies in countries where women are denied equal rights.
It was not easy to reach agreement, and the delegates can take quiet satisfaction in the common ground that was found.
There was a real sense of exhilaration for those who came from the world's poorest countries, using their life's savings to get to Beijing.


Corrections
A television review on Wednesday about the new series "Central Park West" misidentified the producer of the failed series "Models Inc." He was Aaron Spelling, not Darren Star.


America's Cup Hall of Fame to Induct Five
Five leading yachtsmen from the 19th and 20th centuries are expected to be inducted today into the America's Cup Hall of Fame in Bristol, R.I.
The inductees, all of whom are deceased, are Arthur Knapp, skipper in 1958 of the 12-meter Weatherly; Morris Rosenfeld, a leading cup photographer at the turn of the century; Henry Sears, a New York Yacht Club commodore who helped organize a return to cup racing in 1958; T. O. M. Sopwith, a British entrepreneur who challenged in 1934 and 1937 with his Endeavour yachts, and George L. Watson, a yacht designer who created cup contenders in 1887, 1893 and 1895.


Leon Adams, Wine Expert And Writer, 90
Leon D. Adams, considered by wine aficionados and the wine industry to be the seminal wine historian in the United States in the 20th century, died on Thursday in San Francisco.
He was 90.
Mr.
Adams was a prolific author of books, articles and pamphlets about wine, particularly North American wine, and was a founder of the Wine Institute, the trade organization that represents California's wine industry.


Era Ends at Port Authority As 160 Workers Are Laid Off
Wanda Rivera was sitting at her desk at the headquarters of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey yesterday morning grimly watching her co-workers being summoned one by one into an office to receive the news that they were being laid off.
Then her phone rang.
The display said the call was coming from extension 4479.
That office.
Ms.
Rivera knew it was her turn.
"I thought: it is finally here, the dreaded moment," said Ms.
Rivera, 31, a secretary.
"I was nervous and frustrated and angry and all sorts of feelings combined."


INSIDE
Death Row Appeal Rejected
A judge in Philadelphia rejected the appeal of Mumia Abu-Jamal, the former radio commentator who wants to have his conviction for a 1981 murder overturned.
Page 6.
Colorado Battleground
With pastures giving way to golf courses and million-dollar vacation homes, Vail, Colo., is a particularly hot spot in the war between the old West and the new.
Page 6.


In California, Major Bailout Takes Shape
Almost 10 months after investment losses made Orange County the nation's largest municipal government to file for bankruptcy, the State Legislature today passed most of a rescue package that is expected to bring the county out of bankruptcy by next spring.
Three out of the four bills in the agreement had passed as of early this evening, and the fourth was expected to be voted on tonight.


G.O.P.'s Plan to Cut Medicare Faces a Veto, Clinton Promises
President Clinton said today that he would veto the Republicans' legislative package for Medicare and Medicaid.
He said that their proposals for large savings in the Government health plans for the elderly and the poor would have "Draconian consequences" and would "dismantle Medicare as we know it."
Speaking to elderly people at the White House just 24 hours after House Republicans outlined their proposals, Mr.
Clinton said, "If these health care cuts come to my desk, of this size, I would have no choice but to veto it."


Here She Is, Miss America, Whose Ideal?
To win the Miss America pageant here, it is not enough to look good.
A contestant must also do good, identifying a social issue, or "platform," she plans to embrace.
Miss Hawaii's is "aging with dignity." Never mind that she is competing in a contest with an age limit of 24 and an evident prohibition on wrinkles.


Extra Community Service, U.S. Tells Leona Helmsley
Concluding that Leona Helmsley's employees did some of the community service she was required to perform as part of her penalty for tax evasion, a Federal judge in Manhattan yesterday ordered another 150 hours of community work added to her sentence.
But the additional time imposed by Judge Thomas P. Griesa of Federal District Court was far less than the 400 hours that Federal probation officials had asked for, even though Mrs.
Helmsley's lawyer, Arthur Liman, had previously agreed that 400 hours was "fair and acceptable."


Simple Heartburn Isn't Always Simple
To the Editor:
"War on Heartburn Heats Up With Over-the-Counter Blitz," on prescription medications for ulcers and heartburn now offered over the counter (front page, Sept. 8), did not mention that heartburn can be symptomatic of a serious medical problem.
Some heart attacks are preceded by feelings of heartburn, gall bladder diseases can manifest such symptoms, and an ulcer that causes heartburn, if untreated, can bleed or undergo malignant changes.


Women Carry Hopes As Conference Ends
Assumpta Tibamwenda sat on a corridor floor today, musing about the meaning of the United Nations Fourth World Conference on Women as she watched its closing ceremony on television, where delegates from one nation after another could be heard voicing reservations about the platform they had just passed.
"I have mixed emotions," said Ms.
Tibamwenda, a social worker from Uganda.
"Listening to all these delegates list their reservations, you have to wonder how willing they will be to implement the program they agreed to."


Grambling's Robinson Goes for Victory No. 399
Eddie Robinson, who has won more games than any other college or professional coach, will try for his 399th victory when his Grambling State Tigers face the Hampton Pirates on Saturday at 6 P.M. in the New York Urban League Classic at Giants Stadium.
Grambling (1-0) and Hampton (1-1) have played in this game -- formerly called the Whitney M. Young Jr.
Memorial Classic -- for the last two of its 25 years.
Last September, Grambling won, 32-29; the year before, Hampton won, 27-26.


Court Will Weigh Plan to Scramble Cable Sex Shows
Setting up a First Amendment court battle next week, the cable company serving most of Manhattan has moved to control access to Channel 35, the local television forum whose sexually explicit shows and telephone-sex ads have become a peculiar New York City fixture.
Executives at the cable company, Time Warner Inc., say that Congress and the courts have finally given them the tools to do what parents and religious leaders have been urging them to do for years.
Beginning on Oct. 1, sexually explicit programs on the local-access channel will be scrambled, and subscribers are being asked to send in a signed card if they want to get the programming, Time Warner officials said.


Gingrich Criticizes '96 Candidates
Speaker Newt Gingrich said today that the Republican candidates for President had failed so far to articulate a vision for America, and he repeated that he would decide by Dec. 15 whether to enter the race.
Mr.
Gingrich said his main consideration was whether any of the current Republican candidates could proceed with an agenda for the country's future that was initiated this year with the Republican "revolution" in the House.
So far, he said, none had risen to the occasion.


Familiar Look in Packers' Offense
West Coast offense, Part II.
Here they go again.
The Giants on Sunday will face the Green Bay Packers, who may run that offense better than the Kansas City Chiefs.


Rose Chernin, 93, Prominent Leftist
Rose Chernin, a prominent figure in left-wing politics in the 1940's and 1950's whose arrest for Communist activities led to a landmark decision by the United States Supreme Court, died on Sept. 8 at her home in Los Angeles.
She was 93.
Born in Russia, Ms.
Chernin came to the United States in 1913 and became a citizen in 1929.
She was executive secretary of the American Committee for the Protection of the Foreign Born.


Throngs Gather to Greet the Pope in Africa


Mariners Go Ahead Of Yanks by a Game
Mariners 3, White Sox 2
Vince Coleman had four hits, helping Andy Benes and Seattle take over the American League wild-card lead last night with a 3-2 victory over the White Sox in Chicago.
The Mariners, who won for the sixth time in seven games, moved one game ahead of the Yankees, who lost in Baltimore, 8-1.


Chinese Women Can't Claim Equality
To the Editor:
Re "Beijing Says Women Have It Better in China Than U.S." (news article, Sept. 10): The contention by the Chinese Government that "the position and conditions of Chinese women are in no way inferior to the situation of the women in the United States and are indeed much better on the whole" is ludicrous.


Michio Watanabe, 72, of Japan; Powerful Minister Despite Gaffes
Michio Watanabe, one of the most influential politicians in Japan and long an aspirant to become Prime Minister, died early this morning in a Tokyo hospital.
He was 72.
His aides said the cause of death was heart failure.
Mr.
Watanabe had been in poor health for three years.


SERBS, COMPLYING WITH DEAL FORGED BY U.S., BEGIN MOVES TO LIFT SIEGE OF SARAJEVO
The Serbs of Bosnia today took the first steps to lift the siege of Sarajevo, reopening the roads and the airport and giving relief convoys free passage.
They also withdrew a few tanks, howitzers and heavy artillery pieces from the hills surrounding the Bosnian capital.
President Clinton led a chorus of NATO allies and -- after a week of intensifying criticism -- the Russians in welcoming the brokered agreement, which calls for the Serbs to withdraw their heavy weaponry in exchange for a halt in the NATO bombing campaign.


In a Fallen District Attorney's Many Mea Culpas, Traces of Ire
As District Attorney for 20 years, Kenneth Gribetz stood at the summit of Rockland County, with a flair for capturing national attention as well.
This week, he began a new career here: selling title insurance out of a triangular office the size of a generous closet.
"We have no income, but I'm the president," he joked in his first interview since he was sentenced Wednesday to five years' probation for two misdemeanors, including an income-tax violation.
"I hope to God it works out. Three years ago I didn't think I'd be doing this, but you can either cry or laugh, right?"


Surfers Up, Access Down
For the Surfers Environmental Alliance, the good news was that continuing heavy seas had brought in 140 new members since Labor Day.
The bad news?
The group, which works to improve public beach access in towns that discourage it, said that with 13 drownings on the Jersey Shore this summer, local officials worried about liability had been shutting down beaches even when waves were modest.
"I've surfed in Monmouth County for 30 years and this kind of situation has never come up before," said one surfer, Robert Titus.


Taking On the Quirks Of the Piccolo Bass
Two Ron Carters live in the same body.
The first is the musician who, as a member of the Miles Davis group in the mid-60's, helped define the role of the bassist in modern jazz.
He is enormously empathetic, prodding soloists with new harmonies and rhythms; when he sets up a walking bass line, a band can't avoid swinging.
The second Ron Carter -- the one who was on the bandstand on Tuesday night at the Village Vanguard to begin a five-night engagement -- plays a piccolo bass, an instrument positioned somewhere between a cello and a bass, and instead of being a rhythm section player, he's a soloist and band leader.
If anybody can make the piccolo bass work, it should be Mr.
Carter; he's a virtuoso, with years of classical and jazz training.
But the instrument seems intractable.
Even in his hands it sounds out of tune.
And its notes have almost no lasting power, falling short and dry.


CHRONICLE
LARRY KING has a bit of advice for the celebrities who will roast him tonight at the Beverly Hills Hotel: Don't pick on him too much.
"Unless you are the first roaster, don't do more than one or two things about the roastee," Mr.
King said.
"When you do the 15th suspender joke, it ain't funny anymore. It just becomes boring."


Jazzman Doesn't Fit The Usual Pigeonholes
The jazz world is so factionalized that identification with a particular camp often defines one's status.
Randy Sandke, a trumpeter, composer and arranger, doesn't fall into any group easily and as a result is more or less overlooked.
He's best known as a neo-swing musician, but as his self-produced concerts have shown, Mr.
Sandke has all the bristle and virtuosic intensity of a hard bopper.
And his more adventurous compositions, acidic and formally experimental, place him in what might pass as the academic world in jazz.
Mr.
Sandke performed a set of his own music at Merkin Concert Hall on Wednesday night, and oddly enough it was the less adventurous music that worked best.
After an opening piece that used the standard melody-improvisations-melody form, Mr.
Sandke gave a speech indicating that he was against that sort of harmonically and formally limited music.
Then he performed his own symphony, "Symphony for Six," with a jazz sextet, which at its best never equaled the first tune's easy improvisatory elegance.


Chrysler Executives and Kerkorian Aides to Meet
Representatives of the Chrysler Corporation plan to meet in New York with Jerome B. York, the newly hired associate of Kirk Kerkorian, as early as next week to discuss the company's financial and product strategies, people familiar with the plans for the meeting said today.
The group of Chrysler representatives is expected to include three top executives: Gary C. Valade, the chief financial officer; William J. O'Brien, the general counsel, and Thomas P. Capo, the treasurer.
Mr.
Kerkorian, the billionaire financier who previously tried to take over Chrysler, is not expected to attend.


Shares of Oracle Fall 16% As Revenue Growth Slows
Oracle Corporation shares plummeted more than 16 percent today after the software company reported slower revenue growth in its first fiscal quarter.
Analysts said the slowdown at Oracle raised concern that the entire corporate computing market might be cooling.
Oracle's software is used to manage large corporate data bases and to process transactions.


Diving Into Fish Watching
"We're trying to make fish watching as popular as bird watching," said Amanda Landron of Clean Ocean Action, an environmental group whose second annual weeklong "fish-o-rama" starts today.
No, they do not hook the fish.
Instead, divers are invited to spot and classify fish species.
Last year, the divers found about 50 species in New Jersey waters.


Retail Fact, Retail Fiction; In Luxury Goods, a War on Fakes Has Many Pitfalls
For nearly 20 years, Charles W. Bogar made a good living selling high-priced luxury goods in shops in Los Angeles and San Francisco, particularly to Japanese tourists.
Along the way, he settled lawsuits from companies including Alfred Dunhill, Cartier, Louis Vuitton and Chanel that accused him of selling counterfeit goods.
Despite the legal tussles, the profits rolled in.
Mr.
Bogar, who is 59, and his wife, Jo Ann, 51, lived in a suburban Los Angeles home that was once valued at $1.7 million.
He drove a Maserati, she a Corvette.


What Makes a Serb a Villain and a Croat a Hero?
To the Editor:
"U.N. Again Accuses Croats of Atrocities" (some editions, Sept. 9) reports: "As the world focused on peace efforts in Bosnia, the United Nations again accused neighboring Croatia today of failing to halt killings, looting and burning of homes in areas recaptured from rebel Serbs.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  SIEGE OF SARAJEVO EASES  As the Bosnian Serbs took the first steps to lift the siege of Sarajevo, President Clinton warned of further military action if the Serbs renege on their agreement. 1


On a Road To South, Serbs Start To Leave
On a dirt road through this hamlet about five miles southeast of Sarajevo, a column of three 105-millimeter artillery pieces, three tanks and two large mortars, as well as support trucks, was assembled just before 5 this afternoon.
An officer told the soldiers, "You have your orders, and you know the route we're taking. Keep the vehicles 50 meters apart and let's go."


Douglass Cater Is Dead at 72; Educator and Presidential Aide
Douglass Cater, a soft-spoken student and practitioner of government power who began his working life as a journalist and ended it as a college president -- after a heady detour through Lyndon B. Johnson's White House -- died yesterday at the guest house at Washington College in Chestertown, Md.
He was 72 and had lived in Montgomery, Ala., since his retirement as the president of the college in 1990.


New Account of a Death at Ruby Ridge
Some of the United States marshals who participated in a fatal confrontation in 1992 at Ruby Ridge, Idaho, told a Senate panel today they believed that Randall C. Weaver, the white separatist they were trying to arrest, had probably shot his own son in the back by accident.
It was a stunning assertion because a Government expert witness had testified at Mr.
Weaver's trial in 1993 that the shot that killed the boy, Samuel Weaver, 14, had come from the marshals during a shootout in the woods surrounding the Weaver cabin.


Blunt-Spoken Economist Is Japan's Mr. Yen
As the United States and Japan jointly push to strengthen the dollar against the yen, the Clinton Administration finds itself oddly aligned with a blunt-spoken economist here who argues that Japan should avoid American ideas about free-market capitalism.
Japanese Government officials, even more than their American counterparts, have desperately wanted a weaker yen to make Japanese exports cheaper and to shake off the country's enduring economic slump.


CHRONICLE
STEPHEN HAWKING, the renowned physicist, who has Lou Gehrig's disease, was married for the second time yesterday, in Cambridge, England, programming his vows into a voice synthesizer that was designed by his bride's former husband.
Mr.
Hawking, 53, the author of "A Brief History of Time," a book about black holes and the origin and destiny of the universe, married ELAINE MASON, 45.
She became one of his nurses in 1989 after her husband, David Mason, had befriended him.


Philadelphia Judge Won't Grant New Trial for Condemned Black Journalist
The Philadelphia judge who sent the black radio journalist and political advocate Mumia Abu-Jamal to death row nearly 13 years ago in the fatal shooting of a white police officer late yesterday refused Mr.
Abu-Jamal's request for a new trial after weeks of heated court hearings and street protests across the United States and in Europe.
Mr.
Abu-Jamal had been sentenced to death for the 1981 murder of Daniel Faulkner, who was 26.


Arms Treaty Restrictions on Russia Eased
In a concession intended to reduce tensions with Moscow, the United States and its NATO allies decided today to permit Russia to keep more tanks and artillery pieces in the Caucasus region than would be allowed under a 1990 treaty.
American officials said a NATO commission made the decision in Brussels because of fears that tensions could mushroom and the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe could fall apart.
Russia has threatened to flout new restrictions that take effect on Nov. 17.


Corrections
A picture caption on Wednesday about the induction of Richard P. Mills as New York State Education Commissioner misidentified one child shown with him and omitted the name of the other.
The child holding the Bible for the Commissioner was Jared Hamilton, not Samara Valentine; the other child was Sabrina Boza.


A Future for Amtrak
To save intercity rail passenger service from ruin, Amtrak has been running trains less often and discontinuing others entirely, hoping to fashion a lean but viable system.
Now to safeguard its future and secure a reliable source of funding for capital projects, the railroad seeks a permanent trust fund, similar to those in the highway and airline industries.
Congress should support the plan.
The benefits of passenger rail service cannot be measured solely in terms of commercial profit and loss.
It provides a form of transportation valued by millions of Americans and produces reduced highway and airport congestion and cleaner air, amply justifying some public expense.


Sports of The Times; Fancy Footwork By King
THE brain trust of Home Box Office sports spent most of yesterday huddled behind the closed doors of Seth Abraham's 11th-floor office in midtown.
Nearly 100 calls from the news media were received, but none were returned.
No details of the meeting were released, but there was no mystery as to what was taking place.
HBO execs were frantically attempting to formulate a response to a brilliant and unexpected maneuver by Don King.
On Thursday King announced that Mike Tyson's second fight since his release from prison would be shown on "free" television.
Fox, Rupert Murdoch's 8-year-old network, paid an estimated $8 million to $10 million for the right to carry the bout.
This marks Fox's first fight, and it is the first time in nearly two decades that a fighter of Tyson's stature has fought on network television.


What Makes a Serb a Villain and a Croat a Hero?; Bosnian Muslim Plight
To the Editor:
How would a Frenchman answer if someone asked him, during World War II, how he felt about Germans being bombed to "force" them to accept "only" half of France.


U.S. Bond Prices Slip On Report
The Treasury market, hurt by a stronger-than-expected economic report yesterday, fought off the temptation of a full retreat but gave up some ground.
Traders said some investors took profits ahead of the weekend and sold securities to protect the gains made during the week.
Futures trading, which influences cash market transactions, was soft, also bouncing off its lows after the release of higher-than-expected August production and capacity utilization data.


Kohl, the Enduring Everyman, Waits for History
Helmut Kohl has come to this small town near the Polish border to celebrate the Federal Market Gardeners' Show, a panoply of nurtured blooms and emerald lawns grafted onto the environmental neglect of the former East Germany.
The Chancellor, America's most stolid European ally, is large, self- confident, and there is nothing about him -- his gray-suited blandness, his ineffable suggestion of assurance -- that implies mystery.


Helmsley's 150 Hours
Concluding that Leona Helmsley's employees did some of the community service work that she was to perform as part of her penalty for tax evasion, a Federal judge yesterday ordered her to do another 150 hours of community service.


CHRONICLE
ELIZABETH TAYLOR, whose acting career has been punctuated by a series of health problems, was admitted to a California hospital suffering from an irregular heartbeat, her doctor said yesterday.
"She is there for evaluation and is doing fine," Dr.
Charles Freedman said in a statement reported by Reuters.


Gay Republicans
To the Editor:
Richard Tafel ("Gay and in the G.O.P.," Op-Ed, Sept. 9) says how angry he and the Log Cabin Republicans are at Senator Bob Dole's returning their campaign contribution.


Gunshots End a Friendship
Sharico White and Arnold Canary, both 21, were such good friends that Mr.
White often pushed the wheelchair bearing Mr.
Canary, who was shot and partially paralyzed in 1992.
The friendship ended, the police said, when Mr.
Canary fired several gunshots from his wheelchair during a dispute at a known drug corner.
One bullet struck and killed Mr.
White, said the Hudson County First Assistant Prosecutor, Edward DeFazio.
Mr.
Canary is being held on murder charges in a Hudson County cellblock for special-needs prisoners.


Copying Sounds From Others Until Copies Sound Original
In the ever-growing sphere of alternative-rock, bands that copy other bands start to sound original if they copy a lot of bands at the same time.
This is what happened on Tuesday night at Brownie's when Rosa Mota, from England, performed.
One minute it was summoning the spirit of the New York bands the Swans and Lydia Lunch; the next it was in Detroit, blasting away like the Stooges and MC5; then it was echoing its English contemporaries, playing pop songs full of buzzing, droning post-punk guitars, and later its music turned dark and jagged in the style of the Australian group the Birthday Party.


Rape Suspect Tells Why He Fled U.S.
Alex Kelly, the Darien man who spent eight years as a fugitive to avoid trial in the rapes and kidnappings of two teen-age girls, said in legal papers filed today in Stamford Superior Court that he fled the country because his lawyer told him that he could not get a fair trial.
Mr.
Kelly, now 28, stated for the first time his reasons for leaving the United States in a pre-trial motion seeking to bar prosecutors from telling a jury anything about his flight and his years living in Europe with the financial support of his parents.


Corrections
A report in the On Stage, and Off column yesterday about the actor Tom Courtenay referred imprecisely to his role in the 1965 film "Dr. Zhivago." Mr.
Courtenay played Pasha, the young revolutionary, not the title role.


Beliefs; Two groups of scholars face off to define Jesus.
It's Saturday, so for the Rev.
Tom Wright this must be Uniondale, L.I.
Yesterday, it was Ridgewood, N.J., and on the days before, Manhattan, Litchfield, Conn., and Boston.
In each place, Dr.
Wright, a former lecturer in New Testament studies at Oxford University and now Dean of Lichfield Cathedral in England, has conducted a seminar entitled "Who Was Jesus?"


Sloppy Loss Leaves Yanks Trailing in Playoff Race
Throw strikes.
It is the first commandment of pitching, the first instruction Little Leaguers receive and the only way for a pitcher to be effective in the major leagues.
Sterling Hitchcock ignored the ancient advice tonight and paid the price.
Hitchcock pitched a one-hitter into the sixth inning, but his evening was hardly artistic.
He walked nine batters, hit another and transformed the contest into a brutal survival test.
Not surprisingly, he did not survive.


Adult Smoking Victims All Started Young
To the Editor:
Rarely have I read a more misguided comment on smoking and other drug addiction than "It's the Adults, Stupid" by Mike Males (Op-Ed, Sept. 9).
He takes President Clinton to task for focusing so much attention on adolescent smoking and drug use because the death rate among smokers and drug users is much higher for adults.


Technology Stocks Plunge, But Dow Is Off Only 4.23
Technology stocks were hammered yesterday by traders who demonstrated in a concrete way their deep concern about the rate of earnings growth in this sector of the economy.
The big profit taking in high-tech stocks was accompanied by a smaller selloff in many other issues.
As a result, the three major market indicators all declined, just a day after the Dow Jones industrial average had crashed through the 4,800 barrier for the first time.


Observer; Note From The Gas Works
Suddenly people are saying "gravitas." How do these things get started?
A year ago this time nobody except a professor of hermeneutics writing in The New York Review of Books would have said "gravitas." Now you hear journalists -- common hacks, no less ! -- say "gravitas."
The other night I had a cab driver who wore a turban and came from the Punjab.
In a 25-minute trip he didn't once say "gravitas." Trends are slow to catch on in the Punjab.


Monkey Jump Journal; Will Cyanide-Tainted River Ever Be Seen as Safe?
The mighty Essequibo River is once again colored a glistening sable, but Lilmati Goobin cannot shake the fearful vision of what it was like a few weeks ago when the jungle river ran an angry red and the Government warned her to keep her family away from its waters.
Except for what comes from the river, there is very little to eat or drink in this tiny granite-mining settlement of 17 huts on wooden stilts.
Still, Mrs.
Goobin and most of the 35 people who live here have stopped washing and fishing in the river and drinking the water.


Owners Approve Labor Deal
A new six-year labor agreement was ratified by National Basketball Association owners yesterday, meaning the league's lockout will end Monday.
The 29 owners voted by 24-5 to approve the agreement.
A three-quarters majority, or 22 votes, was needed for approval.
Teams will be allowed to make trades and sign free agents starting at noon Eastern time Monday.
Rookie and free agent camps may also be convened.
Training camps open Oct. 6, and the regular season begins Nov. 3.


Croatia Expands Its Power in Bosnia
As the Serbs fall back in disarray, a Greater Croatia is taking shape in Bosnia and the likelihood is growing that Croatia may emerge as the real victor of the wars of Yugoslavia's destruction.
Since Sept. 9, when their offensive began, the Croats have swept across a wide area of western Bosnia, taking Drvar, Sipovo and the strategically crucial town of Jajce.


Corrections
The Book Notes column on Wednesday, about the history of "The Bridges of Madison County" on the New York Times best-seller list, referred incorrectly to a performance record.
The hard-cover fiction title on the list longest was "The Robe," by Lloyd C. Douglas, a novel about Jesus' Crucifixion; it appeared for 178 weeks, most recently on March 7, 1954.
"The Bridges of Madison County" reaches 162 weeks on the list tomorrow; it is not on the list for Sept. 24.


The Art and Markets of the Middle Ages
ANYONE with an extra suit of chain mail in the closet, hearken: you can don that knightwear next Sunday at the 1995 Medieval Festival in Fort Tryon Park.
For those fascinated with days when chivalry ruled, the festival offers a setting as authentic as it gets.
The area around the Cloisters will be transformed into a medieval market town for the day, with the museum standing in for a castle.
Jugglers, jesters, magicians and a puppeteer with a 40-foot dragon will roam the grounds.
The Ensemble for Early Music and I Guilliari di Piazza will offer serenades, while blacksmiths, illuminators, glass blowers and falconry experts demonstrate their Middle Ages arts.
And everyone -- including the public -- is expected to dress in historic garb.


In Defense of Bosnian Muslims


Martha T. Moore, Kent M. Gibbons
Martha Townsend Moore, a business reporter for USA Today in New York, was married yesterday to Kent Morgan Gibbons, the new media editor for Multichannel News, a weekly magazine ofthe cable television industry.
The Rev.
Charles Temple performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of the Transfiguration in New York.
Ms.
Moore, who is keeping her name, graduated from Yale University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Charles Moore of Philadelphia.
The bride's father retired as the dean of students and a lecturer in history from Wabash College in Crawfordsville, Ill.
Her mother, Constance C. Moore, is a director of Associated Services for the Blind in Philadelphia.
The bride is a great-great-great-granddaughter of John A. Roebling, the designer and builder of the Brooklyn Bridge.


Highway Robbery
To the Editor:
We recently returned from our first tour of Italy.
It was everything we had expected and, thanks to Letters on Travel, we avoided becoming victims.


Movies This Week
Faces hold the key this week to choice films that offer entertainment from the thrills of espionage and science fiction to the poignant insights of autobiography and the riotous excesses of comedy.
There are the faces of deceit, the faces of a film maker and his alter ego and a famous face sending up one of his most famous portrayals.
The face of deceit belongs to James Mason in Joseph L. Mankiewicz's smooth 1952 thriller, "Five Fingers" - Thursday at 9:30 A.M. on American Movie Classics.
Based on a true story, "Five Fingers" tells of Cicero, a valet in the British embassy in Ankara, Turkey, who sold his master's secrets to the Germans in World War II.
Mr.
Mankiewicz demonstrates that Hitchcock holds no patent on suspense, and a fine cast helps push up the pulse rate.


Elizabeth Kraft, Victor Jones Jr.
Elizabeth Forbes Kraft, a senior editor of Family Life magazine in New York, was married yesterday to Victor Allen Jones Jr., an architect at Ike &amp; Kligerman in New York.
The Rev.
James C. Martin performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in West Tisbury, Mass., on Martha's Vineyard.
The Rev.
Amy C. Yount, an Episcopal priest, participated in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Jones, 28, graduated from Connecticut College.
She is the daughter of Ann Burrows Kraft and James Kraft, both of New York.
The bride's father is the vice president for development at the Manhattan School of Music.
Her mother is the executive associate at the Guggenheim Museum in New York.


Pope's First Official Visit to South Africa


Languedoc
To the Editor:
Now that you let the cat out of the bag regarding one of the last relatively untrampled regions of France ("Lingering in Languedoc," July 16), I have a suggestion for readers looking for a unique way to experience the area.
Three years ago I had the best vacation of my life, living and working in the small village of St.-Victor-la-Coste.
I was with a nonprofit organization called La Sabranenque, which is devoted to the restoration, preservation and revitalization of rural architecture and habitats in southern France.


Amy Goldstone, Larry Seibert Jr.
Amy Trumpeyter Goldstone, the daughter of Maro Arrathoon Newman and Dr.
Jonas M. Goldstone, both of New York, was married there last evening to Larry Wayne Seibert Jr., a son of Dr.
Seibert of Portsmouth, N.H., and Barbara Hanover of Yankeetown, Fla.
Chief Judge Judith S. Kaye of New York State officiated at the Harvard Club.
Mrs.
Seibert, 29, graduated from Temple University.
She is the office manager at Newman &amp; Harrington, a law firm in New York.
Her mother is the firm's managing partner.
The bride's father, a former director of medical oncology at St.
Luke's Hospital in New York, is a clinical professor of medicine at Columbia University's College of Physicians and Surgeons and the internist for the New York Yankees.


Like the Dutch, Let Us Think Again About Death and Suffering
To the Editor:
My uncle Joe died last month of a cancer that tortured him for the last three years of his life.
What saddened me most about this period was his not having access to the type of humane care now associated with the hospice movement.
While my uncle's tenacity prevented him from considering suicide, many do seek relief that only the end of life seems to bring.
Many more would use hospice services if they were available on the same basis as curative medical care.


Looking for Answers
BEYOND ALL REASON  My Life With Susan Smith.
By David Smith with Carol Calef.
Illustrated. 271 pp.
New York: Kensington Books. $18.95.


.. . And Queens Immigrants Deserve Warm Acceptance
To the Editor:
Adding to the appeal of Richard F. Shepard's article ("Memories of My Queens," Sept. 3) was his recognition that today's ethnic newcomers to Queens will have memories far different from his but no less significant.
At a time when a Presidential candidate spouts xenophobia, shamelessly using the Statue of Liberty as backdrop, Mr.
Shepard's warm-hearted acceptance of the recent immigrants to his beloved borough is a breath of fresh air.
LOU D'ANGELO  Upper East Side


Buenos Aires
You have not been to Argentina until you visit the Teatro Colon, or so goes the saying here.
The theater, which stretches a city block and rises seven stories in downtown Buenos Aires, is considered by many directors and musicians to be among the world's finest concert halls.
Certainly, it is the most important cultural icon in Argentina, presenting an international repertory of opera, ballet and music.
It was built in 1908, in a kind of Italian-French-Renaissance style, at a time when Argentina was a wealthy nation, well before its long economic decline.
With its vast auditorium (providing seats and standing room for 3,500 people), gilded stucco, burgundy velvet, ornate columns and trim, the Colon seems to symbolize that lost legacy.
All the great performers have been here -- Toscanini, Caruso, Maria Callas, Luciano Pavarotti.


He Who Saves The Day Gets The Princess
Arabian Knight  Animated, with the voices of Jonathan Winters, Matthew Broderick, Vincent Price and Jennifer Beals Songs by Robert Folk and Norman Gimbel Directed by Richard Williams G: : 81 minutes


Pacific Flavors and Serious Desserts
A SPLASH is what the restaurant of this name has created in Westport.
The work of the folks who run the hit restaurant Baang in Riverside, Splash opened on Memorial Day weekend at the Inn at Longshore and its deck areas have been jammed ever since.
Splash's Pacific Rim cuisine focuses mostly on Hawaii and on seafood, using many tropical ingredients.
The often-dazzling results are Splash's own.
The food, like the water view, draws raves.
We were delighted with the presentations and funky mixture of flavors and textures.
Two sushi-inspired starters were real knock-outs: kahuka hand rolls (sweet shrimp wrapped in nori seaweed with a lemon-soy dip), and spicy seared tuna (four pieces of fresh tuna in rice-skin wrappers, served with sesame soy and Asian guacamole sauces).


Budapest
The Budapest Opera House is a pride of the city, a symbol of the capital as it came of age at the end of the last century.
Designed by Miklos Ybl, the architect of several of Budapest's grandest buildings, it has a neo-Renaissance stone facade adorned with statues of 16 composers, including Mozart, Beethoven and Wagner.
The Opera House opened in 1884, after nine years of construction; the Hapsburg Emperor, Francis Joseph, was in attendance.
In later years, Gustav Mahler and Otto Klemperer were music directors here.


In Landmark Complaints, Bigotry Is Not the Issue . . .
To the Editor:
In your Sept. 3 article "Conformity and Commerce Collide in a Landmark District" a merchant tries to explain away efforts to remove the carnival monstrosity of a sign above his store as an example of bias against immigrants: "They're not happy with us here." That kind of defense against legitimate landmark complaints is getting a bit tired.
In Ridgewood, for example, anti-Italian bias was foolishly alleged to be the reason why the community board disagreed with some of the plans for the Italian street fair.


Hard Cases at the Hospital Door
AS local governments consider closing public hospitals, health care experts are questioning whether hidden costs may eventually soak up any savings to be realized by padlocking the only doors that guarantee universal access to medical care.
"In the short term, it may save local governments money," said Elisabeth G. Houston, director of metropolitan hospitals for the American Hospital Association.
"But there's no question that sooner or later somebody's going to have to pay."


Report of Lido's Demise Is Very Much Exaggerated
To the Editor:
As president of the Lido de Paris nightclub, I would like to say that, contrary to your Aug. 27 article "The Shifting Sands of New York Restaurants," we are very much alive and kicking and definitely not being replaced by a new Planet Hollywood.
While both establishments are located on the Champs-Elysees, Planet Hollywood occupies space the Lido vacated back in 1977 before moving to our current location.
CHRISTIAN CLERICO  Paris


When a Deal Seems to Benefit Those Closest to the Company
TOO bad F. Scott Fitzgerald had it only partly right.
The rich are different from you and me.
But it's the rich corporate insiders who are the most different of all.
Any doubters should look at what's going on at a real estate investment trust called MIP Properties.
Right now, the company's board is pushing a deal that treats executives who managed MIP into the ground too kindly and allows a former director to purchase company properties at bargain prices.
As for the investors?
Many of them -- particularly those poor souls who bought shares at the offering 10 years ago -- will be saddled with huge losses.


Legalization, Record Revenues And Gambling as a Serious Illness
AS a teen-ager, State Senator Biagio Ciotto watched his friends lose their paychecks in dice games, poker and the horses.
Gambling was part of everyday life in Mr.
Ciotto's neighborhood in the South End of Hartford.
And lives were destroyed.
"There were four bookies on each corner, and there was a crap game every Sunday," Mr.
Ciotto said.
"I'm a street kid. I know gambling is a sickness."
After hearing about the growth of compulsive gambling in southeastern Connecticut, Mr.
Ciotto and State Representative Andrea Stillman of Waterford joined forces to help pass a budget amendment during the last legislative session that appropriates $200,000 over the next two years for treatment of compulsive gambling.


Dreaming Dreams About a Modern-Dance Heaven
IMAGINE THIS: A COMPLEX OF theaters of varying sizes with plenty of wing space and room for orchestras or musical ensembles, in the heart of Manhattan.
Each of the theaters is available at modest rental fees for modern-dance performances of all kinds.
Clustered around the theaters are rehearsal studios, large and small.
There is also a spacious dormitory, spartan but clean and comfortable, open to dance artists, students and teachers visiting New York from other towns and countries.
Dance heaven?
A dream, perhaps?
But wait, there is more.
The building also houses a large fund-raising organization that serves as a conduit for donations to modern-dance institutions throughout the city.
There are offices for dance companies and individual artists, some available on an as-needed basis.
On one floor, there is an archival library.
On another, a health center provides low-cost medical care and massage to dancers and others in the field.
In yet another room may be found information for dancers on everything from low-interest loans and affordable housing to discounts offered to dance advertisers by the city's major media.


Diary
BENETTON Going Where the Suffering Is Benetton, often accused of exploiting human suffering, has opened a store in a capital of suffering, Sarajevo -- and has made sure to pile sandbags in front of the windows.
TELEVISION  Is the Buzz the Message?
You didn't watch "Central Park West" last week?
That took great strength of character, considering the mind-boggling effort that CBS, desperate to lure younger viewers with something glitzy, put into hyping the show.
It went way beyond buzz -- the network enlisted every bee in its hive to promote this one: the stars' faces adorning Manhattan buses, "advertorials" (horrible word), board games, even a World Wide Web site.
The goal, as one marketing type put it: "entertainment-fashion-media-advertising synergy." Whew!
That's a mouthful.
HEALTH CARE  Will This Fix Medicare?
House Republicans were determined to slash $270 billion out of seven years' worth of projected Medicare spending, and last week they said they'd found a way.
But have they?
Yes, premiums would rise -- slightly for most, sharply for the rich -- but the plan is short on incentives to nudge the elderly into H.M.O.'s.
Bob Dole and Newt Gingrich insist that a free market in health care choices will make it all better -- even without those incentives.
But critics like Representative Henry Waxman said cuts in payments to doctors would "destroy Medicare in a few short years." And many elements of the plan are still vague, prompting Democrats to say crucial details are being hidden.
ROCKEFELLER CENTER  It's Hard Being a Trophy  How can this happen?
One of the world's prize properties, Rockefeller Center, is caught up in such convoluted financial games that billions are being lost on it.
The answer is that no one really "owns" such a place, one merely owns the right to collect rents and pay the bills -- but that right is a dubious trophy indeed when the bills exceed the rents.
Last week Mitsubishi Estate decided it wanted no more of such losing math and bailed out -- and expects to pay $1 billion for its lesson in New York real estate economics.
At which point more investors -- like Sam Zell and Goldman, Sachs -- rushed in, cash in hand, to make it even more complicated.
The venerable buildings didn't even sway.
POLITICS  Tobacco Money for the G.O.P.
At a time when it faces various regulatory threats -- Government efforts to label nicotine an addictive drug, for instance, and to reduce sales to teen-agers -- the tobacco industry is pouring money into Republican coffers.
In the first half of this year, the industry contributed $1.5 million, five times as much as last year's first six months.
Nearly half that sum came from Philip Morris.
Representative Henry Waxman said the tobacco industry "has gotten its hooks into the Republican leadership." And the head of Common Cause called the heavy donations "a desperate last effort." But a spokesman for Brown &amp; Williamson -- also a donor -- cited his company's belief in the Republican vision of "less government, less red tape." COMMUNICATIONS Policing the Internet  Computer networks are indisputably glorious things.
No stamps, no paper, no fuss.
A generation that thought letter-writing had surely died in a sun-washed 19th-century morning room has suddenly started to communicate.
Now, alas, comes the dark side.
Some people are using this strange new toy to send out child pornography or even lure children to sex.
This gets complicated, for even if you get past the ethical question -- isn't private communication private? -- a huge practical one remains: how can you possibly monitor the zillions of 1's and 0's zooming through cyberspace?
You can't always, of course, but last week -- after a four-year F.B.I. investigation -- came dozens of arrests for on-line porn and solicitation.
THE WORKPLACE  Women's Progress, Stalled  Are women moving steadily closer to equal status in the workplace?
Surely nothing could stop the momentum of recent years.
Or could it?
In a poll out last week, only 56 percent of women said the role of women was continuing to change -- down from 73 percent five years ago.
Do women "face more restrictions" than men?
Yes, said 84 percent, with 77 percent saying sexual discrimination "remains a serious problem." And 76 percent said there was sexual harassment in the workplace.
STATISTICS  Do-It-Yourself Inflation  Numbers flow mercilessly from the Government -- statistics with little apparent purpose except to keep statisticians busy -- and many are easily ignored.
But not the Consumer Price Index.
"This is real," said Pat Moynihan.
"Everything else is talk." This mighty inflation gauge, after all, dictates cost-of-living increases for Social Security and adjustments in tax brackets, and the tiniest blip translates into billions of dollars.
What a gift to budget-cutters, then, if the index was found to be flawed.
Sure enough, last week a Congressional panel said the index greatly overstates inflation -- and fixing it could trim $634 billion from the deficit over 10 years.
This wouldn't exactly be a gift to retirees, though.
Part of the index's flaw, it seems, is that it doesn't pick up shifts in buying patterns in response to higher prices.
So if this "flaw" is fixed, Social Security recipients struggling to stretch their budgets would, in a sense, be doing the Government a favor, not themselves.
TRANSPORTATION  Tunnel of Lost Cash  Talk about a money pit!
The Channel tunnel cost such a staggering sum to build -- $15 billion -- that it now faces interest costs of more than $3 million a day.
A day!
The tunnel's doing fine, mind you -- Eurostar trains are 75 percent full.
But there's no way it can shell out that killer interest, and last week the company that runs it said it would simply not pay much of that interest for perhaps 18 months.
Which means, of course, that big changes are coming -- and investors will be out a lot of money.
But it will certainly keep running.
"You cannot sell a hole in the ground for much," said a Eurotunnel executive, "if you've closed it." THE MARKETS  Stocks Are Up.
Period.
The facts: The stock market kept soaring last week -- setting records, topping 4,800 for the first time.
The reasons: Oh, please don't ask; no one really has any idea why the market does what it does.


Katherine Walsh, Bruce J. Fernie
Katherine Bowen Walsh, an interior designer, and Bruce John Fernie, a retailer, were married yesterday in Lenox, Mass.
Richard Bentley, a justice of the peace, performed the ceremony in the gardens at Wheatleigh, a hotel there.
Ms.
Walsh, 35, is keeping her name.
She is the ownner of KB Walsh Design, Ltd., an interior design company in Boston.
She is a graduate of the University of California at Santa Cruz.
She is a daughter of Cynthia Hamlin Walsh of West Tisbury, Mass., and Jerome K. Walsh of New York Her mother is a co-owner of Juanita's Restaurant in New York.
The bride's father is a partner in Lane and Mittendorf, a law firm in New York.
Mr. Fernie, 42, is the president of Consumer Retail Ventures, Inc., which


Alexandra Saraspe, Charlton Pettus
Alexandra Marie Saraspe, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lauro Sa raspe of San Diego, was married yesterday to Charlton Clay Pettus, the son of Mrs.
William Wyatt of Providence, R.I., and Peter Pettus of Sharon, Conn.
The Rev.
Gilbert Larsen performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church in Sharon.
Mrs.
Pettus, 29, a former director of artists and repertory and of artist relations at EMI Records in New York, is a consultant in the music industry.
Her father is a commercial fisherman in San Diego.


Bloof of the Conquistadors
THE HOUSE ON THE LAGOON  By Rosario Ferre. 407 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $23.


Golden Days, Russet Vines
IN Finger Lakes wine country, where homes and farmland are impeccably neat and Old Glory flies from porches every day, autumn is Dionysian.
Vineyards turn gold, purple and russet.
The aroma of fat grapes hangs in the luminous Indian summer air, and wood smoke scents the crisp nights.
"You can hear the fermentation downstairs," said Mark Wagner, the owner of Lamoreaux Landing Wine Cellars, named for a 19th-century steamboat dock on Seneca Lake.
"The barrels make noise. Up here in the tasting room, it sounds like an orchestra."


Dr. Friedman And Mr. Levy
Dr.
Caroline Friedman, a daughter of Barbara and Stephen Friedman of New York, is to be married this evening to David Levy, a son of Lila and Marvin Levy of New Springville, S.I.
Rabbi Shira Milgrom is to perform the ceremony at Wave Hill in Riverdale, the Bronx.
The bride, 29, recently completed a Ph.D. in clinical psychology at the University of Vermont.
She graduated magna cum laude from Cornell University.
Her father is a senior chairman of and a limited partner in Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, the investment bankers in New York.


Abigail Adams, Richard Brigstocke
Abigail Lindhurst Adams, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Lynn Adams of Baltimore, was married there yesterday to Richard McCallum Brigstocke, the son of Mrs. and Mrs.
Richard May Brigstocke, also of Baltimore.
The Very Rev.
Van Gardner performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Cathedral of the Incarnation.
Mrs.
Brigstocke, 28, graduated from the Maryland Institute College of Art and is an interior designer in the Washington office of RTKL Associates, an architectural firm headquartered in Baltimore, where her father is chairman and chief executive.
Her mother, Janice Lindhurst Adams, is the president of the National Museum of Women in the Arts in Washington.


Corrections
A collection of quotations from the late civil rights lawyer William M. Kunstler last Sunday rendered a quotation from his autobiography, "My Life as a Radical Lawyer," incorrectly in some copies.
He wrote, "The Kennedys' real immorality has to do with their lack of ethics as political leaders rather than their sexual exploits"; he did not say "immortality."


In Search of an Innocence Lost Long Ago
IN the surreal musical "Nine," the theater season's opener at the Paper Mill Playhouse, Guido Contini, "the most famous Italian movie director in the world," takes a head trip around his creative block.
Before inspiration can dawn for a new epic, Guido has to get over an obsessive-compulsive sex disorder, an Oedipal fixation and the psychic scars of a Roman Catholic boyhood that entangled repression, lust and flagellation.
In the Broadway production, which in 1982 unaccountably won Tony Awards for best musical and best direction over "Dreamgirls," 21 women in Guido's life appeared mannequinlike in mostly monochromatic, sedentary splendor.
It was as if a high-fashion layout had fitfully come to life against the background of a spa with tiles of white.
But the show moved, thanks to Tommy Tune's inseparable direction and choreography.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Recalled LaTroy Hawkins and Rich Robertson, pitchers, and Denny Hocking, Brian Raabe and Steve Dunn, infielders, from Salt Lake City of the Pacific Coast League.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Acquired Greg Keagle, pitcher, from the San Diego Padres to complete the July 31 Andy Benes trade.
National League
COLORADO ROCKIES -- Recalled Mark Thompson, pitcher; Craig Counsell, infielder; and Quinton McCracken, outfielder, from Colorado Springs of the Pacific Coast League.
Purchased the contract of Harvey Pulliam, outfielder, from Colorado Springs.
Designated A.J.
Sager, pitcher, for assignment.
Hockey


What Color Are Your Plates? And What Does That Mean?
Q. What distinguishes New Jersey license plates?
A.
Their color: goldfinch yellow, fading to pale yellow at the bottom of the plate, with black letters and numbers.
The bright yellow band across the top makes it easy for the police to distinguish them from other states' plates.
They also have a series of circular holograms down the center to deter counterfeiters.


INSIDE
Denver Ends Forced Busing
A Federal judge has agreed that Denver can abandon court-ordered busing and return to neighborhood schools, bringing an end to a bitter quarter-century fight.
Page 16.
New York Is Dole Country
Challenging Senator Bob Dole in New York means challenging the state's Byzantine ballot-access laws.
So far, only one leading Republican Presidential candidates seems ready to do that.
Page 43.
New Talks on Palestinians
Trying to break a deadlock on Palestinian self-rule, Israel planned to offer a proposal for a city that has been a center of conflict between Arabs and Jewish settlers.
Page 14.
2 International


Liberties; Colin Powell Rules!
O.K., I've got the book now.
Naturally, I flipped to the back to see how it ends.
Does he?
Is he?
Will she let him?
Foiled again.
It ends with a list of "Colin Powell's Rules."


Julie Sutherland, John T. Delalio
Julie Peters Sutherland, a daughter of Beatrice Wagstaff Ingham of Locust Valley, L.I., and Donald J. Sutherland of Glen Head, L.I., was married yesterday to John Theodore DeLalio, a son of Marilyn Heggie DeLalio of Chapel Hill, N.C., and the late Louis DeLalio.
Hallsted Christ, a retired judge of the New York State Supreme Court, officiated at the Creek Club in Locust Valley.
Ms.
Sutherland, 28, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Lake Forest College, and she and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from Hofstra University.
Her father is a partner in Quincy Partners, an investment and management firm in Glen Head.
Her mother is a sales associate for the Worth Collection, a women's clothing distribution network.


Every Picture (Every Party) Tells a Story
Three photograph exhibitions, and two benefits to fight disease.


Stand Fast or Pander: What's a Candidate to Do?
WITHOUT a trace of embarrassment, Senator Bob Dole this summer delivered an utterly undisguised political appeal: "I'm willing to be another Ronald Reagan," he told members of the Republican National Committee gathered in Philadelphia, "if that's what you want."
Giving the impression that his transformation from a pragmatist to a devoted Reaganite occurred overnight, Mr.
Dole said he was responding to people who told him the night before that "what they are really yearning for in Philadelphia is another Ronald Reagan." His remarks were still more stunning because everybody (particularly the Republican faithful) knows that Bob Dole is no Ronald Reagan -- and never pretended to be.
At the Drop of a Poll
Mr.
Dole's comments -- and his evolving (rightward) positions on issues ranging from affirmative action to gun control to welfare to homosexuals in the military -- has led critics to lump him and most of his Republican competitors with President Clinton as politicians who will recast their positions at the drop of a hat -- or, more to the point, the drop of a poll.


Balloonists' Lives of Adventure That Fell to Earth
They were both adventurers, passionate for flying.
They had spent much of their lives roaming the world aloft: in fighter planes and transports and commercial airliners, in helicopters and even trainers and seaplanes.
One had been shot down in battle and had been a jungle fighter in Southeast Asia; the other had become a senior pilot for Trans World Airlines.
But in recent years, John Stuart-Jervis, 68, a British-born naturalized American, and Alan Fraenckel, 55, who grew up near Schenectady, N.Y., found a new road through the skies -- in the whimsical wanderlust of sport balloons, soaring wherever the wind took them, over mountains and seas, across deserts and international borders, from Asia and Australia to Europe and North America.


Ellen C. Stern, Eric P. Garland
Ellen Carol Stern, a decorative painter in New York, is to be married today in Remsenburg, L.I., to Eric Paul Garland, the executive editor of Adweek magazine in New York.
Cantor David Weissman is to perform the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Howard N. Stern.
The bride graduated from Syracuse University.
She received a master's degree in education from the Bank Street College of Education and a Ph.D. in museum and esthetic education from Columbia University.
Her father is the president of Eight-in-One Pet Products Inc. in Hauppauge, L.I.


Beyond the Waterfront, and Into the Water
MIKE DAVIS knows exactly why he likes rowing.
"The thing is," says Mr.
Davis, a 53-year-old archeologist, "you're in a completely different element. You are far from all the hard edges. Out there you're dealing with wind and current and an occasional thunderstorm. Out there you're in nature's realm, and you don't quibble with the rules. You don't get a lawyer to get you out of it."


Victor M. Contini Is Dead at 81; Translated Visions Into Bronze
Victor M. Contini, a fifth-generation artisan who helped transform sculptors' artistic creations into some of the nation's most notable statues and then translated his ancient mold-making craft into a space-age skill as an aviation pattern maker, died last Sunday at Vassar Brothers Hospital in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
He was 81 and lived in Esopus, N.Y.
The cause was complications from a stroke, his family said.


Sports of The Times; Confronting Some Haunting History on Lombardi Avenue
TO Giants parishioners with a sense of history, the address is haunting.
When the Giants play the Packers here today, the game will be in Lambeau Field at 1265 Lombardi Avenue.
As in Vince Lombardi.


BOOKS IN BRIEF: FICTION
OBLIVION  By Josephine Hart. Viking, $19.95.
Laura is dead.
Her husband, Andrew, just can't stop thinking about her -- even as he's diligently trysting with Sarah, a lusty young thing who would make an admirable replacement wife.
Andrew's mother-in-law, a retired civil servant named Jane, is also thinking about Laura and holding impromptu solo seances in Laura's old room, sometimes in the nude.
Then she starts following Sarah, finding herself "moved to sudden tears" when she watches her daughter's rival buying tampons in a drugstore.
Readers of Josephine Hart's previous novels, "Damage" and "Sin," may be forgiven for expecting these preliminary maneuvers to be whipped into yet another kinkily dysfunctional family set-to.
But here the drama is presented in a thuddingly literal fashion as Andrew, who interviews celebrities on television, takes himself off to grill Catherine, a cranky old playwright, then sits through a reading of her latest work, ominously entitled "The Book." Andrew seems to find it all fascinating and therapeutic.
Readers -- who must endure an 80-page script in which the grimly larky voices of a crowd of dear and not so dear departed try to "get across the fact that they existed" -- will soon be squirming in their seats.
When it's all over, Jane has stopped being sinister and Andrew has resigned himself to remaining "a little sad" forever.
The rest of us are left pondering the remarks of the "Maitre Death" of Catherine's play: "Remember, the people with the most interesting stories aren't necessarily the ones who talk." ALIDA BECKER


State Gathers Data to Show Who Profits From Fund-Raising Dollars
The volunteer ambulance squad in Edgewater Park, N.J., was set to hold a country music show, and to pay off its new ambulance with the proceeds, when the unthinkable happened.
The professional fund-raisers who agreed to solicit contributions and produce the concert -- in exchange for 80 percent of the revenues -- suddenly canceled.
What was worse, the company immediately agreed to put on the show for Edgewater's crosstown rival, the Beverly Emergency Squad.


Irreconcilable Foes in 'Oleanna'
IT was devoid of sexual content," he says. "I say it was not," she says. In "Oleanna," David Mamet precipitated what is now a standard he-says-she-says reference in one sexual harassment story after another. It was widely assumed that Mr. Mamet's 1992 Off Broadway hit was written in response to the Clarence Thomas-Anita Hill hearings, though the playwright denied it.
After the failure of last year's movie version, it was then assumed that "Oleanna" was played out.
But the hot topicality of its setup, reinforced by relentless high-profile accounts of aggressive male sexism as well as the irresistible economic advantage of producing a two-character, one-setting play, means that "Oleanna" has yet to be silenced.


Elise A. Frank, Evan H. Karas
Elise Amy Frank, a music-industry executive, is to be married this evening to Dr.
Evan Howard Karas, the chief resident in orthopedic surgery at Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York.
Rabbi Joseph Potasnik is to officiate in the Palm House at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
The bride, 33, is a vice president of artist development at Elektra Entertainment, a recording division of the Warner Music Group in New York.
She graduated from New York University.
She is a daughter of Flora and Eugene Frank of Fair Lawn, N.J.


Al Roker and Deborah Roberts
Deborah Ann Roberts, a correspondent in New York for the ABC news magazine "20/ 20," was married yesterday to Albert Lincoln Roker Jr., a weatherman on the "Today Show," in New York.
The Rev.
John Andrew performed the ceremony at the St.
Thomas Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
Roker, 34, graduated from the University of Georgia.
She is a daughter of Ruth N. Roberts and Ben Roberts of Perry, Ga.
Her father is a building contractor in Perry.


BOOKS IN BRIEF: NONFICTION
JOHANN SEBASTIAN BACH  As His World Knew Him.
By Otto L. Bettmann.
Birch Lane/Carol Publishing, $22.50.
Otto Bettmann is the creator of the Bettmann Archive.
He is also a lifelong admirer of Johann Sebastian Bach.
Now in his retirement, the nonagenarian Mr.
Bettmann has gathered together facts about Bach's life and arranged them alphabetically, from "Abendmusik" to "Zeitgeist," in "Johann Sebastian Bach: As His World Knew Him." The book serves equally well as an introduction to the composer and as a browsing cornucopia.
We learn that Bach composed rapidly: "Rarely does he seem to have agonized over details." He copied his own scores (with the help of his second wife, Anna Magdalena); used numerology to spell out his name in music, and received little acclaim as a composer.
In his day, Bach's reputation was as a superb organist, harpsichordist and tuner of keyboard instruments.
Only a handful of his compositions were published in his  lifetime.
But as Mr.
Bettmann notes, Bach's music was revived a century after his death in 1750, and now, as Arnold Schoenberg once put it, "Bach survives eternal." PEGGY CONSTANTINE


A Paint-In Festival at a Peace Park


A Curve of Binding Energy
THEY say the neon lights are bright on Broadway, and they say there's a broken heart for every one of them.
Nobody says there are 21 gas stations on Broadway, but it's true and I know because one day last week, I walked its length from north end to south end and counted them.
This is an odd fact, sure.
But for the walker, the plodding chronicler and observer, the size and sweep of Broadway, New York City's legendary and vainglorious Main Street, yields a set of dizzying impressions that seem suitable to either poetry or quantification.


Judith Fisher, Samuel Trotzky
Judith Lesley Fisher, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Michael Fisher of New Rochelle, N.Y., is to be married today to Dr.
Samuel William Trotzky, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Trotzky of Bangor, Me.
Rabbi Melvin Sirner is to perform the ceremony at Le Chambord, an inn in Hopewell Junction, N.Y.
The bride, 28, graduated from Duke University.
She is a student at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx, where her father is a professor and the chief of the division of dermatology.
The bride's mother, Davina Fisher, is a special education teacher at the Eastchester (N.Y.) High School.


Mining the Hendrix Legend
WHEN JIMI HENDRIX died in London 25 years ago tomorrow, he left an indelible mark on pop music and popular culture generally.
Part shaman, part showman, Hendrix redefined rock guitar much as John Coltrane redefined the tenor saxophone.
And his legend has only grown, with the marketing of it showing no signs of letting up.
Here is a sampling of the recent evidence.
Music
The bulk of the celebrated Hendrix catalogue was recorded between 1967 and 1970, and a score of other albums have been released since then.
"The Ultimate Experience" (MCA), a compilation of some of Hendrix's best-known music, has sold 1.2 million copies since its release in April 1993.


Still Moaning, Still Shimmying
SEX IS NOT ALL I THINK ABOUT," Prince Rogers Nelson declares partway through his new album, "The Gold Experience." "It's just all I think about you." For the length of the song that follows, he tries a subject other than sex. But soon enough, he gets back to his true vocation: creating music that pulses and moans and shimmies with the rhythms of lubricity.
All around him, he has been watching others make hits with his kind of come-on.
"Everybody wants to sell what's already been sold," he sings in "Gold." TLC's "Waterfalls" sounds like a Prince song; so does D'Angelo's "Brown Sugar." While Prince didn't invent heavy-breathing songs, he did give them a certain slow-rolling groove and a willingness to be explicit.
But he started releasing albums back in 1978, and he has been around so long that many listeners began to take him for granted.
Perhaps they should; "The Gold Experience" (Warner Brothers) holds few large surprises amid its many small pleasures.


On Prime Time, as in Real Life, Nothing Stays the Same Forever
LIFE goes on.
Things change.
Here today, gone tomorrow.
So it is, also, for our 2-D cousins.
Most contemporary network series, in an effort to mirror the twists and turns of the world on the other side of the screen, include a substantial number of fundamental changes each year. (Periodic overhauls also cope with exigencies like ambitious actors, bored writers and falling focus-group scores.)
The beginning of the fall season is the traditional time to unveil these twists and turns.
Here is a select list of returning shows and their alterations.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Easy Penn State Victory Evokes Glory of 1994
Feeling an undergraduate's vigor, or perhaps the inevitability of a lopsided victory over moribund Temple, the 68-year-old Joe Paterno ran into Beaver Stadium today, jumped into the air and pumped his fist.
Given the puritanical mood of collegiate rule makers, it's a wonder he wasn't flagged for excessive celebration.
But who could blame Paterno for his exuberance?
Just ahead was a satisfying, revealing afternoon that extended the nation's longest Division I-A winning streak to 19 games as seventh-ranked Penn State pummeled Temple, 66-14.
The swamping was provided courtesy of a smothering defense, three touchdown passes from the junior quarterback Wally Richardson and three touchdown runs in the impressive debut of the freshman tailback Curtis Enis.


Joy Fedden, Bruce Habian
Joy Fedden, the director of marketing for a real estate firm, and Bruce George Habian, a lawyer, were married yesterday in New York.
The Rev.
Stan Moseley performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Thomas More.
Mrs.
Habian, 32, works for Joseph Hilton Associates in New York.
She graduated from the Parsons School of Design and received her master's degree in architecture from Harvard University.
She is the daughter of Joyce and Charles E. Fedden of New York.
The bride's father, a former partner in the New York law firm Coudert Brothers, now is a lawyer in private practice in New York.
Her mother retired as a saleswoman at Tiffany &amp; Company in New York.


BELTWAY WARRIOR
I read with some surprise and, frankly, chagrin the article by Michael R. Gordon and Bernard E. Trainor on the life and times of Colin Powell ("Beltway Warrior," Aug. 27).
I was director of operations for the Joint Chiefs of Staff during the entire period from the Panama incursion through the Persian Gulf war.
I had intimate knowledge of what was going on and who the players were.


Luggage Takes New Turns
IF you go shopping for a new suitcase, as I was forced to do recently, you may find the terrain unfamiliar.
The sets of big, hard suitcases were back by the walls and virtually everything in the middle of the floor had wheels, including many of those garment-suit bags that remind me of semi-deflated elephants bumping through the coach cabin.
"If it has wheels, it moves," was the message from Stan Schwarz, president of Innovation Luggage, a major retail chain.
Fran Philip, a spokeswoman for L. L. Bean, the mail-order company in Freeport, Me., said the same.
Michele Marini Pittenger, spokeswoman for the Luggage and Leather Good Manufacturers of America, confirmed that wheels were the major trend.


Snapshots of the U.S. Economy: Some Clouds May Be Moving On; Bankers See Upturn For Midsize Clients
Cruising east on the Long Island Expressway, it seems every other truck bears a company name well known to Frank Lourenso and Richard E. Grabowski, two senior Chemical Bank lending officers who are calling on some customers.
Here in Long Island's industrial heartland, smokestacks are scarce, but there is no lack of "middle market" businesses -- small enough to be entrepreneurial, but big enough to need millions of dollars in bank financing to pay for everything from inventories to expansion.
"Business has been pretty good lately, and we have seen some solid loan growth since February," said Mr.
Lourenso, a top loan executive.
His experience at Chemical mirrors the national trend; bank loans to businesses have increased 11 percent in the last year to an annual rate of $695 billion last month.
That is well above the peak level before the recession and the credit squeeze of the early 1990's.


Digging In the Surprises for Next Spring
FORTUNATE indeed are those gardeners, especially those with an eye for the unusual, who remembered to mail in their orders for hardy spring-flowering bulbs during the summer months.
If the orders have already been shipped, these foresighted planners are now able to tuck the bulbs into their appointed places.


A Dusty Eyesore Bites the Dust
The sprawling lot was arguably Union Square's biggest eyesore, a stubborn blemish in an up-and-coming neighborhood bustling with retail activity.
Today, the lot, which runs from 13th to 14th Streets and from Broadway to Fourth Street, is a construction site obscured from view by a wooden fence.
The Related Companies is planning to build a 300,000-square-foot residential and retail development on the land.
The company recently demolished the only structure on the site, the long-vacant Berkey Building, the former home of The Village Voice.


Milbury Warns Lindros
One of the Islanders' highest-paid players might not be on the opening-day roster, Coach Mike Milbury said today.
Brett Lindros, who is in the second year of a five-year $6.7 million deal, "is definitely a bubble guy," Milbury said.
Lindros, 19, will get the better part of nine exhibitions to show Milbury that he doesn't warrant a trip to the minors.


A Corner, A Kingdom, In Vermont
ALTHOUGH he may be best remembered for suggesting that the United States should declare victory and then get out of Vietnam, it was during a 1949 speech made to his constituents in the small Vermont town of Lyndonville that Senator George Aiken observed: "You know, this is such beautiful country up here. It ought to be called the Northeast Kingdom of Vermont."
Senator Aiken, who died in 1984, was referring to the state's three northeasternmost counties, Orleans, Essex and Caledonia, which form a crude triangle wedged between the Connecticut River and Canadian border.
The name stuck.
It evokes the region's beauty, mystery, remoteness and even the quirky independence that caused its residents to help send Mr.
Aiken down to Washington for more than three decades.
The Northeast Kingdom is what the rest of Vermont used to be before it made a self-conscious effort to appeal to tourists.


ALSO INSIDE
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 2 Canoes amid the skyline: River explorers begin to test the waters around Manhattan Island.
INSIDE QUEENS 3 The war is 6,000 miles away, but the tensions over the war in Bosnia simmer in Queens.
MOVIE CLOCK 23  What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 22 The Medieval Festival in Fort Tryon Park; a tribute to the 1964 World's Fair; A children's harvest in Prospect Park.
GOOD EATING 24 A tour of the East 40's; The bustling Palm; the reliable Cafe de Paris; the "uptown-style" Chin Chin.
SOAPBOX 25 The apartment hunt and the theater of the absurd.
And letters.


Identity Crisis on Bleecker Street
It's been a while since Bleecker Street, here in 1968, was a main strip for flower children and folk singers but it has managed to keep some of its funky feel.
Now the Village Gate is becoming a CVS pharmacy.
And a debate is being waged over Bleecker's future.
With reports from Union Square and City Island.
PAGES 6-13. (Michael Evans for The New York Times)


Raising a Dream from the Deep
Jack Liebolt spent 14 years and most of his retirement money building his home and dream: a 72-foot sailboat named Lisa.
So when she sank off City Island on Aug. 19, after water gushed in through an open porthole, he had two questions: What will the sea do to her?
And how can I afford to raise her?
By last Wednesday afternoon both of Mr.
Liebolt's questions were answered.
A New Jersey salvage firm, Donjon Marine, raised Lisa for a price Mr.
Liebolt would not reveal but could just afford.


Pamela R. Fenton, Scott W. Eaton
Pamela Ruth Fenton, a daughter of Dean E. Fenton and Barbara Perrow Fenton of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Scott William Eaton, the son of Sharon Murphy Eaton and T. James Eaton Jr. of Tucson, Ariz.
The Rev.
Ivan Weiser performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of the Holy Faith in Santa Fe, N.M.
Mrs.
Eaton, 29, graduated from Duke University.
Until recently she was the hiring coordinator at Brown &amp; Wood, a law firm in New York.
Her father is the president of Prime Capital Management, a venture capital company in Stamford, Conn.
Her mother is the business manager of Greenwich magazine in Greenwich.


Rabbit Ears To Cable, Cornwall Succumbs
CORNWALL, tucked into the hills of Northwest Connecticut, is a town of twisty roads and barns and graceful old homes perched on hillsides or clustered in little sections.
It has a covered bridge of note but no supermarket or movie theater or houses spread out in nice neat grids.
Agriculture is still the principal, and seemingly only, business.
You can still see cows and sheep and horses, close up, and smell the new mown hay.
The major difference between, say, 1795 and 1995, is that Cornwall actually had more people then than now, about 1,600 to about 1,400.
It lost population in the mid-19th century when many of its farmers moved west for better land in New York State and Ohio.
Today some of its residents are descendants of the original settlers, some are young couples seeking a safe place to bring up children, some retired people seeking tranquillity and a few are celebrities, Michael J. Fox and Whoopie Goldberg among them, seeking a retreat where people will respect their privacy.


Eagles Ponder Bench-Trade Option Play for Cunningham
When Randall Cunningham takes the field as the Eagles' starting quarterback against the Chargers this afternoon, he will do it with the knowledge that he might finish the game on the bench.
Ray Rhodes, the Eagles' new coach, gave Cunningham the quick hook last week against Arizona, bringing the backup Rodney Peete off the bench to help the Eagles win, 31-19.


Jonathan Jadow and Victoria Estern
Victoria Estern, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Neil Estern of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Jonathan McCrea Jadow, a son of Mary Evans of Pound Ridge, N.Y., and Julian Jadow of Manhattan.
Wilbur Levin, a clerk for Kings County in Brooklyn, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Ms.
Estern, who is 34 and is keeping her name, is an owner of Northern Lights Motion Picture Lighting, an equipment company in Brooklyn.
She graduated from Wesleyan University and is studying for a master's degree in fiction writing at Bennington College.


WHO WILL FACE THE MUSIC?
Kolbert perpetuates the myth that current retirees take more from the system than they put into it.
The same could be said about recipients of any pension scheme if one ignores employer contributions and the power of compounding.
Her example has a retiree getting $240,000 more in benefits than he contributed.
The figure shrinks considerably if employers' contributions are included.
REED MOYER Palo Alto, Calif.


Blue Jays' Demise Wasn't Sudden
Unless the owners and the players eliminate October again, the Toronto Blue Jays' reign as two-time World Series champions is over.
They were unceremoniously eliminated from contention for a spot in the American League playoffs Friday night and will receive no special dispensation or free pass into this year's playoffs.
Maybe they should have seen it coming.
They didn't lose their status as two-time World Series champions, the first winner of two successive World Series in 15 years, last season because the season ended early, and the World Series was not played.
But the Blue Jays finished with a 55-60 record, the first time in a dozen years they did not have a winning record.


He Who Saves The Day Gets The Princess
The Prophecy  Christopher Walken, Eric Stoltz, Virginia Madsen, Elias Koteas  Directed by Gregory Widen R: : 91 minutes


Stephanie Mathews, Joseph O'Keefe
Stephanie Christine Mathews, a daughter of Cleo P. Mathews and William P. Mathews of Hinton, W.Va., was married there yesterday to Joseph Saxon O'Keefe, a son of Rose A. O'Keefe and Jeremiah J. O'Keefe Sr. of Biloxi, Miss.
The Rev.
William Brook, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at the First Baptist Church.
The bride and the bridegroom received master's degrees in public administration from Harvard University.


A Quiz Show's 'Jeopardy-Like' Format Is a Knowledge of Rye
IN the 1940's, Ted Levine listened with rapt attention to radio quiz shows.
In the 1950's, he became enthralled with television quiz shows like "21."
"I loved the idea of people sitting around pitting their minds against each other," he said.


E.T., Drive Home
We've got legalized prostitution.
That is somewhat of a black eye.
Now they want to name highways for aliens." Both aliens and prostitutes will probably take offense at that statement, but Nevada State Senator William R. O'Donnell doesn't seem to care.
The state assembly passed bill 533, renaming Highway 375 to "Extraterrestrial Alien Highway" because it has been the site of more than its share of U.F.O. sightings.
Part of the reason for those visions may be that the highway, running through the lonely Nevada counties of Nye and Lincoln, is close to the birthplace and testing site of the Stealth bomber and the fighter.


Louisa Moore, George Consagra
Louisa Jane Moore, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Douglas G. Moore of San Francisco, was married yesterday to George Douglas Consagra, a son of Sophie Chandler Consagra of New York and Pietro Consagra of Rome.
The Rev.
Malcolm Manson, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at the country home of the bride's parents in Inverness, Calif.
Mrs.
Consagra, 30, is an assistant product manager at the Nestle Beverage Company in San Francisco.
She graduated from the University of California at Berkeley and received an M.B.A. from the University of San Francisco.
Her father is the president of JAM Securities, an investment company in San Francisco.


Miss Morange Selig And Mr. Casas
Marea Liane Morange Selig, the daughter of Marion and Leon Morange Selig of New York, was married yesterday to Jose Ignacio Casas Mendoza, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jose Ignacio Casas of Barranquilla, Colombia.
The Rev.
Norman Catir, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the House of the Redeemer, an Episcopal retreat in New York.
Mrs.
Casas owns Monoexport Ltd. in Bogota, Colombia, where she represents international textile and furniture companies.
She graduated from the Institut Superieur des Carrieres Artistiques in Paris.


Forget the Past
To the Editor:
The way you explain it, money making is easy ("Making Money: It's a Matter of Time, Not Timing," Investing It, July 30).
I wonder why more people aren't rich.


Strangled by History
VOICES FROM SILENCE  By Douglas Unger. 286 pp.
New York: A Wyatt Book/ St.
Martin's Press. $21.95.
NAMING THE SPIRITS  By Lawrence Thornton. 257 pp.
New York: Doubleday. $22.95.


Andrea Perlman, Andrew J. Wolff
Andrea Perlman, an account supervisor at Falk Communications Inc., a pharmaceutical marketing firm in New York, is to be married today to Andrew Joel Wolff, an associate producer of the CBS News program "60 Minutes." Rabbi Herb Brockman is to perform the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Elliott Perlman, in Woodbridge, Conn.
The bride, 38, graduated from Beaver College.
Her father retired as a dentist in New Haven.
Her mother, Anita Perlman, was the founding president of Career Life Alternatives of New Haven, a counseling center.


St. Petersburg
With the professional decline of Moscow's Bolshoi Theater, the Mariinsky Theater in St.
Petersburg, still better known in the West as the Kirov, has become the one necessary stop in Russia for any visitor with the slightest interest in opera or ballet.
Compared to the enormous and decrepit Bolshoi, the Mariinsky, its pale green facade renovated and repainted only last year, seems like a jewel, though it seats some 1,600 people.
Designed by A. K. Kavos in an eclectic but recognizably Petersburg style -- ice cream colors and white columns -- it opened in 1860.


Catia Z. Mortimer, Schuyler G. Chapin
AS New York City's Commissioner of Cultural Affairs, Schuyler G. Chapin is out almost nightly at performances, ribbon-cutting ceremonies and openings held anywhere from the Tibetan Museum on Staten Island to a sculpture garden in Harlem to the Morgan Library on East 36th Street.
He is not just a figurehead; he talks about art the way Bill Gates talks about the Internet.
"Art is what marks a civilization," said Mr.
Chapin, the former general manager of the Metropolitan Opera.
"Do we know who controlled the grain markets in ancient times, or who, in fact, was the richest person in Rome at the height of the empire? No. But do we know Greek poetry and Roman art? Of course we do."


Corrections
Because of a production error, the final paragraphs of the Beliefs column were omitted from some copies yesterday.
The column concerned reaction to the Jesus Seminar, a group of scholars who have been making pronouncements on the validity of parts of the Gospels.
The omitted passage said:
"In short, the critics say, despite the seminar's claims to the contrary, it is no more free of preconceptions than more traditional scholars are.


A Tough Act to Follow, And Democrats Know It
When Senator Christopher J. Dodd got into his speech at the annual state Democratic dinner on Tuesday, the waiters and waitresses began filtering out of the kitchen to linger along the walls.
The chairman of the Democratic National Committee recalled the glories of the Democratic Party -- student loans, family-leave policies, higher minimum wages, open doors to immigration -- and the lobbyists and lawyers and legislators who paid $500 each to be there applauded.
But none of the paying guests were listening as raptly, or clapping as hard at the applause lines, as the workers who had just distributed the carrot cake with cream cheese and shaved chocolate icing.
Mr.
Dodd, the Connecticut Democrat, is an old-fashioned podium pounder who can rouse a crowd with the best of them, and he summoned the proud ghosts of Democratic champions: Franklin D. Roosevelt, John F. Kennedy, Sam Rayburn, New Jersey's own Woodrow Wilson.
"We need to reconnect with the people of this country," he said, implicitly acknowledging that the party had somehow lost touch.


Q. &amp; A.
Brokers Preparing Contracts
Q When real estate brokers prepare contracts of sale for residential transactions, aren't they engaging in the unauthorized practice of law? . . .
Lilian Marquez, Manhattan.


Tokyo's Favorite Noodles
NOODLES: thick, slithery udon in a briny broth; whole-grain soba in a wasabi-spiked dipping sauce; ice-cold somen or miso-enriched ramen.
Scorned, yet adored, noodles have a special place in the hearts of the Japanese, and there is no better place to sample them than Tokyo.
Thought of in Japan as a snack rather than a real meal, noodles' lower status on the culinary hierarchy doesn't keep them from being enormously popular.
In March 1994, in fact, a special museum was created in Tokyo for ramen, the thin, Chinese-style egg noodle, sponsored by Nisshin Corporation, the largest producer of instant noodles in Japan.
The Ramen Museum.
The Ramen Hakubutsukan is an amazing, amusing place that combines mercantile kitsch (a noodle souvenir shop and video games about noodles, for example), historic archives (including the first box of instant Japanese noodles marketed) and eight noodle restaurants -- each serving a different regional version of ramen -- under one roof.
The casual eateries are incorporated into a two-story, basement-level re-creation of an urban 1950's street scene.
It's fun to wander around here; friendly crowds mill around at lunch, and there are long but fast-moving restaurant lines.
Meal tickets are purchased at vending machines just outside each eatery; helpful staff members will assist you when signs are not in English.


NATO Tells Serbs to Speed Pullout or Face Bombing
NATO warned the Bosnian Serbs today that if they did not accelerate the withdrawal of heavy weapons ringing Sarajevo in the next 24 hours, attacks by NATO warplanes and missile strikes on Serbian positions would resume.
Earlier today, United Nations officials said the Bosnian Serbs had withdrawn only a dozen artillery pieces and tanks from the heights overlooking the besieged city, despite promises made on Thursday to pull out some 200 heavy weapons in exchange for an end to NATO air attacks on Serbian positions.


Corrections
An article on Sept. 3 about computers in schools misidentified Christopher Clouet, who attended a national conference on the subject.
He is educational technology director of the Hamden schools, not a teacher in Bridgeport.


Betrayed by Broadway
AN OBSESSION WITH ANNE FRANK  Meyer Levin and the Diary.
By Lawrence Graver.
Illustrated. 254 pp.
Berkeley: University of California Press. $28.


Composting Thrives On the Lower East Side
In New York City, where leaves hang limp from the drought, the Lower East Side Ecology Center on East Seventh Street, between Avenues B and C, is a living testimony to the powers of compost.
"There was no soil here, just amended rubble," said Christine Datz, who got a lease from the city in 1990 to start a composting program on a trash-filled lot.
It took neighbors and friends a few months to throw out several Dumpsters' worth of garbage.


SEPT. 10-16: Whose Accounting?; Swiss Bankers Discover $34.1 Million From Wartime
It was a remarkable admission last week after two decades of denial: Switzerland's secretive banks said they had found more than 800 accounts with $34.1 million lying dormant since 1945, most likely belonging to Holocaust victims.
The banks still face a credibility problem.
For many, Jews and Swiss alike, the sum seems far too small to represent what Jews carried into Switzerland before being taken away by the Nazis.
A top Swiss regulator said it amounted to what a few wealthy Jews would have had.
Jewish groups say there should be billions.


School Board 15, Rebels With a Fiscal Cause
Community School Board 15 is waging a rebellion.
Angry that it received less money from the Board of Education again this year, even though enrollment and teacher salaries rose, it refused to adopt its 1996 budget, and urged other districts to do the same.
The action was largely symbolic, since school boards are obligated to pass their budgets. (The board did the same thing last year after less-severe cuts, but followed the unapproved budget anyway.)


A PICTURE-PERFECT CAPITAL
IN Montpelier, Vermont's capital, everything looks the way it's supposed to look, and yet it seems surprising that this is so.
The gold dome of the 1857 capitol building is neither too large nor too small, and sets off perfectly the graceful statue of Ceres, goddess of agriculture, mounted on top, while the dark granite building beneath it catches just the right note of Doric dignity and grace.
A short distance down State Street, the Capital Movie Theater has a glitzy Art Deco facade right out of the Thirties, ditto the marquee jutting out across the sidewalk.
A few yards farther is the Federal courthouse, suitably pillared and imposing; just behind it off Elm Street, the sheriff's office is so neat in its Victorian primness that the black bars over the windows come as something of a shock.
The firehouse with its three arched bays sits beside the endearingly pompous, high-towered City Hall; the bridges over the Winooski are spare and functional; gothic Christ Church offers a square with shade of, well, gothic coolness; the office of Sen.
James Jeffords looks as friendly and open as the old feed store it once was.
Even Charlie O's, a notorious bikers' bar smack in the center of Main Street ("Good Drinks and Bad Company" proclaims the neat carved sign) blends into this overall perfection, its turn-of-the-century facade making it indistinguishable from the neat wooden storefronts that flank it on either side.


Reeves and Young: Two-Year Partnership Shows Signs of Strain
There is no communication between George Young and Dan Reeves unless there needs to be.
They do not socialize.
On the team flights they rarely, if ever, converse, with Young usually reading a book and Reeves sitting on the opposite side of the plane talking with his wife or others.
When Reeves wants to discuss personnel matters, he goes to Young's office, says what he has to say, then leaves.
The relationship between Young, one of the National Football League's most successful general managers the last 10 years, and Reeves, the current coach of the Giants and one considered by many to be one of the best in the league, is right now fairly free of bumps.
But it is clearly a chilly relationship, and it is one that will always be potentially explosive as long as the two men hold their current jobs.


Big-City Amenities. Trees. High-Tech Jobs. Cappuccino. Retirement Paradise. Nose Rings.
Places Rated Almanac bills itself as a "guide to finding the best places to live." It compares and ranks all 343 metropolitan areas in the United States and Canada, taking into account cost of living, job opportunities, transportation, housing, recreation, climate and so on.
The metropolitan areas surrounding large, vibrant cities like Seattle, San Francisco and Toronto are highly ranked -- after all, these places tend to boast a variety of employment, entertainment and recreational opportunities; they also offer a wide choice of health care facilities, and are usually important transportation hubs.
It is a surprise, then, to discover that the fifth-rated place to live in the United States is Raleigh-Durham in North Carolina.
This is a metropolitan area whose largest city, Raleigh, has only about 230,000 people; Durham is even smaller, with fewer than 150,000.
Yet little Raleigh-Durham is hot: in 1992, Inc. magazine rated it as one of "the best places in the country to own a business," and last year, Money magazine gave it the coveted No. 1 spot in its "best places to live in America" issue.
The runners-up to Raleigh-Durham as Money's best places to live were Rochester, Minn., and Provo-Orem, Utah.
All three are small-to-midsize regional centers that share several characteristics other than their size.
They score high in that ephemeral but crucial category, "quality of life." They are near recreational resources like lakes and mountains.
They have strong local economies and have lower unemployment, poverty and crime rates than the national average.
But Raleigh-Durham, Rochester and Provo-Orem are not merely examples of successful small cities.
They are also examples of a new urban trend: the rise of what might be called the college city.
The college town is an American institution.
Throughout the 19th century, it was common practice to locate private colleges in small towns like Amherst in Massachusetts, Middlebury in Vermont and Pomona in California.
The idea was that bucolic surroundings would provide the appropriate atmosphere for the pursuit of learning and (not incidentally) remove students from the distractions and temptations of the big city.
The influence of the small college on its town was minimal, however, beyond providing a few local residents with service jobs.
THE COLLEGE CITY IS ALTOGETHER different.
At its heart is a large research university.
For example, the 6,800-acre Research Triangle Park outside Raleigh is now home to more than 80 research enterprises that employ about 35,000 people.
It's not just jobs that lure people to these places.
Simply put, life in most smaller cities is cheaper.
A family moving from the metropolitan area of a large city like Philadelphia, say, to Raleigh-Durham would need considerably less income -- about 30 percent less -- to maintain the same standard of living.
The savings come chiefly in the form of lower housing prices and property taxes as well as lower state and local taxes.
IN THE PAST, A LOWER COST OF LIVING Usually translated into a lower standard of living.
Life in small cities -- with or without colleges -- may have been cheaper but it was also restricted in terms of entertainment, shopping and recreation.
Today, VCR's, sports channels, cineplexes, clothing and housewares catalogues, national distribution chains and the Internet have changed that.
You don't have to travel to Manhattan any more to shop at Bloomingdale's -- all you need to do is go down to the mall or call an 800 number.
This is more than merely a matter of convenience.
It means that small cities can offer many, if not all, of the everyday services and amenities that used to be the exclusive province of the metropolis.
Where people live has always been influenced by technology.
Once, the seaport, the railroad and the huge factory complex encouraged concentration in large cities.
Truck transport and the automobile have had the opposite effect; so have the deregulation of airplane travel and telecommunications.
Generally speaking, recent technological developments like cellular telephones, cable television, personal computers and fax machines have all supported dispersal.
Indeed, it is difficult to think of a single invention in the past 50 years that has not been inspired by the desire to make modern life more decentralized.
The forces of decentralization account for much of the appeal of the college city.
For example, the largest cities -- New York, Philadelphia, Chicago, Boston -- traditionally have had the most sophisticated hospitals.
The decentralization of medical skills now means that a regional medical center, like the one affiliated with Duke University, can provide worldclass health care.
Another appeal of a college city is the access to continuing education, not only for people in midcareer, but especially for retirees.
Mild climates and golf courses used to be the main attractions in retirement communities, but college cities, with their high-quality athletic programs, their university drama and music departments and their art galleries and museums offer a variety of diversions not available in most cities of comparable size.
Life in a college city, whether it is Raleigh-Durham, Santa Cruz, Calif., or Charlottesville, Va., can be as cosmopolitan as it is in larger cities.
The list of college cities is long and growing longer: Madison, Wis.; Ann Arbor, Mich.; San Luis Obispo, Calif.; Eugene, Ore.; Austin, Tex.; Bloomington, Ind.; Boulder, Colo.; Iowa City, Iowa, and Lawrence, Kan., are some examples.
The college city I know best is Burlington, Vt.
This little city is in the foothills of the Green Mountains and on the shore of Lake Champlain. (Burlington itself has a population of less than 40,000 while the metropolitan area has about 157,000 people.) The setting is as idyllic as it sounds.
Undoubtedly, it was the unspoiled surroundings and the recreational opportunities that drew many newcomers here during the 1960's and 70's.
Burlington became a destination for those who wanted to escape big cities but were not quite ready for a dropout's life on a farm or in a commune. (The rest of Vermont offered those alternatives, too.) Burlington also attracted young professionals and entrepreneurs who were looking for a low-key urban life.
The city's most famous success story of that era is Ben &amp; Jerry's, whose first ice cream parlor was located in an abandoned service station downtown.
High-tech corporations also found Burlington congenial, and I.B.M. and Digital Equipment Corporation established plants in the area.
While not quite in the same league as booming Raleigh-Durham, Burlington exhibits many of the amenities of the larger college city: a busy regional airport and university medical center, growing white-collar employment and a beautiful environment.
I used to live close to Burlington, right over the Canadian border.
My wife and I would frequently make the 90-minute drive, sometimes to shop, sometimes to visit the nearby Shelburne Museum -- an extraordinary collection of historic buildings and artifacts -- and sometimes to go boating on Lake Champlain.
But most often we would go with no particular aim in mind, just to stroll the streets.
We would usually end up on Church Street, where a legacy of that urban design fad of the 70's still exists: the main street converted into a pedestrian mall.
The malls of that period were usually a last-ditch effort to resuscitate declining downtowns; today, with their crumbling planters and unpainted benches, most downtowns are deserted.
Church Street is an exception: it's a busy and thriving thoroughfare crowded with adults, children and dogs.
There are sidewalk vendors, several good bookstores, an art supply store, the inevitable Banana Republic, a number of restaurants and bistros and cafes -- a veritable Green Mountain St.-Germain-des-Pres.
EXAGGERATE, BUT THERE IS AT LEAST one real similarity to Paris's Latin Quarter: the place is teeming with students. (There are about 15,000 of them in Burlington, enrolled at the University of Vermont and at four other colleges.) The presence of so many young people may be one of the secrets to the success of college cities like Burlington.
College students are generally bright, healthy, social and usually unencumbered by serious financial worries.
They typically don't have large, comfortable homes to retreat to -- or families to take care of -- and so they tend to inhabit the public realm.
At night, students are out and about; downtown Burlington has two independently owned cinemas as well as a renovated theater.
Although some might complain that students, by their nature, can be bothersome, they contribute a vital ingredient to urban life.
Unlike their career-crazed elders, college students really do have the time to sit in a cafe or dawdle on the village green, which is why many college cities have retained the vibrant kind of public street life that was once characteristic of larger cities.
Who would have thought that the ivory tower would nurture that precious but rapidly disappearing commodity: civilized city life.


North Carolina's Equestrian Heaven
At the horse camp in Vermont I went to in the mid-60's, it was clear that the aristocracy was the three or four girls who brought their very own horses along with them.
The rest of us would have crushes on mounts belonging to the camp and might even be allowed, if we were good enough riders, to go steady with one (ride it every day, help groom it), but the chosen few were married to their animals: responsible for their care, able to take them to shows, recipients of extra attention and instruction from the riding teachers.
And I, like the rest of hoi polloi, passionately wanted to be one of them.
The weirdness of this ancient aspiration was not lost on me last winter when I did, at the age of 45, finally take my horse to camp in Southern Pines, N.C.


Dole Defends Wife's Role At Red Cross
With Elizabeth Hanford Dole at his side, Senator Bob Dole today defended his wife's stewardship of the American Red Cross and rejected suggestions that she was using her position to change the organization's AIDS prevention and education program in a way that could benefit his Presidential campaign.
"Elizabeth has been very scrupulous in trying to keep the Red Cross out of it," Mr.
Dole told reporters gathered here at a meeting of Dade County Republicans.
Mr.
Dole, who is leading in the polls for the Republican Presidential nomination, commended the Red Cross, a nonpartisan organization, saying, "It's a great organization that's done a lot of good around the world, particularly with her leadership."


More Stieglitz, if You Haven't Had Enough
THE GRAND PANJANDRUM IS back.
Actually, he never quite left.
He had the misfortune to die in 1946, at the age of 82, but long before that he had arranged for immortality.
In the art and photography worlds, Stieglitz is an essential noun in the historical vocabulary, much the way Cubism is, or pictorialism.
Not a year goes by without a Stieglitz show of some variety or other somewhere.
The market rhapsodizes over him: in 1993, his image of Georgia O'Keeffe's hands with a thimble set an auction record of $398,500.


Arafat and Peres Sit Down in Effort to Settle Last Issues
Pressing to conclude an agreement on Arab self-rule in Israeli-occupied territories in time for a signing ceremony scheduled in Washington next week, the Israeli Foreign Minister, Shimon Peres, met Yasir Arafat tonight for a major effort to resolve the deadlock.
On his way to the resort of Taba on the Gulf of Aqaba in Egypt, where he has met Mr.
Arafat, the Palestinian leader, twice in the last two months, Mr.
Peres said he was carrying a new proposal on the West Bank city of Hebron, though he offered no details.


Splendor In the Grass?
AFTER one of the driest Augusts on record, even the tidiest lawns in the toniest neighborhoods are starting to look a little shopworn.
Throughout much of the Northeast -- particularly in areas where homeowners have been asked or required to cut down on water usage -- lawns that were lush and green this time last year are now brittle and browning and seemingly past the point of no return.


Corrections
An article on Sept. 3 about a children's medical center under construction in Hartford referred incorrectly to the uniqueness of its emergency room in the state.
Yale-New Haven Hospital opened a pediatric emergency room in July 1993.


The Lisa, a Dream Risen from the Deep
Jack Liebolt spent 14 years and most of his retirement money building his home and dream: a 72-foot sailboat named Lisa.
So when she sank off City Island on Aug. 19, after water gushed in through an open porthole, he had two questions: What will the sea do to her?
And how can I afford to raise her?
By last Wednesday afternoon both of Mr.
Liebolt's questions were answered.
A New Jersey salvage firm, Donjon Marine, raised Lisa for a price Mr.
Liebolt would not reveal but could just afford.


In Landmark Complaints, Bigotry Is Not the Issue . . .
To the Editor:
Your article missed a much better story: Jackson Heights has been working to achieve a balance with its many new foreign residents and business owners, and there are success stories.
The terra-cotta street signs on 82d Street show that ordinary citizens and business people were able to obtain landmark status after an arduous campaign.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CHELSEA  $400,000
446 West 23d Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. duplex co-op in a prewar building; dining room, 38-ft. living room, 14-ft. ceilings, 2 fireplaces, c/a, terrace; maintenance $1,185, 50% tax-deductible, listed at $425,000, 1 year on market (Broker: Wells &amp; Gay/Stribling &amp; Associates)  GREENWICH VILLAGE  $250,000
115 East Ninth Street  1-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 900-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doormen, dining area, remodeled kitchen, terrace, 30-ft. of windows; maintenance $929, 60% tax-deductible, listed at $275,000, 8 weeks on market (Brokers: Bellmarc; Elise Ward)  TRIBECA  $560,000
80 Warren Street  1-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,700-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; artist's studio with skylights, 1,400 sq. ft. of private roof rights; maintenance $1,887, listed at $595,000, 16 weeks on market (Brokers: Douglas Elliman; Tabak)  UPPER EAST SIDE  $1.215 million
320 East 69th Street  2-family town house; 3 bedrooms, 3 baths in primary unit; 2 bedrooms, 2 baths, eat-in kitchen in other; dining rooms in each; taxes $10,003, listed at $1.299 million, 1 year on market (Broker: Douglas Elliman)  BRONX
BAYCHESTER  $198,000
4165-B Hill Avenue  2-family, 47-year-old attached brick house; 3 bedrooms, dining room in primary unit; 2 bedrooms, eat-in kitchen in other; 1 bath in each; taxes $1,400, listed at $219,000, 17 weeks on market (Broker: Albert R. Bryan)  RIVERDALE  $65,000
525 West 238th Street  (Fieldston Garden)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 950-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; dining room, remodeled kitchen, h/w floors; maintenance $388, 43% tax-deductible, listed at $69,000, 8 weeks on market (Broker: Trebach)  BROOKLYN
BROOKLYN HEIGHTS  $305,000
146 Columbia Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. co-op in a limestone building; dining area, 2 fireplaces, harbor view; maintenance $1,042, 60% tax-deductible, listed at $329,000, 3 years on market (Broker: Brooklyn Landmark)  DITMAS PARK  $250,000
659 East 19th Street  6-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 85-year-old detached colonial; center hall, dining room, stained-glass windows, 2-car garage; taxes $1,600, listed at $289,000, 10 weeks on market (Broker: Wilk Real Estate)  PARK SLOPE  $170,000
99 Berkeley Place  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; eat-in kitchen, fireplace, original moldings and detail; maintenance $490, 50% tax-deductible, listed at $185,000, 6 weeks on market (Broker: Warren Lewis)  QUEENS
FOREST HILLS GARDENS  $825,000
60 Deepdene Place  7-bedroom, 4-bath, detached brick Tudor; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2 powder rooms, fireplace, solarium, rear patio, 2-car garage, corner lot; taxes $3,824, listed at $995,000, 2 weeks on market (Broker: Madeline Realty) STATEN ISLAND
LIVINGSTON  $125,000
68 Bement Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 60-year-old detached house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, full basement, 1-car garage; taxes $875, listed at $131,000, 17 weeks on market (Brokers: Vitali-Sunshine; Mary Jeanne)  SHORE ACRES  $43,500
20 Cliff Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 663-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; new lobby, 32- by 5-ft. terrace, harbor view; maintenance $414, 36% tax-deductible, listed at $45,000, 2 weeks on market (Brokers: Gateway Arms; Vitali-Sunshine)  NEW JERSEY
FAIR LAWN  $410,000
380 Owen Avenue  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 50-year-old colonial; c/a, deck, basement, Radburn section; taxes $8,032, listed at $429,000, 3 weeks on market (Brokers: T.P. Mabey, Coldwell Banker)  NEW MILFORD  $215,000
335 Lacey Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old ranch; 1-car garage, full finished basement, deck; taxes $4,415, listed at $219,900, 3 weeks on market (Broker Prudential Higgins)  OCEAN CITY  $280,000
1401 Gardens Plaza  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 22-year-old renovated condominium; 14th floor, wraparound deck, ocean view; taxes $4,000, monthly maintenance $450, listed at $295,000, 4 months on market (Broker: The Richards Agency) VERNON  $119,900
31 Winding Hill Drive  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 20-year-old ranch; vinyl siding, eat-in kitchen, new windows; taxes $2,159, listed at $119,900, 17 weeks on market (Broker: Weichert) CONNECTICUT
DARIEN  $942,000
340 Middlesex Road  5-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 89-year-old converted barn; dining room, breakfast room, library, 3 fireplaces, lighted tennis court, pond, 2-car garage, 4.47 acres; taxes $7,534, listed at $1.1 million, 15 weeks on market (Broker: Preferred Properties)  GREENWICH  $800,000
681 River Road  4-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 7-year-old contemporary; vaulted ceilings, gourmet kitchen with island, h/w floors, c/a, 3-car garage, 2.32 acres; taxes $8,005, listed at $849,000, 1 year on market (Brokers: William Pitt; Cleveland, Duble &amp; Arnold)  NEW CANAAN  $903,000
21 Turtleback Lane East  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 19-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, heated pool, study, 2-car, heated garage, 2.6 acres; taxes $7,380, listed at $949,000, 17 weeks on market (Brokers: William Pitt; Kelley Associates)  OLD GREENWICH  $425,000
10 Mortimer Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 75-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, fireplace, rear deck, 1-car garage; taxes $3,543, listed at $429,000, 5 weeks on market (Brokers: Coldwell Banker/Schlott; William Pitt) WESTCHESTER  BRONXVILLE  $319,000
Westbourne Alger Court  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 75-year-old co-op; entry hall, window seats, den, wet bar, terrace; maintenance $1,146, 60% tax deductible; listed at $335,000, 11 weeks on market (Brokers: Bronxville/Ley; Houlihan/ Lawrence) LEWISBORO  $185,000
6 Mill River Road  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 125-year-old colonial; entry hall, fireplace, enclosed porch, sun porch, dining room, full unfinished basement, 2.1 acres; listed at $225,000, 28 weeks on market (Brokers: Don McGrath Residential; Houlihan/Lawrence) MAMARONECK  $2.05 million
9 Rebeau Drive  6-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 66-year-old Tudor; marble entry hall, library, modern eat-in kitchen, terrace, solarium, heated pool, 2-car garage; listed at $2.2 million, 4 months on market (Brokers: Merritt Associates; Burbank Whittemore) MOUNT PLEASANT  $755,000
6 Boulder Trail  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 1-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, breakfast room, full unfinished basement,family room, 2 fireplaces, study, 3-car garage, 1 acre; listed at $750,000, 57 weeks on market (Broker: Houlihan/Lawrence)  LONG ISLAND
ALBERTSON  $200,000
48 Netz Place  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 43-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, patio, 1-car garage; taxes $3,300, listed at $219,000, 6 weeks on market (Broker: Atanas)  LAKE GROVE  $140,000
119 McGaw Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 32-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, fireplace, 120 by 140-foot lot; taxes $3,800, listed at $150,990, 4 weeks on market (Brokers: Grant Real Estate; Straub Resales)  LEVITTOWN  $135,000
57 Sunrise Lane  5-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 46-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen; taxes $4,500, listed at $139,990, 8 weeks on market (Brokers: Coldwell Banker Sammis; Century 21 Dallow)  SOUTHOLD  $155,000
1155 Jacobs Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 12-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, 1-car garage; taxes $3,800, listed at $159,900, 6 weeks on market (Broker: ERA Albo)


Bus Cutbacks are Bad News for Night Owls
At 1 A.M. one night last week, Vinny Calvarino and Don Reddy were standing on Roosevelt Avenue waiting without luck for a Q15 bus to take them home to Whitestone.
The Q15 was one of three Queens bus lines to lose overnight service when cutbacks went into effect last week as part of the Metropolitan Transportation Athority's $113 million budget reduction.
In all, service was reduced on seven Queens bus lines and on the IRT 7 subway line.


Paris
It is hardly surprising that, six years after Paris's functional, modern Bastille Opera opened, the romantic spirit of opera still seems more at home in the grandiose, ornate, 19th-century theater, built on orders of Napoleon III, known as the Palais Garnier.
After all, for more than a century, it was here that Paris society came to see and be seen.
It was here that the world's greatest singers and dancers wanted to perform.
Yet the visitors who now flock to the Palais Garnier (so named after its designer, Charles Garnier) find far more than memories.
Its foyers are crowded with statues, busts and chandeliers, its ceilings decorated with paintings or mosaics of allegorical scenes, its floors and its magnificent 30-foot-wide main staircase covered in marble and onyx.


Back to School, and School Boards
MANHATTAN  DISTRICT 1: Next meeting: Oct. 11, 7 P.M. (tentative); Location: TBA.
Superintendent: Dori Collazo-Baker; President/Chairwoman: Dolores Schaefer; (212) 602-9765.
DISTRICT 2: Next meeting: Sept. 19, 7:30 P.M.; P.S./I.S. 217, 645 Main Street, Roosevelt Island.
Superintendent: Anthony Alvarado; President/Chairwoman: Kathleen Berger; (212) 330-9400.
Agenda: General meeting.
DISTRICT 3: Next meeting: Sept. 27, 7:30 P.M.; 300 West 96th Street.
Superintendent: James Mazza; President/Chairman: Harold R. Meyer; (212) 678-2845.
DISTRICT 4: Next meeting: Sept. 20, 6:30 P.M.; P.S. 155, 319 East 117th Street.
Superintendent: Evelyn Castro; President/Chairwoman: Shirley Stroud; (212) 860-5910.
Agenda: General meeting.
DISTRICT 5: Next meeting: Sept. 21, 7:00 P.M.; P.S. 125, 123th Street between Morningside and Amsterdam Avenues.
Superintendent: Dr.
Bertrand Brown; President/Chairwoman: Wynola Glenn; (212) 769-7534.
Agenda: Election of officers.
DISTRICT 6: Next meeting: Sept. 20, 7:30 P.M.; I.S. 143, 511 West 182d Street.
Superintendent: Anthony Amato; President/Chairman: Robert Jackson; (212) 795-9549.
Agenda: Budget issues.
THE BRONX  DISTRICT 7: Next meeting: Sept. 21, 6:30 P.M.; I.S. 183, 339 Morris Avenue.
Superintendent: Pedro Crispo; President/Chairman: Luis Perez; (718) 292-0164.
Agenda: General meeting.
DISTRICT 8: Next meeting: Oct. 11, location T.B.A.
Superintendent: Max Messer; President/Chairman: Ciro Guerra; (718) 409-8801.
DISTRICT 9: Next meeting: Sept. 27, 6:30 P.M.; P.S., 360 East 168th Street.
Superintendent: Loyda R. Alfalla; President/Chairman: Carmelo Saez; (718) 681-8558.
Agenda: General meeting.
DISTRICT 10: Next meeting: Sept. 27, 7:30 P.M.; P.S. 7, 3201 Kingsbridge Avenue.
Superintendent: Irma Zardoya: President/Chairman: Charles Williams; (718) 584-8338.
Agenda: Spending and budget issues.
DISTRICT 11: Next meeting: Sept. 27, 7:30 P.M.; P.S. 121, 1250 Arnow Avenue, corner Throop Avenue.
Superintendent: Joseph Kovaly; President/Chairwoman: Loretta Y. Jones; (718) 519-2647.
Agenda: Budgetary issues.
DISTRICT 12: Next meeting: Sept. 20, 7 P.M.; C.S. 6, 1000 Tremont Avenue, off West Farms Road.
Superintendent: Robert Henry; President/Chairman: Ruth Poindexter; (718) 328-2310.
Agenda: General meeting.


Will He or Won't He?
MY AMERICAN JOURNEY  By Colin L. Powell with Joseph E. Persico.
Illustrated. 643 pp.
New York: Random House. $25.95.


Mississippi Guide
To the Editor:
Tania Unsworth is right: There are great things to see in Mississippi ("Mississippi's Heart Is on Its Front Porch," July 16).
However, the subhead, "Two travelers discover eclectic charms that the guidebooks ignore," is somewhat off the mark.
Several of the tourist spots mentioned in the article (including Earl's Art Gallery, Margaret's Grocery and Graceland Too) are featured in "Only in Mississippi: A Guide for the Adventurous Traveler," a quirky, funny book by Lorraine Redd (Quail Ridge).
I found my copy at the Delta Blues Museum, in Clarksdale.
SUSAN THOMSEN  Westport, Conn.


First Tier I.P.O's Always Seem Taken
WHAT?
Your broker forgot to call last month when Netscape Communications, one of the year's big success stories, went public?
No need to feel left out.
While some braggarts may claim huge gains in 1995's red-hot new issues market, and while dozens of deals have doubled or tripled in price, the truth about profits is much more modest.


BOOKS IN BRIEF: NONFICTION
ART ON MY MIND  Visual Politics. By Bell Hooks. New Press, paper, $15.
In "Art on My Mind," Bell Hooks, the black feminist cultural critic, examines the way race, sex and class shape who makes art, how it sells and who values it.
Why are there so few black artists or critical black voices thinking and writing about art, she wonders; why has there been no place for the visual arts in traditional black life?
These are some of the questions that resurface throughout this collection of essays on everything from the work of Jean-Michel Basquiat and Andres Serrano to the place of photography in black culture to the stereotypical ways in which black male and female bodies have been depicted.
Unfortunately, while Ms.
Hooks poses her questions with intelligence and precision, she slips into jargon when framing her answers, falling back on ideological phrases like "a politics of white-supremacist capitalist patriarchal exclusion."  Still, many of her points are sharp and persuasive, once one gets beyond the agitprop.
Ms.
Hooks writes about difficult subjects, and when she manages to transcend her own political agenda she hits a nerve that makes the slogging through worthwhile.
ANDREA BARNET


Park Workers Struggling to Limit Tree Losses From Drought
Usually this time of year, Central Park caretakers plant thousands of new bushes, shrubs and trees.
But this fall, they decided against new plantings.
Instead, they have been marshaling efforts and resources to save the park's great century-old trees.
Every day, in the battle against a drought that has threatened plant life throughout the region, dozens of workers have been visiting the prized remaining American elms and the sheltering beech groves in Central Park to break up the hard ground with pick axes, spread wood chips to retain moisture and inject water into the ground with powerful hoses.
Some trees are beginning to lose their leaves a month early; some are already completely bare.


Regarding Emily, Becky and Inky
THREE worried women sat on a park bench last week talking about a fourth woman with whom they have little in common except a love for small dogs.
They shared a story.
Seventeen years ago, a drug dealer called Speedo died leaving a puppy in bad company.
A telephone operator named Emily rescued the year-old black poodle, Inky.
She bought him for $5 from a junkie.
Emily never could pass a dog that needed a home.
"She'd sit on a bench with Inky and Becky, the younger black poodle," said Naomi Meyer, a financial adviser, "and tell us that when she won the lottery she was going to open a hotel for people with dogs."


Davie Gets a Lift From the Irish As Holtz Rests and Watches
The head coach of Notre Dame's Fighting Irish was going to be in an unfamiliar position this week, even if Lou Holtz had continued to crouch along the sideline, picking at the grass, healthy and in charge.
Holtz's frighteningly deteriorating condition, and the sudden need for spinal surgery last Tuesday, did not alter the less significant football scenario.
His team was still working to restore a lost sense of confidence and credibility.
With Holtz resting at home after a return from the Mayo Clinic this morning, Bob Davie was treated to an impromptu dousing and his most unlikely ride.


CLASSICAL BRIEF
Arriaga: Symphony in D, Overture (Op. 1), 'Los Esclavos Felices' Overture  Le Concert des Nations (La Capella Reial de Catalunya) conducted by Jordi Savall.
Astree E8532; CD.
Overshadowed by Mendelssohn and Mozart in the annals of composer prodigies, the Spanish composer Juan Crisostomo Arriaga is belatedly coming into his own.
Born in 1806 and dead before his 20th birthday, he left a compact collection of remarkably mature works.
The three included here, composed in his early and mid teens, account for virtually his entire orchestral output.


A New Line (of Defense) in the Sand
In recent years a series of punishing storms have taken ever larger bites of the region's coastline.
Among the most badly eroded have been the beaches along the Rockaway Peninsula.
The erosion has not only threatened popular recreation areas, but also communities like Edgemere and Arverne.
As a result, the United States Army Corps of Engineers will oversee a project to replenish the shoreline.


Harriet Bell, Rights Advocate, 72
Harriet Bell, a polio survivor and advocate of handicapped rights who directed the Polio Information Center from her bedroom as a resource center for the country's 250,000 polio victims, died last Sunday at her home on Roosevelt Island.
She was 72.
The cause was cardiac arrest, Cathie Bell, one of her daughters, said.


Canadians Reconsider Rising Costs Of Benefits
With generous welfare and other public allowances, an envied national health program and gleaming subways and other services, Canada has always been considered more socially responsive than the United States -- more like a North American Sweden.
But over the last 10 years, Canada has undergone huge spending increases, the steepest rise in taxes of any industrial country and long stagnation of middle-class incomes.
Now the central and provincial governments are racing to balance budgets, reduce debt and cut taxes, at the expense of services that have long been taken for granted.


Jennifer Bursky, Jacob Eisenstat
Jennifer Dina Bursky, the daughter of Dolores and Herman A. Bursky of Lawrence, L.I., is to be married this evening to Jacob Heller Eisenstat, a son of Samuel and Suzanne Eisenstat of New York.
Rabbi Haskel Lookstein is to officiate at the Inwood (L.I.) Country Club.
The bride, 24, graduated from Cornell University, where she is a medical student.
Her father is a partner in Rosenman &amp; Colin, a law firm in New York.
Her mother is a guidance counselor at Polytechnic University in Farmingdale, L.I.


A von Bulow Sheaf of Masters
VISITORS TO "FANTASY AND Reality," the show of drawings from the collection of Sunny Crawford von Bulow that has just opened at the Morgan Library, may decide that among forms of collecting, the master drawing has a great deal to recommend it.
For one thing, there are lots of them, and they don't all have to come with great names attached.
Even when they do have a great name attached, as is the case with the drawing of a boy by Ingres in the Morgan show, they do not have to be what the auctioneers call "important."


Damage Heavy as Hurricane Ravages Island of St. Thomas
Hurricane Marilyn hit St.
Thomas today with winds of more than 100 miles per hour, damaging most homes on the Caribbean island, closing its hospital and causing an apartment complex to collapse, Federal officials said.
Officials from the Federal Emergency Management Agency in Washington said initial reports indicated that 75 to 80 percent of the homes on St.
Thomas, site of the capital for the three-island United States Virgin Islands territory, were heavily damaged or destroyed.


Sports of The Times; Candlestick Park Deserves Better Than a Nerdy Name
THEY have no shame.
That's my first reaction upon hearing that Candlestick Park has been violated by some dweeby Silicon Valley techno-name.
They have no shame.
That's also my second reaction.
This windswept stadium below San Francisco has earned the right to be called Candlestick Park for eternity, not to have its name changed by some Internet interloper.


BOOKS IN BRIEF: FICTION
SHIFTING LOYALTIES  By Daniel Cano. Arte Publico, paper, $9.95.
Initially, Daniel Cano's second novel seems to offer a fresh fictional perspective on the Vietnam War as it explores the disillusionment of several Mexican-American men who find their experiences totally at odds with their fathers' gung-ho stories of patriotism and machismo in action during World War II.
Unfortunately, good ideas are sabotaged here by clunky prose and clumsy execution.
Although the book opens with David Almas's letter to the parents of his dead comrade, Wayne Podleski, and closes with David visiting Wayne's grave, the narrative in between is rambling and unfocused.
The cast of characters seems too large, and so does a time frame that jerks the reader from Southeast Asia to pre- and post-Vietnam America, as well as Spain in the 1970's and Mexico in the 1980's.
The author's political insights, intelligent though they often are, lose credibility when crammed into the mouths of people who have previously shown no signs of being terribly introspective.
"Shifting Loyalties" seems to be the product of intellectual conviction rather than deep emotional identification.
WENDY SMITH


From Around the World, With Sparkle, on a Human Scale
WITH "One World, Many Visions," Silvermine Guild Arts Center goes global: almost 50 artists from about 30 countries are in the show, which marks the 50th birthday of the United Nations.
Not that Martha Scott, the show's guest curator, had to travel the world, for most of the painters and sculptors have gained a foothold in the United States by way of dealers and private collectors.
Even so, it took her two years to assemble the display, which was proposed by Bonnie Woit, a painter and one of the New Canaan center's trustees.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
DAY IN THE BOG
A Day in the Bog, an Irish heritage celebration that drew 25,000 visitors last year to Yonkers Raceway, is to be repeated today at the same location from 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Some extraordinary, authentic items have been imported from the Ould Sod, including some of the Ould Sod itself -- a peat bog.
A thatched-roof cottage was also built for the occasion, replete with a spinning wheel, settlebed and role-playing family.
At a second cottage the eviction of a family of poor 19th-century farmers will be re-enacted, and a costumed wake with keening for the dead will be held.


Hollister Gignoux, David McDonnell
Hollister Harrower Gignoux, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick E. Gignoux 3d of Charlottesville, Va., and David Randall McDonnell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James F. McDonnell of Grosse Pointe Farms, Mich., were married yesterday in New York.
The Rev.
Stan Moseley officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Thomas More.
The Rev.
Brian Lathrop, an Episcopal minister, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
McDonnell, 33, is an art therapist in the adolescent unit at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
She is a graduate of Ohio Wesleyan University and received a master's degree in art therapy from New York University.
Her father, now retired, owned Charlottesville Vineyards Inc. in Ivy, Va.


Vidal and Buckley, Calley and My Lai
To the Editor:
Timothy Foote doesn't get it.
In his review of "It Wasn't Pretty, Folks, but Didn't We Have Fun?" he suggests that Esquire's publication of my "Confessions of Lt. Calley" was silly and shameful, an instance of shaky judgment by Esquire's editor, Harold Hayes.
Carol Polsgrove is much more perceptive in her book.
She reports that when Lieut.
William Calley arrived in Quang Ngai Province in Vietnam, 85 percent of the place had already been destroyed, and she quotes from the Backstage column in Esquire: "Calley had all the guidance an ungrateful nation, which includes you and us, could lend him. . . . Nothing in Calley is alien to us."


Mary A. Vanderbilt, Eric S. Howard
Mary Augusta Vanderbilt, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert R. Vanderbilt of Saunderstown, R.I., was married there yesterday to Eric Sevan Howard, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert G. Howard of Marblehead, Mass.
The Rev.
Anne Kimball, an Episcopal minister who is an associate dean of the Berkeley Divinity School at Yale University, performed the ceremony at the South Ferry Church.
Mrs.
Howard, 33, works in South Portland, Me., as a program and policy consultant to nonprofit organizations.
She graduated from Skidmore College and received a master's degree in international administration from the School for International Training in Brattleboro, Vt.
Her father retired as a divisional president in Winchester, Mass., for the Textron Corporation, the industrial conglomerate.


Beatrice Sevcik And A.J. Gibney
Beatrice Eva Sevcik, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Ludovit Sevcik of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Anthony John Gibney, a son of Mr. and Mr.
Charles J. Gibney Jr. of Vienna, Va.
Msgr.
Edward M. Connors performed the ceremony at the O'Byrne Chapel at Manhattanville College in Purchase, N.Y.
The bride, 24, graduated from Yale University, as did the bridegroom.
She is a third-year law student at Columbia University.
Her father is an associate professor of anesthesiology at New York Medical College in New York and is the director of anesthesia and the president of the medical board of St.
Agnes Hospital in White Plains.
Her mother, Maria Sevcit, is an interior designer.


A Dream School Springs to Life, but Reality Is a Letdown
With many public school children spending their days in dingy buildings constructed during the first half of the century, the amenities at Public School 92 are luxurious.
The red brick building has sweeping skylights, a computerized heating and cooling system and color-coded corridors.
But what was conceived as a dream school to replace the old P.S. 92, built in 1913, has become a constant irritant to parents and administrators who say the construction was flawed.


Newt Tests TV and Flunks the Press
FOR all the animosity between officials and reporters, they still regularly come together in a ritual that at least holds the promise of conveying information from the Government to its people.
The ritual is the daily news briefing, at the State Department and the White House.
The Senate gave these up long ago, but until this year they were held at the House of Representatives, too.
But the House briefings are suddenly no more, and the death of the Speaker's news conference reflects how much Capitol Hill has changed in the age of Newt.


Elizabeth B. Glass, Adam I. Gordon
Elizabeth Barbara Glass, a daughter of Corinne Smith Glass and Dr.
Robert M. Glass of Far Hills, N.J., was married there last evening to Adam I. Gordon, the son of Rose and Edwin J. Gordon of Dorset, Vt.
Rabbi Arnold Gluck performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Gordon, 29, is a financial analyst at the Ann Taylor Company, the women's fashion chain, in New York.
She graduated from Haverford College and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
Her father is the chief of ophthalmology at St.
Peter's Medical Center in New Brunswick, N.J., where he is also president of the executive committee of the medical and dental staff.


Randall J. Fuller, Wendy E. Lewis
Wendy Elizabeth Lewis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard T. Lewis of Riverside, Conn., was married yesterday to Randall Jackson Fuller, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
H.
Laurance Fuller of Wheaton, Ill.
The Rev.
Dr.
Thomas L. Stiers performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Old Greenwich, Conn.
The bride and the bridegroom, both 29, graduated form Duke University.
Mrs.
Fuller received a master's degree in social work from Columbia University.
She is an associate with Harris, Rothenberg International, a psychology consulting firm in New York.
Her father is the president of Lewis Enterprises Inc., which operates seven McDonald's restaurants in New York.
Her mother, Rusty Lewis, is a member of the Greenwich Representative Town Meeting.
Mr.
Fuller, received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
He is a sales manager in Boston with in the business communications services department of AT&amp;T.
His father is the chairman and chief executive of Amoco Corporation in Chicago.


It Isn't the Washington Monument, Is It?


He Who Saves The Day Gets The Princess
To Wong Foo, Thanks for Everything, Julie Newmar  Wesley Snipes, Patrick Swayze, John Leguizamo Directed by Beeban Kidron PG-13: : 108 minutes


BEHIND THE WHEEL/Jaguar XJS Convertible and Honda del Sol; Rich Tan, Poor Tan
TAKE it from Charles Foster Kane: the simplest toys are the ones worth remembering, whether a Rosebud sled or an old MG roadster.
Consider two adult toys at opposite ends of the price spectrum.
Starting at $15,310, the Honda del Sol is America's cheapest open-air car (as opposed to a dwarf sport utility like the Geo Tracker).
What does the youthful del Sol have in common, if anything, with an aging, bank-breaking tanning device like the Jaguar XJS 6.0 Liter?
What wins out, youth or experience?


Snapshots of the U.S. Economy: Some Clouds May Be Moving On; Cost-Cutting Mission For Hospital Chief
Ronald J. Del Mauro, chief executive since 1986 of St.
Barnabas Medical Center, the largest hospital in New Jersey and one of the largest in the country, eases his black 1995 Mercedes-Benz into the hospital parking lot just before dawn.
Ahead of him lies a 15-hour marathon of meetings, presentations and his weekly tour of the newborn, pediatric and burn-care units, this time with a visitor in tow.


If You're Thinkingh of Living In: Colts Neck; 60 Miles From Broadway, A Rural Feel - At a Price
THERE is a good chance that a visitor who spends some time in Colts Neck may forget that he or she is so close to two major cities.
The Monmouth County township's wide open spaces, picturesque horse farms, enormous parks, and 10-acre-zoned homes resemble a small town in the Midwest, not one in central New Jersey.
Colts Neck is exactly 60 miles from mid-town Manhattan and 72 miles from Philadelphia.
Its population of 7,959 recorded in the 1990 census is up 20 percent in a decade.
Yet unlike neighboring towns such as Holmdel and Freehold, Colts Neck has maintained its rural atmosphere.


For the Poor, Defining Who Deserves What
DISTINGUISHING the deserving poor from the simply lazy, the scammers from the unfortunate, the truly needy from those who just don't want to work, used to be easy.
Lots of people had humble beginnings, but poverty often seemed to be a temporary aberration brought on by elemental forces beyond an individual's control: a parent died or became disabled, the economy shriveled or collapsed.
During the Depression, when thousands of desperate breadwinners lined up outside food pantries, Americans believed that it was society, and not the poor, that had failed.
Hence the beginning of an enduring welfare experiment.


Radio Frenzy Brings Riches
There's a lot of money in radio these days.
The value of companies that own radio stations has zoomed this year, amid optimism that companies will be able to make more money by buying up stations in one market.
All this has created a wonderful circle.
With their share prices zooming, the companies find it easy to sell more shares, thus raising cash to buy more radio stations.
That cash drives up the value of radio stations, which in turn makes the shares more valuable.
And so on and so on.


Medallions Mark the Spot
Willa Cather may be forever associated with the Great Plains, but she wrote her first novel, "Alexander's Bridge," in Greenwich Village in 1912.
Three decades later, Richard Wright wrote his autobiography, "Black Boy," in the same building.
It is one of 16 culturally significant New York sites being marked with medallions by the city's Historic Landmarks Preservation Center, a private, nonprofit group that is planning to expand the list.
The first three black-and-white terra-cotta markers are to be dedicated on Sept. 28, at the homes of Edna St.
Vincent Millay, the poet; and George and Ira Gershwin, and at a school designed by Alfred M. Butts, better known perhaps as the inventor of Scrabble.
Frank O'Hara, 1926-1966  Writer  90 University Place  Lived here 1957-59.
James J. Corbett, 1866-1933  Heavyweight boxing champion in the 1890's  221-04 Corbett Road, Bayside  Lived here 1903-1933 while pursuing a vaudeville and movie career.
Willa Cather, 1873-1947  Richard Wright, 1908-1960  Authors  82 Washington Place  E. E. Cummings, 1894-1962  Poet who made art of commas and parentheses  4 Patchin Place  Lived here for the last 40 years of his life.
Lady Deborah Moody, died circa 1659  Founder of the Gravesend Colony, the first New York settlement headed by a woman  27 Gravesend Neck Road  Settled here in 1643.
Alfred M. Butts, 1900-1993  Architect and game inventor
81-10 35th Avenue, Jackson Heights  Designed the Community United Methodist Church Educational Building, and members of the congregation helped him create Scrabble.
Hart Crane, 1899-1932  Poet  79 Charles Street  Lived here while supporting himself as an advertising writer.
Horace Greeley, 1811-1872  Journalist who said "Go West, young man!"  35 East 19th Street  Lived here while editor and publisher of The New York Tribune.
George Gershwin, 1898-1937  Composer  Ira Gershwin, 1896-1983  Lyricist  33 Riverside Drive  Between 1929 and 1933 they wrote the shows "Girl Crazy," "Of Thee I Sing" and "Let 'Em Eat Cake" here.
James Cagney, 1899-1986  Actor  34 Gramercy Park East  Lived here from 1965 to 1968.
Edna St.
Vincent Millay, 1882-1950  Poet  75 1/2 Bedford Street
Lived here in 1923-24 at the time she wrote the Pulitzer Prize-winning "Ballad of the Harp-Weaver."  Harold Ross, 1892-1951  Editor  412 West 47th Street  Lived here when he founded The New Yorker in 1925.
The New York City Building  Flushing Meadows-Corona Park  Built for the 1939 World's Fair and used again for the 1965 World's Fair, it was home to the United Nations from 1946 to 1950 and remodeled as the Queens Museum of Art in 1972.
Brooks Atkinson, 1894-1984  Drama critic of The New York Times  160 Riverside Drive  Lived here from 1928 to 1969.
Edwin Arlington Robinson, 1869-1935  Poet  121 Washington Place  Lived here at intervals from 1909 to 1912.
Dorothy Thompson, 1893-1961  Journalist, author of "I Saw Hitler"  237 East 48th Street  Lived here from 1941 to 1957.


Navy Keeps Up for a Half, Then Rutgers Pulls Away
Say this for Navy.
The Midshipmen may not be one of the best teams in college football, but they are tenacious and entertaining.
They gave Rutgers all kinds of problems tonight before the Scarlet Knights escaped with a 27-17 victory.
The freewheeling first half ended in a 17-17 tie, with each team kicking a field goal in the last 38 seconds.
But in the second half, Navy, operating from its unusual wingbone offense with two wide receivers and two slotbacks, gained only 51 yards.
It did not get past the Rutgers 28-yard line.


At D.M.V., Speeding Is Encouraged
Waiting in line at the Department of Motor Vehicle's Worth Street headquarters is a rite of passage for many New Yorkers, a social equalizer that brings people of every caste and class together in grumbling solidarity.
But these days, the average waiting time is 22 minutes, down from 97 minutes two and a half years ago, department officials say, thanks to an all-out assault on the problem that started in 1993.


Cuba's Drive for Tourists Stirs Neighbors to Action
AFTER years of deliberately ignoring tourism for ideological reasons, Cuba, which before the revolution led by Fidel Castro was the most popular destination in the Caribbean, has accelerated its efforts to attract foreign visitors and their hard currency.
The campaign has been so successful that Cuba's neighbors are having to devise new strategies to meet the growing Cuban challenge.
More than 600,000 tourists, most of them Europeans, Canadians or Latin Americans, visited Cuba in 1994, up from just over 300,000 in 1988, the year before the Soviet bloc collapsed.
Lured by a marketing blitz and offers of cheap package tours and charter flights, more than 100,000 Canadians went to Cuba last year.
At the same time, Canadian tourism to Miami was falling by nearly a third in 1994, in part because of concerns about crimes against tourists and the weakness of the Canadian dollar.


Candice L. Goldfarb, Scott F. Posner
Candice Laura Goldfarb, a daughter of Mary Jane Goldfarb of New York and the late Jack Goldfarb, is to be married today to Scott Fried Posner, a son of Susan and Samuel Posner of New York.
Rabbi David Posner is to perform the ceremony at the Stanhope Hotel in New York.
The bride, 26, is a graphics designer in New York for Ann Taylor, the women's clothing store chain.
Her father was the president of Goldfarb Brothers, a former textile manufacturing company in New York.


Gingrich Dismisses Clinton's Medicare Veto Threat as Posturing
Responding to President Clinton's threat to veto the Republican plan to overhaul Medicare, Speaker Newt Gingrich today accused the President of taking a hard line for political purposes rather than seeking to negotiate.
"His position was what I sadly thought it probably would be, which is totally political," Mr.
Gingrich told reporters after a town hall meeting on Medicare in his district.


Bruce Wright: Off the Bench, but on the Case
If anyone thought Justice Bruce Wright would slip silently into retirement in January after 25 often-controversial years on the New York bench, his lecture last Monday night in South Ozone Park was surely reason to think again.
His topic: "Avoiding Arrest in Racist New York City."


Elsewhere On the Dial
To the Editor:
Marc Gunther's article "At NPR, All Things Reconsidered"  [ Aug. 13 ]  regarding changes at National Public Radio may have given readers the impression that programs being dropped by NPR would no longer be available to listeners.
Not so.
Beginning in January, "Afropop Worldwide," a weekly showcase for African and African diaspora musical cultures, with Georges Collinet as host, will be distributed by Public Radio International (PRI) to 530 stations in the United States.
MELINDA WARD  Minneapolis The writer is senior vice president for programming for PRI.


Even With State Permit, Handicapped Can't Park
To the Editor:
The article about the troubles a New Jersey resident with disabilities faced in obtaining a handicap parking permit in New York City ("Long Road to Handicap Permit Is Paved With Tickets," Sept. 3) tells only a part of the story.


Corrections
A picture caption with the Art column on Sept. 3 about a painting at the Heckscher Museum of Art in Huntington misidentified the work and the artist.
It was "Eclipse of the Sun" by George Grosz, not "The Poetry of Moonlight" by Ralph Albert Blakelock.


Snapshots of the U.S. Economy: Some Clouds May Be Moving On; Retailing Is Sluggish But Looking Stronger
Scenes from a mall: Three women wait outside a Friendly's restaurant, their morning's purchases at their feet: four bags from Sears, three from the Disney Store and one each from the Gap and Woolworth's.
One of the three studies a Macy's "Housewares Sale" catalogue.
When a fourth woman arrives, they head toward Macy's.
A man in white shirt and tie, an accountant on his lunch break, strides empty-handed into the parking lot.
"The store didn't have the sneaker I wanted," he said.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Where Was the Chariot?
CHARLTON HESTON parted Main Street in Huntington last weekend.
On one side of the thoroughfare legions of Heston fans lined the sidewalk as far as the eye could see.
On the other side a few Huntingtonites tried to go about their shopping chores.
Moses may have come to town, but it was Saturday, and the dry cleaning had to be picked up.


POSTINGS: New Guide Published to Branch Brook Park in Newark; Sunday in the Park With a 16- by 25-Inch Map
Although Calvert Vaux and Frederick Law Olmsted proposed a Central Park in Newark in 1868, it was another Olmsted who later got the job: John Charles, Frederick's stepson and nephew. (John Charles's widowed mother married Frederick, who was her brother-in-law.)
John Charles Olmsted created Branch Brook Park, the first county park in the nation.
To celebrate the park's centennial, the Greensward Foundation has published a guide to its 359 acres.


Vidal and Buckley, Calley and My Lai
To the Editor:
The reviewer of Carol Polsgrove's "It Wasn't Pretty, Folks, but Didn't We Have Fun? Esquire in the Sixties" (Aug. 13) further garbles an already garbled account of what he terms "Gore Vidal's unfounded charge that Mr. Buckley was anti-Semitic, an assertion that Hayes  [ Esquire's editor ]  should have deleted." This is misleading, to say the least.


In Landmark Complaints, Bigotry Is Not the Issue . . .
To the Editor:
Your article missed a much better story: Jackson Heights has been working to achieve a balance with its many new foreign residents and business owners, and there are success stories.
The terra-cotta street signs on 82d Street show that ordinary citizens and business people were able to obtain landmark status after an arduous campaign.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
WRITERS IN SPEECH
Madeleine L'Engle, author of "A Wrinkle in Time" and some 40 additional books, will be the first speaker in UConn-Torrington's Litchfield County Writers Project series.


Word for Word/Sweetening the Bitter Pill; How a Republican Should Break Bad News to Grandma
LAST week Republican leaders in the House unveiled their plan to slash projected Medicare spending by $270 billion, or 14 percent, over the next seven years.
The breakdown of the cuts was not revealed.
Democrats accused Republicans of hiding the grim details from their constituents.
And House Speaker Newt Gingrich accused the Democrats of trying to "frighten 85-year-olds."


Recorder Guild Seeking Recruits
FOR the last 10 years, the Westchester Recorder Guild has been welcoming players at all skill levels to its monthly sessions of coaching and informal group performances.
"As we start our second decade of music making," said the guild's secretary, Carol Leibman, "we are supplementing our regular intermediate and advanced groups with a structured 10-week beginning class. This will provide an opportunity for adults with or without previous music experience to gain an introduction to this delightful instrument and the increasingly popular early music scene."
There will be an organizational meeting tomorrow at 8 P.M., an all-day workshop on Sept. 30 and regular convocations thereafter on the last Monday evening of each month, all at Emanuel Lutheran Church in Pleasantville.
For more details, call 741-2129 or 741-0301.


Irreconcilable Foes In Balanced 'Oleanna'
IT was devoid of sexual content," he says.
"I say it was not," she says.


Words and Pictures
From the title of the documentary "Listening To Children: A Moral Journey with Robert Coles" - Friday at 9 P.M. on Channel 13 - you might expect yet another in the well-born genre of programs about innocent children struggling with the cruelty of ghetto life.
And at first Dr.
Coles, the distinguished child psychiatrist and author, appearing here in his first television program, comes across as Mr.
Rogers on tour, gently asking, "Would you like to draw a picture for me?"
But the children take over and begin to shine, quietly but unquenchably.
They open up to him in remarkable ways, both verbally and on paper.
Dave, a boy in his early teens, with shaggy blond hair, dark eyes and baseball cap, doesn't look like a child whose violent rages force his family to send him to a group home.
Of his father, who departed before Dave was born, the boy says, "I think he left me because he thought I'd turn out to be a bad kid." Dave's drawings are almost colorless, except when he draws himself - in red.


Irish Cabinet Backs Lifting Divorce Ban
The Government of Prime Minister John Bruton has approved a constitutional amendment that, if approved in a referendum scheduled for the end of November, would permit divorce in overwhelmingly Roman Catholic Ireland for the first time.
The Cabinet's approval of the amendment on Wednesday effectively began the Government's campaign to allow divorce and the remarriage of divorced people, now explicitly prohibited by the Constitution.
The approval also ignited what is expected to be an emotional national debate on divorce, which the Roman Catholic hierarchy vehemently opposes and which the voters rejected 2 to 1 in a 1986 referendum.


Chatter: Surviving the Drought; Falling Leaves And Danger of Fire
My lawn is brown, the leaves are falling way too early and I am waiting for the Pinelands to burst into flames.
It will make for a heck of a ride down the parkway!


M. J. Goldfein, Robert D. Eigen
Margaret Julia Goldfein, the daughter of Valerie and Robert Goldfein of New York, was married last evening to Robert Douglas Eigen, a son of Natalie Eigen and Dr.
Stuart Eigen of Hewlett Bay Park, L.I.
Rabbi Ronald B. Sobel performed the ceremony at the St.
Regis Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Eigen, 23, graduated from the University of Vermont.
She is an assistant teacher at the Rodeph Sholom Nursery School in New York.
Her father is the managing partner in Goldfein Properties, a real estate firm in New York.
Her mother is a coordinator of the waiting room for families of patients undergoing surgery at the Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York.


Snapshots of the U.S. Economy: Some Clouds May Be Moving On; Despite Higher Rates, Miles Wear on Trucker
Charles Holman had no time to clean out the mud and the dung from his livestock trailer because he had to drive 760 miles after delivering a truckload of cattle in Colorado the day before.
Now, on a west Texas ranch, he was coaxing and prodding 111 terrified calves into the trailer, a double-decker aluminum labyrinth of cramped compartments.


... And Queens Immigrants Deserve Warm Acceptance
To the Editor:
Adding to the appeal of Richard F. Shepard's article ("Memories of My Queens," Sept. 3) was his recognition that today's ethnic newcomers to Queens will have memories far different from his but no less significant.
At a time when a Presidential candidate spouts xenophobia, shamelessly using the Statue of Liberty as backdrop, Mr.
Shepard's warm-hearted acceptance of the recent immigrants to his beloved borough is a breath of fresh air.
LOU D'ANGELO  Upper East Side


The Art and Markets of the Middle Ages
ANYONE with an extra suit of chain mail in the closet, hearken: you can don that knightwear next Sunday at the 1995 Medieval Festival in Fort Tryon Park.
For those fascinated with days when chivalry ruled, the festival offers a setting as authentic as it gets.
The area around the Cloisters will be transformed into a medieval market town for the day, with the museum standing in for a castle.
Jugglers, jesters, magicians and a puppeteer with a 40-foot dragon will roam the grounds.
The Ensemble for Early Music and I Guilliari di Piazza will offer serenades, while blacksmiths, illuminators, glass blowers and falconry experts demonstrate their Middle Ages arts.
And everyone -- including the public -- is expected to dress in historic garb.


Pickets Help Uproot Suspected Brothel, but Battle Goes On
The first hint of the goings-on within the modest row house at 43-36 Colden Street in Flushing came earlier this summer, when neighbors noticed how frequently men traveling by cab or limousine visited the house.
Their curiosity turned to anger when they learned that the house was a massage parlor, Beautiful Spa, which advertised in newspapers' classified sections.


Chicago
Big, burly and imposing, like Chicago itself, the Civic Opera House is 45 stories of stone, shaped like a huge throne, on the bank of the Chicago River in the city's frenetic Loop.
Lyric Opera of Chicago has sold out every season for years in its splendid Art Deco space.
Built in 1929, the theater seats 3,600.
Its central doorway is flanked by 30-foot-high columns with Deco capitals.
Gold and shades of red warm the auditorium; there are chandeliers throughout, and the huge lobby, with bars serving food and drinks, is exuberantly Art Deco.


Bruce Wright: Off the Bench, but on the Case
If anyone thought Justice Bruce Wright would slip silently into retirement in January after 25 often-controversial years on the New York bench, his lecture last Monday night in South Ozone Park was surely reason to think again.
His topic: "Avoiding Arrest in Racist New York City."


Murder at the Hospice
IN THE NAME OF MERCY  By Nicholas Delbanco. 310 pp. New York: Warner Books.


A Church's Daily Rite Of Sadness
The coffin carrying the body of a 47-year-old woman was brought up the steps, as six family members and friends walked into St.
Barbara's Roman Catholic Church in Bushwick, Brooklyn.
The doors then closed against the morning sunlight, and from inside the vast emptiness of the ornate old church, voices rose.
The singers were no formal choir.
Most were grandparents, elderly Hispanic women in white knit shawls, men with canes and graying beards.
But their 34 voices were strong, easily carrying the hymn "Juntos Como Hermanos," or "Together as Brothers" back to the coffin near the doorway.


The Young, the Bold, the Irish


Conundrum
A pelican perches in a pine tree on the slope of a green mountain.
In the foreground, among the palmetto and bluegrass, a wolverine, a nutmeg-chewing gopher, a beaver, a badger and a coyote gather around the treasure they have discovered, hidden away beneath a beehive, from which a diamond shines brightly.
What on earth does this painting represent?
Answer to riddle The painting combines images of the more or less official epithets of 14 states, e.g., the Pelican State, Louisiana.
The others are: the Pine Tree State (Maine); the Green Mountain State (Vermont); the Palmetto State (South Carolina); the Bluegrass State (Kentucky); the Wolverine State (Michigan); the Nutmeg State (Connecticut); the Gopher State (Minnesota); the Beaver State (Oregon); the Badger State (Wisconsin); the Coyote State (South Dakota); the Treasure State (Montana); the Beehive State (Utah), and the Diamond State (Delaware).


Twilight of a Baleboosteh
MRS. TED BLISS  By Stanley Elkin. 292 pp. New York: Hyperion.


Britain's Ugly Duckling Library Ready to Fly
If told as an epic, the story of the construction of the new British Library would rival Odysseus' 20 years' siege of Troy and his wandering in search of Ithaca.
Except that it's longer and more heartbreaking.
But maybe, just maybe, this one too will have a happy ending.


Uncovering History, Layer Upon Layer, in Salonika
Salonika, or Thessaloniki,  as the Greeks call it, is a redeveloper's nightmare.
A few years ago, the city fathers decided to build an underground  parking lot, only to find remains of Turkish buildings below  which there was successive evidence of Byzantine, Roman  and Hellenistic civilizations.
At an earlier date, when they prepared to construct new law courts, they ended up unearthing more and more of one of the largest and most important agoras of 2,000 years ago.
In each case, the  builders moved out and the archeologists in -- and why not?
There can be few more fascinatingly layered, textured cities  anywhere in the world than Salonika.
If that's bad news for the redeveloper, it's good news for the visitor, and there is plenty more to report.
Considering how much there is to see in Salonika, and how well placed a center it is for trips beyond, it is an astonishingly untouristy place.
The tacky souvenir shops that so disfigure Athens are entirely missing.
Salonika has its ugly pockmarks and drab concrete spots -- what Greek city hasn't? -- but the lower town has a smarter look and a more sophisticated, cosmopolitan feel than almost anywhere in central Athens.
Myself, I'd rather wander through the towering colonnades of Aristotelous Street toward the seafront, stopping for an iced coffee or a browse through one of its many bookstalls, than  do battle with the throng surging past the postcard stands  to the Parthenon.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Sports Authority Joins A Cluster of Superstores
When Sports Authority selected the site for its first Queens store, which opened recently in Long Island City, it chose a crowded neighborhood that is within easy commuting distance of Manhattan, said Mark Walker, Sports Authority's vice president for real estate.
It also opted for an area with several other superstores that sell different types of merchandise.
The new Sports Authority, which opened on Aug. 17, is in a 43,000-square-foot space on Northern Boulevard, off Woodside Avenue.
It has parking for 130 cars.
"The area has turned into a hotbed of big-box retailers," Mr.
Walker said.
The store, which sells a wide variety of sports equipment, from tennis racquets, golf clubs and bicycles to athletic footwear, is now a Northern Boulevard neighbor of Toys 'R' Us as well as Staples office equipment and Tops appliance superstores.
All are within six blocks of one another.
Mr.
Walker said the demographic profiles of the neighborhood suited the company, which is based in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
He said Sports Authority planned to open another Queens store, probably in Forest Hills or Middle Village, within a year.
Sri Lankan Home Cooking Moves Into a Restaurant
When Kaluwage Wijesinghe moved to the city from Colombo, Sri Lanka, a decade ago, he worked as a clerk in a video store.
Fellow Sri Lankans would meet after work and pay him to cook their native dishes at his Times Square apartment.
Mr.
Wijesinghe honed his culinary skills to the point that on Sept. 6, he opened his own restaurant, Lakruwana, at 358 West 44th Street, at Ninth Avenue.
"There's a big Sri Lankan community in the neighborhood," said Mr.
Wijesinghe (pronounced wee-jee-SING-ha), who has invested $35,000 in the business.
He likened Sri Lankan food to Indian cuisine, but said it is spicier.
Lakruwana specializes in hoppers: round rice-and-flour pancakes that are stuffed with curried lamb, chicken or beef, chutney and basmati rice.
They sell for $6.
Prices for other items range from $3.50 for pureed vegetable soup to $9.95 for entrees like shrimp biriyani.
Japanese Crystal Company Is Moving to Madison Ave.
Hoya, the Japanese crystal company known worldwide for its camera and eyeglass lenses, is moving its only free-standing store in the United States from Park Avenue and 57th Street to Madison Avenue and 52d Street in late November.
The new 1,450-square-foot space is designed to resemble the shape of molten glass at the tip of a glassblower's blowpipe, said Alice M. Chappell, Hoya's president for United States operations.
In its New York store, the company, with $1.3 billion in sales worldwide, sells crystal objects, from a small, round dish for $25 to unique, signed crystal sculptures for $35,000.


Jump Suits
Jackets made of shiny, high-tech fabrics take a great leap forward.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: VILLAGES, EAST AND WEST Post-Bohemia Crisis: What Should Bleecker Street Be?; At Old Village Gate, New Acts Are Signed, With CVS as Headliner
The Village Gate -- the sprawling, barn-like Greenwich Village institution where jazz greats like Theolonious Monk and Miles Davis once held forth, where the Byrds made their debut and where Dustin Hoffman worked as a waiter and Sam Shepard washed dishes -- will soon be the home of a quintessentially mallish drug and convenience store: CVS pharmacy, as well as three smaller commercial properties: an Italian restaurant, a health-food restaurant and a jewelry store.
CVS will occupy 9,000 square feet in the historic building at 160 Bleecker, built in 1897 as a single-room-occupancy hotel.
Its lease is for 10 years, and it is expected to open around the beginning of 1996.
Under a 12-year lease, Trattoria Bologna, described by a lawyer for the owner as a northern Italian restaurant, will occupy 3,000 square feet and an outdoor cafe.
Ziggy's Jewelry Salon will take up 550 square feet and is expected to open at the end of October, said Ziggy Appias, who owns another Bleecker Street jewelry store, Ziggy's Originals.
The contractor for the health-food restaurant, Christopher Rozycki, said the owner was out of town and unavailable for comment.


For Fall, Three Simple Gifts
AS fall approaches, the culinary palette goes from the vibrant reds, yellows and greens of summer to honeyed tones.
The palate also changes, preferring warm richness and spice to the salad freshness of summer.
"In a Shaker Kitchen" by Norma Macmillan (Simon &amp; Schuster), which describes the Shaker way of life in its introduction, is a wonderful source for autumn recipes.
Soups, casseroles, hearty baked savories and sweets fill its pages.


LAST DANCE
THIRTY YEARS AGO, THE LAS VEGAS SHOWGIRL WAS A flourishing species -- a pink-plumed icon of every kind of seduction that the city had to offer.
These days, though, her numbers are dwindling.
Only about a third of Vegas's big-ticket shows even include showgirls, thanks in part to what tourism officials call "the New Vegas." On this same patch of desert where the Rat Pack once caroused with mobsters, parents and children now line up for virtual reality, water slides and "Starlight Express." While the two extremes of the city -- family fun and old-fashioned smut -- are doing a brisk trade, showgirls float in a sort of pop limbo reserved for the naughty-but-nice.
Paradoxically, even as Las Vegas tries to brighten its image, Hollywood is churning out some of the darkest portrayals of the city to date.
Martin Scorsese's "Casino" arrives this fall, and on Friday, Paul Verhoeven's "Showgirls" opens.
Since the main character of "Showgirls" spends a good bit of time writhing in a strip joint before she hits it big at the Stardust Hotel, Las Vegas's showgirls are preparing to defend their honor.


SEPT. 10-16: Waning Wanderlust; Census Finds Americans Less Eager to Move
The proportion of Americans moving from one state to another is at its lowest level since 1950, the Census Bureau said last week, and the percentage of those changing address -- either across the street or across the continent -- is at its second lowest level since 1948.
In the 1950's and 1960's, 20 percent of the population changed residences; in 1993 to 1994 16.7 percent did.
Demographers, sociologists and economists blame the trend on an aging population, the growth of two-income families and persistent economic insecurity.
To some, the trend signals more.


Why Rates Look Good At the Local Credit Union
WHEN Carolyn Rickard received a check for several thousand dollars from her mother's estate last month, she decided to shop around for a certificate of deposit.
She received quotes from two banks and a savings and loan.
Then she went to a credit union.
"The credit union's interest rates were higher," says Ms.
Rickard, 50, who works for the Texas State Teachers Association Member Benefit Corporation in Austin.
So she ended up with three C.D.'s, with varying dates of maturity, at the Austin Area Teachers Federal Credit Union.


Legal Maze Gives Dole Big Edge in New York G.O.P. Primary
With time fast running out on Republicans hoping to run against Senator Bob Dole in New York State's Presidential primary, only one candidate, Gov.
Pete Wilson of California, has begun building an organization to challenge the state's ballot-access laws, the most Byzantine and demanding in the nation.
Though other leading Republican candidates have said they would like to take on Senator Dole, the state party's choice, no others appear prepared to devote the immense resources needed to make a serious attempt to enter the primary.


The Situation for Murrell With Jets: Lots of Numbers, Not Enough Plays
The leading rusher on the Jets is Adrian Murrell.
The leading receiver on the Jets is Adrian Murrell.
The leading bench-warmer on the Jets is Adrian Murrell.
For the third straight year, Murrell, the Jets' best summertime runner, finds himself a second-stringer, owning the despised (for him) designation of "situation back."


Some Guidelines for Making Loans to Relatives
IN the interest of family harmony, here are a few tips for anyone making a loan to a relative:  *
Treat it like a business venture.
D.
K.
Shah, a financial planner in Weston, Mass., advises people to draw up "a promissory note that spells out all conditions, including a repayment schedule, interest fees, and collateral, if that's appropriate."


In Landmark Complaints, Bigotry Is Not the Issue . . .
To the Editor:
In your Sept. 3 article "Conformity and Commerce Collide in a Landmark District" a merchant tries to explain away efforts to remove the carnival monstrosity of a sign above his store as an example of bias against immigrants: "They're not happy with us here." That kind of defense against legitimate landmark complaints is getting a bit tired.
In Ridgewood, for example, anti-Italian bias was foolishly alleged to be the reason why the community board disagreed with some of the plans for the Italian street fair.


Correction
A picture caption about Joseph Goebbels on Sept. 3 with an article about the photographer Alfred Eisenstaedt misstated the date.
It was 1933, not 1944.


Tokyo
Nearly four centuries ago, a young priestess in Kyoto, desperate to raise funds for the repair of a shrine, dressed up like a man, and, with a group of friends, mostly women, performed a comic sketch about secret lovers.
Thus began the Japanese dramatic form known as Kabuki.
It soon became extremely popular, and rowdy.
In 1629, after the actresses began practicing prostitution on the side, the authorities banned all women from the stage, an edict that remained in effect for some 250 years.


Falling Leaves
In autumn, the amateur artist turns to foliage -- the proverbial riot of color.
Frank Stella, the painter whose place in the art hierarchy is somewhere above the tree line, draws a more austere inspiration from the same source.
For the past half-dozen years Stella, his associate Earl Childress and two engineers, Alex Cot and, initially, the late Peter Rice, have been working on the Leaves Project.
It is an architectural design for a building with a roof that resembles two leaves intersecting in space, as if falling in midair.
The design is now being considered by clients in America, Europe and Japan.
Frank Lloyd Wright built a house called Falling Water.
Maybe this one will be called Falling Leaves.


McDowell's Back Strain Puts Damper on Victory
Jack McDowell against Mike Mussina is a matchup of two of the best pitchers in the league.
Yankee Manager Buck Showalter called their skirmish last month -- a 3-0 New York victory at Yankee Stadium -- the finest combined pitching performance he had ever witnessed.
Jokingly, Showalter wondered whether tonight's game might end with a 10-9 score.
He was almost prophetic, although he did not include an injury to his pitcher in the prediction.
Both McDowell and Mussina were reviewing the messy game in their minds when the Yankees finally emerged with a 6-5 victory in a rain-shortened game against the Orioles at Camden Yards.
Mussina departed after being battered for five quick runs in the fifth.
McDowell ambled off one inning later, having given up five runs himself over five innings, with an upper back strain that has troubled him for several starts.


On Sunday; In Jail Stripes, Singing Dirges Over Pinstripes
LET'S remember that, officially, Dale Tippins is the bad guy in this tale.
Mr.
Tippins, a former school security guard from Brooklyn, was convicted in 1986 of arranging the sale of two pounds of cocaine to a man who turned out to be a police informer.
It was his first offense, but he received one of those whopping war-on-drugs prison sentences: 18 years to life.
Mr.
Tippins feels he was lured into crime by the informer, but he acknowledges that he went astray.
It happens.
That's why there are lawyers and prosecutors and judges.
Officially they were the good guys in Mr.
Tippins's case.
But eventually they, too, went astray.
From his cell, Mr.
Tippins marveled at the deals they cut to avoid heavy sentences.


Heather Beatty, Todd D. Raker
Heather Spire Beatty, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce L. Beatty of Pound Ridge, N.Y., was married yesterday to Todd Dunkin Raker, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gilbert D. Raker of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
Thomas A. Hughart performed the ceremony at the Bedford (N.Y.) Presbyterian Church.
The bridegroom's twin brother, Geoffrey Raker, was the best man, and the bride's twin sister, Holly Beatty, was the maid of honor.


Beautiful Spa: Not So Far Gone
The first hint of the goings-on within the modest row house at 43-36 Colden Street in Flushing came earlier this summer, when neighbors noticed how frequently men traveling by cab or limousine visited the house.
Their curiosity turned to anger when they learned that the house was a massage parlor, Beautiful Spa, which advertised in newspapers' classified sections.


Kerrin Kennedy, Simon D. Perkins
Kerrin Ann Kennedy, a daughter of Joan C. Kennedy of Greenwich, N.Y., and the late John Clark Kennedy Jr., was married yesterday to Simon David Perkins, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond S. B. Perkins of Plymouth, England.
The Rev.
David Kelly performed the ceremony at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church in Greenwich.
Mrs.
Perkins is a software services brand manager in New York for the International Business Machines Corporation.
She graduated from St.
John's University.
Her father bred thoroughbred horses in Greenwich.
Her mother is an accounts payable clerk at the Glens Falls (N.Y.) Cement Company.
The bride's paternal grandfather, the late Mr.
Clark Sr., founded Yachting magazine.


Group Sees Ozone Danger In Illicit Chemical Trade
As the deadline approaches for the United States to stop making almost all ozone-destroying refrigerants for domestic use, a private group is estimating that up to 22,000 tons a year, or one-third the amount sold in this country, is smuggled in.
The Federal Government has no current estimate of the amount of the chemicals, most of them chlorofluorocarbons, or CFC's, entering the country illegally.
But last year officials said it was about 10,000 tons.


Long Island Q&amp;A: Stephen Davies; Finding a Gold Lining as a Result of Some Computer Failures
WHAT should be done if a storm, power failure, fire or flood knocks out all the computer terminals at work?
Stephen Davies has built a successful business pondering questions like that.
Mr.
Davies is president of the U.S.
Computer Group in Farmingdale, a company that provides computer maintenance, products and solutions in the New York metropolitan region.
Mr.
Davies founded U.S.
Computer, he said, because he thought a small independent company could provide better repair service at lower costs than the computer manufacturers.


WHO WILL FACE THE MUSIC?
Kolbert caricatures the members of A.A.R.P. as selfish opponents of rational reform.
But she fails to note that PAC 20/20, the Concord Coalition, the National Association of Manufacturers and other backers of drastic change for Social Security have their own axes to grind.
For instance, the Simpson-Kerrey bill would also present a windfall to the mutual fund and private money-management industries by allowing individuals to place 2 percent of their gross pay in a special investment account.
It has been estimated that this could shift nearly $100 million a year of Social Security money to the private sector by 2005.
Almost every other "reform" proposal calls for some degree of privatization as well.
ERIC LAURSEN South Norwalk, Conn.


Hilton Creates Prize for Aid Organizations
A $1 million prize for a relief organization for helping to alleviate suffering is being established by the Conrad N. Hilton Foundation of Los Angeles and will be awarded for the first time in June 1996.
The prize will go to "the nongovernmental organization judged to have made the most significant contribution to ease the impact or root out the causes of human suffering," the foundation says.


Reluctant Conscripts In The March of Technology
AFTER resisting for years, Robert Post finally succumbed to electronic mail.
Mr.
Post, a curator of technology at the Smithsonian Institution's Museum of American History and a fellow at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, had long watched with amused detachment as E-mail became first fashionable and then pervasive in academic circles.
But more recently, he felt the peer pressure to join the E-mail community.


New Hampshire Cautions Dole: No Lead Is Safe
There is a small slate on the wall of Bob Dole's campaign headquarters here on which workers chalk the number of days left until this state's 1996 Presidential primary -- as ever, the first in the nation.
The other day, the number was 160.


A Dream in Retreat -- A special report.; Serbs of 'Greater Serbia' Find Suffering and Decay
Ljubica Solic, like her people, is at the end of the road.
In a schoolyard filled with mud-spattered tractors and trailers, she has discovered the misery bequeathed by the great Serbian illusion.
Mrs.
Solic, dressed in black, slumped on the ground, is a Serbian refugee.
She fled the Krajina area of Croatia, 450 miles away, when it fell to the Croatian Army last month.
Her husband was killed by the Croats during the retreat.


Hot


Christina E. Lowder, C.R. Winston
Christina Elizabeth Lowder, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard B. Lowder of Pelham, N.Y., was married yesterday to Christopher Reeves Winston, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
A.
Lee Winston of Pelham Manor, N.Y.
The Rev.
David S. Hoag performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Parish of Christ the Redeemer in Pelham Manor.
Mrs.
Winston, 26, until recently taught the fourth grade at the Windward School in White Plains.
She graduated from Manhattanville College and received a master's degree in elementary education from Iona College.
Her father retired as the director of corporate development at American Brands in Greenwich, Conn.


The Ubiquitous Kate Moss, Nowhere to Be Found
"The more visible they make me," Kate Moss writes of the sniping news media in "Kate," her new book of photographs that will do more for her bank account than it will for art or literacy, "the more invisible I become."
It seemed that the British uberwaif was being true to her word at the James Danziger Gallery in SoHo on Sept. 11; more than 90 minutes into a two-hour opening reception for a show of photographs from the book, published by Rizzoli's Universe Publishing, she was nowhere to be found.


Stephanie D'Abruzzo, Craid Shemin
Stephanie Ann D'Abruzzo, a puppeteer in New York, is to be married today to Craig Farrell Shemin, an associate creative director and a staff writer for Jim Henson Productions in New York.
Justice Carol H. Arber of State Supreme Court in New York, is to perform the ceremony at the Beekman Tower Hotel in New York.
The bride, 23, and the bridegroom, 28, graduated from Northwestern University.
Both work in New York.


Ann M. Rehm, Scott Pulver
Ann Melissa Rehm, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Daniel Rehm of Des Moines, was married yesterday to Robert Scott Pulver, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Smith Pulver of Atlanta.
The Rev.
Gerard C. Reedy, the president of the College of the Holy Cross, performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Sorrows Church in Essex, Conn.
Mrs.
Pulver, 34, is a consultant with Pile &amp; Company, a marketing communications consulting company in Boston.
She is a graduate of Hartwick College.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of the Meredith Corporation, the media communications company in Des Moines.


Newest Species Evolves: Hybrid of Boat and Car
ONE night in the early 1960's, my father remembered vividly, a California Highway Patrolman pulled him over during the commute home from his foreign car dealership in San Francisco.
Only police cars can have colored lights, said the officer, pointing to the red and green running lights on my father's unusual vehicle.
"The Coast Guard requires the lights," my father protested in vain as he was handed a ticket.
Such was life for anyone who drove a 1950's German import called the Amphicar, the first amphibious vehicle sold to consumers.
A squat little convertible with two spindly propellers sticking out of its tail, the car always drew attention, though it wasn't really well suited to either land or water.


Forget the Channel Tunnel. Dream BIG.
DOES going from London to New York by railroad sound like a pipe dream?
Add that the route would go through the plains of Poland, Moscow, Siberia, Alaska, Canada, the Pacific Northwest and Chicago, and it might be asked how potent was the stuff being smoked in that pipe.
But that's the vision, or dream, of a consortium of financiers, engineers, entrepreneurs and others who have assembled into the Interhemispheric Bering Strait Tunnel &amp; Railroad Group.
The group, incorporated in November 1991, wants to build an intercontinental railway to link the United States and Russia by tunneling under the Bering Strait.


At Hopper House Center, One of the Smoothest of Lineups
IT used to be that when the talk turned to exhibitions at the Hopper House Art Center here, the terms elegance and professionalism rarely came to mind.
But through this 1858 structure, which Edward Hopper called home for the first 28 years of his life, blows a new wind and, among other assets, it has brought a full-time director, Paula Madawick.
She selected Manuel Gonzalez for the task of sifting through the 160 artists applying for inclusion in this year's small works show.
To suppose that as vice president and executive director of the Chase Manhattan Bank's art program, Mr.
Gonzalez is overqualified for the job is to overlook the years that he spent in the esthetic boot camp that is Manhattan, first as co-director of the Sidney Janis Gallery, then as director of Holly Solomon.
But juried exhibitions being only as good as the work submitted, Mr.
Gonzalez's expertise alone does not explain why this is one of the smoothest lineups -- perhaps the smoothest -- that I have ever observed in or around New York City.
So consistent is the level of the art, not to mention the taste in framing, that it is hard to believe that Mr.
Gonzalez was a judge and not a curator starting from scratch.


Towns Putting It in Writing: Farms Are Loud and Smelly
Ronnie Lee of Lee's Turkey Farms gets along with his neighbors -- all 55 of them, who live in the subdivisions called Brooktree and Warren Estates and Devonshire that surround his family's farm 10 miles southeast of Princeton.
But just in case one of them decided he didn't like the smell of turkey manure or the way Mr.
Lee sprays his apple trees, Mr.
Lee is glad that East Windsor is introducing a right-to-farm ordinance on Tuesday.
On Old York Road, Michelle and Butch Blasig are even happier.
If the township adopts the law, as it is expected to, they stand a much better chance of selling the development rights on their 96-acre spread to a state farmland preservation program for about $7,000 an acre.


The Horse Of the Day Lays Claim To the Year
New York opened its countdown to the Breeder's Cup yesterday with an all-star show built around six Grade I stakes, but the spotlight was captured by two horses who gave championship performances: Cigar, who won the Woodward Stakes for his 10th victory in a row and a tighter grasp on the title of Horse of the Year, and Inside Information, who won the Ruffian Handicap by 11 lengths and may be the grandest filly in the land.
Cigar, in particular, was so brilliant that Jack Nicholson, the film star who is known for his fondness for cigars, joined the horse in the winner's circle and said, "I bought a $5 ticket to have it framed and signed." And Mike Smith, after directing Inside Information into the winner's circle, said with some wonder, "You would pay for the privilege of taking a ride like that."


Crime
Sherlock Holmes in love?
In A MONSTROUS REGIMENT OF WOMEN (Thomas Dunne/St. Martin's, $22.95), the great detective does indeed lose his heart to Mary Russell, the clever orphan he tutored in Laurie R. King's enchanting earlier mystery "The Beekeeper's Apprentice." He also flings aside his idiosyncratic genius and his proud, disdainful ways to mince along in the shadow of his protegee -- even to the point of drawing her bath and preparing her meals.
It is not a pretty sight.
In the end, though, it isn't romantic love as much as the novel's post-World War I period that diminishes the brilliant ratiocinator, who pales into transparency outside his own Victorian era.
But if her 60-year-old mentor looks peaked, 21-year-old Mary, who narrates this story, blooms with intelligence and vivacity in the less rigid social climate of 1920's England.
An Oxford scholar studying "the feminine aspects of the Divine," Mary is invited into the inner circle of a feminist religious temple whose evangelical leader attracts genteel young ladies with immense personal fortunes -- some of whom meet untimely ends.


Seeing South Africa As the U. S. A., 1954
ALMOST anywhere in South Africa, an American can pull off a perfectly paved road into a time warp.
It's called a petrol station, and several smiling attendants will converge on the car, one washing the windows, one checking the oil, one filling the tires, one carefully topping off the tank with premium.
The bathrooms are spotless, and a 56-cent tip -- not necessarily even expected -- leaves everyone beaming.
Welcome to the new South Africa, a country that despite rapid political change remains for now much like 1950's America, for better or worse.
At least that's the way it can seem to a newly arrived American, particularly a white more likely to encounter a cocoon of white privilege in daily life than the hard lot of the black majority (more of which later).
Wistful, or Not
Because of years of international isolation, many of the changes of the 60's simply bypassed South Africa.
And so, despite the essentially European nature of much of white South African culture, a white American here can feel a sense of deja vu; visiting black Americans will no doubt be decidedly less wistful.


In Worthington State Forest, an Uneasy Wait Continues
It has been the most stressful of summers for firefighters in Worthington State Forest, a 5,770-acre preserve adjacent to the Delaware River, off the last New Jersey exit on Interstate 80 westbound.
On Aug. 23, a fire broke out, eventually consuming 20 acres.
On Aug. 31, there was another fire, covering 750 acres and forcing a 10-mile stretch of the Appalachian Trail to close.


SEPT. 10-16: Preying in Cyberspace; Child Pornographers Raided On Computer Network
Federal authorities have invaded cyberspace to investigate child pornography and molestation.
With more than a dozen arrests and searches of 125 homes and offices around the country last week, the F.B.I. capped a two-year, undercover investigation into the use of America Online, the nation's largest commercial computer network, to trade images of children and lure minors into sex.
Agents assigned to the inquiry posed as underage computer users with names like "One4fun4yu." They agreed to meet adults who were then arrested after arranging sexual encounters through chat lines.


Time to Set Out Next Spring's Surprises
FORTUNATE indeed are those gardeners, especially those with an eye for the unusual, who remembered to mail in their orders for hardy spring-flowering bulbs during the summer.
If the orders have already been shipped, these foresighted planners are now able to tuck the bulbs into their appointed places.


The New Face of British Labor
Tony Blair, the popular new leader of Britain's Labor Party, has gone through a summer of testing, facing his first real criticisms within the party since taking over in July 1994.
The internal arguments are sure to continue through the Labor Party Conference in October.
But the summer's battles seem to have had a salutary effect, clarifying Mr.
Blair's vision for a modernized party without noticeably denting his commanding lead in the opinion polls.
Labor still holds a better than 30 point margin over the ruling Conservatives, with the next election due no later than April 1997.
America's ties with Britain will remain strong no matter which party wins the next British election.
But it is encouraging to see Britain's main opposition party reviving so smartly after more than 15 years of eclipse by Margaret Thatcher and then John Major.
Labor's comeback makes British democracy stronger.


A Dusty Eyesore Bites the Dust
The sprawling lot was arguably Union Square's biggest eyesore, a stubborn blemish in an up-and-coming neighborhood bustling with retail activity.
Today, the lot, which runs from 13th to 14th Streets and from Broadway to Fourth Street, is a construction site obscured from view by a wooden fence.
The Related Companies is planning to build a 300,000-square-foot residential and retail development on the land.
The company recently demolished the only structure on the site, the long-vacant Berkey Building, the former home of The Village Voice.


Selling, as the Bookworm Turns
Three months ago, the Burlington Book Shop, a decades-old fixture at 1082 Madison Avenue, closed its doors, the latest in a long list of independent book shops to fold under pressure from big chain stores like Barnes &amp; Noble.
But last week the store was back in a new edition, Crawford Doyle Booksellers.
And its new owners -- Judy Crawford and John Doyle -- say they know how to buck the trend.
"The way we're going to survive versus the chains," Mr.
Doyle said, "is with book knowledge, creating a forum for people who like to talk about books and authors and get book ideas when they're buying."


Rock-and-Roll Shrine Honors a Music Myth
To the Editor:
Cleveland's claim to be host to the Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame is based largely on the myth that the disk jockey Alan Freed coined the term "rock-and-roll."


Nancy Lago, Harold Adrion
Nancy Lago, an architect in New York, was married yesterday to Harold Lewis Adrion, an international tax lawyer in New York.
The Rev.
Ernest Hunt performed the Episcopal ceremony at the American Cathedral in Paris.
Ms.
Lago, who is keeping her name, graduated from Virginia Polytechnic Institute and received a master's degree in landscape architecture from Harvard University.
She is a daughter of Annajulia Lago of Paoli, Pa., and the late Vincent P. Lago.
The bride's father was a telecommunications specialist for the Central Intelligence Agency in Athens, Manila and London.


By the United Nations, The Global Palate
CAFE DE PARIS + (212) 486-1411; 924 Second Avenue, at 49th Street; $; American Express, Mastercard, Visa
A reliable neighborhood spot, this inviting little bistro can be recommended for its pleasing wholesome French fare at moderate prices.
The menu features a three-course dinner, including a mixed green salad with vinaigrette, tender sliced entrecote (actually a shell steak) served with a house-secret herb sauce and french fries, dessert and coffee for $25.50 (cash only).
From the a la carte menu, there are appetizers of mussels a la mariniere; baked snails in Pernod and gratinee, and smoked salmon with dill sauce, onions and capers.
Main courses include roast duck with mixed fruits and wild rice; grilled rack of lamb with a medley of vegetables; chicken Basquaise, with a sauce of white wine, tomatoes, peppers, onions, olives and almonds, served over rice pilaf, and grilled steak with a green peppercorn sauce. (Articles: 11/3/ 89, 2/4/94)  CHIN CHIN **  (212) 888-4555; 216 East 49th Street; $$$; all major credit cards
Fans of "uptown"-style Chinese cooking flock to this superior establishment, handsomely designed with banquettes, Oriental pottery and flattering lighting.
Recommended to start are the pan-fried dumplings with a pork and ginger filling; crisp fried squid, clams in ginger broth, and shredded duck salad with coriander.
Among the main-course selections are Mongolian shredded pork in a spicy chili and cucumber sauce, accompanied by steamed watercress; steamed or fried whole sea bass; diced chicken with candied walnuts and leeks; prawns Sichuan style; three-glass chicken, and Peking duck. (Review: 5/3/91; revisited: 2/24/95)  DIWAN GRILL ++ (212) 593-5425; 148 East 48th Street; $$; all major credit cards
This elegant branch of the popular Jackson Diner, in the Jackson Heights section of Queens, specializes in a vibrant mix of northern Indian dishes.
The setting is spacious, with comfortable tables, colorful banquettes and attractive lighting, and service is amiable.
A good way to begin is with the platter of diaphanous papadums or peppery lentil wafers accompanied by small dishes of sweet-and-sour tamarind sauce and spicy coriander-mint sauce; a fried dish of minced shrimp mixed with sesame seeds, flour and spices called shrimp ki tikki; crisp and clean pakoras, or fried wedges of zucchini, cauliflower florets and other vegetables coated with chickpea flour, and smoky karare quails, marinated in yogurt and cooked in the clay oven.
Familiar entrees include rogan josh, tender morsels of lamb in a complex spicy sauce; seekh kabab, and fish tikka, bite-size pieces of salmon roasted in the tandoor. ($25 and Under: 5/6/94)  MARICHU ++ (212) 370-1866; 342 East 46th Street, Turtle Bay; $$; all major credit cards
Brick walls and wood beams characterize the setting of this inviting little mom-and-pop operation, which specializes in Basque cooking.
At lunch, the restaurant is packed with patrons from the United Nations; dinner is a more tranquil affair.
The food comes in large portions and includes appetizers of shrimp in garlic sauce; a subtle fish soup with shrimp, monkfish and clams in a broth with white wine and saffron; cold gazpacho; Serrano ham with olives, and dill-marinated salmon served on a bed of greens.
Among the main courses are tender baby squid in a deliciously nutty black ink sauce, made with sauteed leeks, onions and tomatoes; red snapper in a garlic vinaigrette with scalloped potatoes; and sauteed medallions of monkfish in a parsley and garlic sauce with clams and shrimp, and a hearty stew of fresh tuna, green peppers and potatoes in a tomato broth. ($25 and Under: 1/20/95)  MEE NOODLE SHOP AND GRILL ++ (212) 888-0027; 922 Second Avenue, at 49th Street; $; American Express
This little Chinese noodle parlor is not only uncomplicated and efficient but also delivers pleasing fare at bargain prices.
There are more than 190 selections on the menu, but if you focus on the noodle dishes you can't go wrong.
Seven kinds of noodles are featured -- complete meals in themselves -- from rice noodles to egg noodles to spinach noodles.
They include thin lo mein with paper-thin slices of red-edged roast pork or roast duck in bowls of fragrant chicken broth; mee fun rice noodles, served with shavings of chicken breast in soy sauce, and dan dan noodles in an earthy meat and mushroom sauce.
Other dishes to consider are the light mixture of scrambled eggs, shrimp and scallions; sweet and spicy cold sesame noodles, and dry sauteed green beans with pork. ($25 and Under: 3/18/94)  SMITH &amp; WOLLENSKY *  (212) 753-1530; 201 East 49th Street; $$$$; all major credit cards
An East Side institution of sorts, Smith &amp; Wollensky is a big, clamorous space done in brass and wood with starched white tablecloths and decorated with duck decoys, ornithological prints, lanterns, weather vanes and other Americana.
The menu includes appetizers of split pea soup, Cobb salad, shrimp cocktail and cold asparagus vinaigrette.
But huge, tasty slabs of meat are really what attract the crowds.
And steaks are done right indeed: nicely textured, flavorful and beautifully cooked.
Other options include rosy triple lamb chops, beefy prime ribs, succulent veal chops, calf's liver, steamed lobster and lemon-pepper chicken.
Side dishes include thick cottage fries, onion rings and fried zucchini. (Review: 3/30/90; article: 1/21/94)  ZARELA **  (212) 644-6740; 953 Second Avenue, near 51st Street; $$; American Express, Diner's Club
This festive bilevel establishment, named for its ebullient owner, Zarela Martinez, is one of the most spirited and authentic Mexican restaurant in Manhattan.
Zarela's cooking is aggressive yet refined, and varied enough for all tastes.
One might begin with poblano chilies stuffed with a corn and white cheese mixture and topped with roasted tomato sauce; a spiced hash of red snapper, tomato and scallions; fried calamari with a sauce of jalapeno, tomato, onion and olives; and chicken enchiladas with a mole sauce.
Among the main courses are skirt steak fajitas with guacamole and salsa; sauteed calf's liver that has been marinated in pickled jalapeno juice and then served with onions and bacon; roast duck with red chili and tomato sauce and complemented by a dried fruit compote of apricots, prunes, raisins and pineapple. (Review: 8/23/91) Simply Meat  THE PALM *  (212) 687-2953; 837 Second Avenue, near 45th Street; $$$$; all major credit cards
This bustling steakhouse, with its sawdust-strewn floor, is a model of consistency when it comes to delivering a first-rate sirloin strip, crusty and caramelized on the outside and juicy inside.
Also recommended are the double-cut lamb chops, pork chops, prime ribs of beef and steamed lobsters.
Cottage fries, creamed spinach, and crisp and buttery hash browns are all fine side dishes.
To begin, there is the traditional sweet crab meat or shrimp cocktail, baked littleneck clams and spinach salad. (Review: 8/21/92; article: 1/21/94) Summaries of reviews use the star system; others are culled from articles (indicated by +), the $25 and Under column (++) and Diner's Journal (


New York City Dispatches Aid
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that New York City was sending a search-and-rescue team of police officers, firefighters and emergency medical workers to the Caribbean island of St.
Thomas, which was hit hard by Hurricane Marilyn.
The city also will distribute more than $250,000 in food and medical and building supplies to other Caribbean islands that suffered severe damage from the storm and from Hurricane Luis earlier this month.


The Summer of '53
MANHATTAN, WHEN I WAS YOUNG  By Mary Cantwell. 214 pp.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.


Chatter: Surviving the Drought; Tending the Garden, Enjoying the Weather
I traveled back to the house of my birth only once this summer, but since we experienced the drought here too, I feel I can participate.
There were restrictions on water use in our nearby villages, but we had plenty with the well.


With the Country Seeking a Leader, Gen. Powell Explains Who He Is
General Colin L. Powell says he did not spend his whole life waiting for this moment.
Yet, the moment has clearly arrived.
America's yearning for a strong, vivid leader has met up with one of the most intense book marketing efforts of all time.
And the man who has been effusively hailed as an inspirational leader, a national hero and a potential savior of the political system is finally going to be expected to explain who he is, and what he wants.


Mudslinging?
To the Editor:
Being a fan of the pleasures the Napa Valley has to offer, I was surprised at the attitude expressed in Elizabeth Marcus's essay.
After her description of the Calistoga mud bath and spa treatment, the expression "stick in the mud" came easily to my mind.
STEPHANIE SCHULTZ  Upper Saddle River, N.J.
The author responds: In the account of my trip to the Napa Valley, I had no intention of dragging Bacchus through the mud.
I was poking fun, not at Napa's serious wine industry, but at its silly self-promotion as the American seat of the good life.
To my mind, a guided tour by a professional hospitality hostess could ruin even Shangri-La.


Jennifer Mason, Ralf Shockey 2d
Jennifer LaSerre Mason, a daughter of Jayne B. Whaley and a stepdaughter of William F. Whaley of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday to Ralf James Francis Shockey 2d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William H. R. Shockey of Westport, Conn.
The Rev.
John H. Branson 3d performed the ceremony at Christ and Holy Trinity Epsicopal Church in Westport.
Mrs.
Shockey, 29, is a special events coordinator at Ralph Lauren Womenswear in New York.
She graduated from the Fashion Institute of Technology.
Her stepfather is a marketing consultant in New Canaan.


F.Y.I.
Moored on High Q. I heard that blimps once docked at the top of the Empire State Building.
Is this true?
A.
Make that blimp, singular.
When the landmark skyscraper was built in 1931, it was indeed designed as a blimp terminal.
The balconies surrounding the top of the building's 16-story metal finial, now the 102d floor, were equipped to secure and dock the dirigibles as well as to house ticket stands and loading docks.
After the building was opened on May 1, 1931, and its mooring mast declared safe, it took four months before a blimp actually moored there.
On Sept. 16, 1931, The New York Times reported that a small privately owned blimp had docked for all of three minutes before taking flight. (This was after it circled for a half-hour in 40-mile-per-hour winds, attracting quite a crowd of gawkers and tying up traffic below.)
Two weeks later a Goodyear blimp dropped a bundle of newspapers, but it failed in an attempt to dock in near-perfect conditions the next day, according to the forthcoming Encyclopedia of New York City (Yale University Press, 1995).
After other docking failures, the mooring tower was abandoned in favor of a safer, more profitable venture: sightseeing.
Lurking for 114 Years
Q.
I often run in Central Park and I notice a strange black carving of a big cat (a cougar, perhaps?) crouched above the East Drive at about 76th Street.
It's partly hidden by trees, there's no pedestal, and sighting it unawares can give you quite a chill.
What is its history?
A.
The bronze kitty is called "Still Hunt." It was created by the sculptor Edward Kemeys, and Parks Department records show it has been scaring the Spandex and its predecessor off joggers and skaters since 1881.
Kemeys's inspiration to sculpt animals came while he worked as an ax man with the Parks Department's corp of engineers in the 1860's.
He traveled around the United States in search of indigenous beasts to sculpt and places to put his works.
His special talent seemed to lie with felines.
"Still Hunt" depicts an American mountain lion; Kemeys's two majestic African lions guard the Art Institute of Chicago's gates.
That Mystifying Hum
Q.
There's a walled compound on Avenue A between Fifth and Sixth Streets that mystifies me.
It looks like some sort of power plant (and it hums!), but there are no signs identifying it, and I never see anyone coming or going.
What is this place?
A. Your instincts were correct.
The compound is a Con Ed substation, one of 14 in Manhattan that distribute power generated at larger plants around the city, Bruce Wittmer, a spokesman for the company, said.
Electric power is generated at very high voltages, which are gradually decreased to allow for use in homes and businesses.
The substation, at 502 Sixth Street, receives power from the East River Generating Station, on 14th Street, and feeds it to the surrounding area.
Some substations are also used by meter readers and maintenance workers, Mr.
Wittmer said, but Sixth Street apparently sees little human traffic, a sign that it is doing its job.
As usual with city infrastructure, you only hear about substations when they aren't doing their job.
The last time they were in the news was August 1990, when a fire at the South Street substation cut power to most of lower Manhattan and parts of the subway system.
Subway Map as Art
Q.
Who draws the subway map?
I love its weird pseudo-Cubist crunching of New York geography. (For instance, the Harlem River ends up twice as wide as the East.)  A. Since 1992, the Transit Authority has used C.A.D. programs to draw and redraw the map three to four times a year, said David Jenkins, of the authority's marketing department.
The computer version is based on a 1979 map that was hand drawn by a graphic designer, Michael Hertz.
Mr.
Hertz said the distortions were inevitable to fit the finished product into subway car map frames.
The result: a massive Manhattan, a widened Queens, a shrunken Brooklyn, and a squat Bronx.
JESSE McKINLEY


Q and A
Malta in November
Q.
My wife and I are intrigued with the idea of visiting Malta in November, the start of their off season.
What can you tell me about the island during the first week of that month? -- Barry F. Sachs, Longmeadow, Mass.


An Apple Today
Apples remain forever female, beautiful, bright and loaded with trouble.
It doesn't seem to matter that Adam actually ate the apple from the tree of knowledge, that Hercules stole the apples of Hesperides as one of his 12 labors, that William Tell risked the thing he loved most when he shot an apple off his son's head.
Adam may have done the eating, but Eve did the picking.
And poor Aphrodite.
Just by accepting the apple proffered to her by Paris, she instigated the Trojan War.


Kate Bedrick, C. V. Brokaw 4th
Catherine Brewster Bedrick, the daughter of Marion H. C. Bedrick and Melvin L. Bedrick, both of New York, was married yesterday to Clifford Vail Brokaw 4th, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Brokaw 3d of Southampton, L.I.
The Rev.
C.
Hugh Hildesley performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York.
Mrs.
Brokaw, 26, is known as Kate.
Until recently she was a client service manager at the United States Trust Company in New York.
She graduated from Barnard College.
Her father is a partner in Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore, the New York law firm.
Her mother is a broker at Stribling &amp; Associates, the real estate agency, in New York.


A Year Down, With Goals to Go
Three seasons ago, when Colin Campbell began coaching the Rangers' farm team in Binghamton, N.Y., he took his dog on the ice to teach his new players an old trick.
Campbell kicked a ball behind the net and chased it.
When the animal followed, the coach kicked the ball back out in front of the net and the dog chased it back the other way.


Melanie M. Kirkpatrick, Jack David
Melanie Margaret Kirkpatrick, the assistant editor of the editorial page at The Wall Street Journal, and Jack David, a lawyer in New York, were married yesterday at their weekend house in New Hartford, Conn.
Judge Jose A. Cabranes of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, in New Haven, officiated.
The Rev.
Philip A. C. Clarke, a United Methodist minister, took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Kirkpatrick graduated from Princeton University and received a master's degree in English from the University of Toronto.
She is a daughter of Virginia R. Kirkpatrick of Buffalo and the late William C. Kirkpatrick.
The bride's parents owned Ideal Pictures, a film rental and sales business formerly in Buffalo.


Miss Rasenbe3rger, Mr. Sevastopoulo
Catherine Maguire Rasenberger, a cable television executive, was married yesterday to Dimitri Sevastopoulo, a financial executive.
The Rev.
Mark Anschutz performed the ceremony at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York.
The couple graduated from Harvard University.


A General and His Labyrinth
Gen.
Colin L. Powell's statements and his autobiography raise a key question: If he were to lead the nation, where would he want to take it?
Interview, page 13, and a review, Book Review, section 7.


Out Towns
CITY LIFE  Urban Expectations in a New World.
By Witold Rybczynski. 256 pp.
New York: Scribner. $23.


Private Money Manager or Mutual Fund? The Gap Narrows
NOT so long ago, the wealthy hired someone to manage their money.
Along with a certain snob appeal, they could count on portfolios created just for them and on ready access to a cadre of elite managers.
Mutual funds were the investments of commoners.
No more.
The wealthy are moving into mutual funds -- as are heavily larded institutions.


O'Keeffe's Adobe Sanctuary Opens for Tours
The rambling New Mexican adobe house that was a sanctuary to the painter Georgia O'Keeffe for 35 years, and which inspired many of her better-known works, has been opened to the public to group tours for the first time since her death in 1986.
Situated in the hilltop village of Abiquiu, 48 miles northwest of Santa Fe, the house and the surrounding three-acre grounds are the sites of hourlong tours given by the Georgia O'Keeffe Foundation.


Cutbacks on 3 Bus Lines Leave Night Owls Hunting a Way Home
At 1 A.M. one night last week, Vinny Calvarino and Don Reddy were standing on Roosevelt Avenue waiting without luck for a Q15 bus to take them home to Whitestone.
The Q15 was one of three Queens bus lines to lose overnight service when cutbacks went into effect last week as part of the Metropolitan Transportation Athority's $113 million budget reduction.
In all, service was reduced on seven Queens bus lines and on the IRT 7 subway line.


The Lineage of 'Dummies'
To the Editor:
As a sometime user of "dummy" books, I found your profile of John Kilcullen, chief executive of IDG Books Worldwide, interesting ("A Champion of the Technically Challenged and Overwhelmed," Earning It, July 9).
The first dummy book I ever used was published in the early 1970's -- not by IDG.


Holly Kennard, J. D. Youngwood
Holly Catherine Kennard, the daughter of Kathleen Frank of New York and Bruce Kennard of Scottsdale, Ariz., was married yesterday evening to Jonathan David Youngwood, a son of Judith and Alfred Youngwood of New York.
Rabbi Peter J. Rubenstein performed the ceremony at the Century Country Club in Purchase, N.Y.
Mrs.
Youngwood, 27, is an associate at Willkie, Farr &amp; Gallagher, the New York law firm.
She graduated cum laude from Duke University and received her law degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is the stepdaughter of Barry Frank, a senior vice president of the International Management Group, the sports representation agency, in New York.


ALSO INSIDE
NEIGHBORS 3 The war is 6,000 miles away, but the tensions over the war in Bosnia simmer in Queens.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 Canoes amid the skyline: River explorers begin to test the waters around Manhattan Island.
MOVIE CLOCK 15 What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 18 The Medieval Festival in Fort Tryon Park; a tribute to the 1964 World's Fair; A children's harvest in Prospect Park.
GOOD EATING 18 A tour of the East 40's; The bustling Palm; the reliable Cafe de Paris; the "uptown-style" Chin Chin.
SOAPBOX 19 The apartment hunt and the theater of the absurd.
And letters.


For London Visitors, A Guide to Complaining
The Westminster City Council, which administers an area containing some of London's best-known tourist attractions, has produced a booklet offering advice to visitors who want to lodge complaints about everything from parks to restaurants.
There is a phone number to call if hotels do not live up to their claims -- a promised ensuite bathroom is not provided, for example -- or if restaurants are not clean.
The eight-page booklet, called the Visitors Charter, also gives advice about parking and warnings about ticket touts.
The locations of sports facilities, libraries and other sites are also included.


No Headline
"Books are like wine. They belong in the basement -- a point the French have failed to understand. Putting them in glass towers is the one thing you do not do to books." -- COLIN ST.
JOHN WILSON, who designed the longawaited British Library.  [ 12:2. ]


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Foiling the Best Laid Plans; Hard Realities Roil the Irvine Company's Tidy California Dream
IF there are two words that sum up this obsessively planned city of 120,000 in the heart of Orange County, they are symmetry and order.
In Woodbridge Village, the largest subdivision here, there is a central corridor of churches, shopping centers and low-rise office buildings with nearly identical manmade lakes on either side.
Spreading out from their banks are similar wood-framed town houses, thickets of oleander and tract housing.
Businesses, and homeowners, are strictly regulated so they do not upset the buff-hued color scheme.
And in a city dedicated to healthy living, there is no cemetery.


INSIDE
INVESTING IT /Page 4  Your broker casually mentions his admittance to the elite chairman's council at his firm.
Don't be too impressed.
By Marcia Vickers.
STREET SMARTS /Page 5  MIP Properties is a real estate investment trust investors would prefer to forget.
But a deal to buy the company has one too many strings attached.
By Kurt Eichenwald.
SPENDING IT /Page 9  When it's all in the family, money-lending can strain ties.
By Jill Andresky Fraser.
MINDING YOUR BUSINESS /Page 11  Incorporation makes sense for a lot of small businesses, but is not for everyone.
Is it for you?
By Laura Pedersen.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-14  LONG ROAD FOR SERBS  Among the Serbs who dreamed of greater Serbia, many are finding that the end of the road is back in Serbia, now a desolate land of broken promises.  1


Welfare Clash Gives 2 Views Of New York
When Speaker Newt Gingrich took a swipe at New York on Friday, complaining of its "culture of waste," city and state leaders were quick to try to turn the tables.
At a breakfast with reporters, Mr.
Gingrich was asked what he thought of remarks last week by Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York, during the debate over the Republican welfare bill.
Senator Moynihan said the Republican plan would lead to "children sleeping on grates."


Lucile Gray, Johnston Northrop
Lucile Ralston Gray and Johnston Filmer Northrop were married on Friday at St.
Barnabas Episcopal Church in Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Richard Van Wely performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Northrop is a daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
John Gould Ralston.
The bride's father was the president of the former Reynolds Wire Company, a manufacturer in Dixon, Ill.
After his death, her mother, Lucile Ralston, served as the company's president.


Commercial Property: Sporting Weapons; Gunmakers Are Setting Their Sights on New York
IN a city where guns are more often associated with drug wars than with upper-class leisure, the gun companies are pretty careful about image and nomenclature.
They call their products "sporting weapons" and "country wear," their target market the "field sports enthusiasts" and "country leisure class." Their store windows feature clothing, not rifles.
And they do not stock ammunition.
But appearances and verbiage aside, Europe's venerable gunmakers clearly have Manhattan in their sights.
In June, Beretta, the 469-year-old Italian gun company whose 9-millimeter guns supplanted the Colt .45 as the American military's sidearm of choice, opened a store on Madison Avenue, near 63d Street.


Correction
CORRECTION: An article on Sept. 3 about the 1996 Presidential campaign misstated the year that Ronald Reagan announced Richard S. Schweiker as his running mate.
It was 1976, not 1980.


Richness and Spice of Autumn In the Tasty Ways of Shakers
AS fall approaches, the culinary palette goes from the vibrant reds, purples, yellows and greens of summer to more honeyed tones.
The palate also changes, preferring warm richness and spice to the salad freshness of summer.
"In a Shaker Kitchen" by Norma Macmillan (Simon &amp; Schuster), which describes the Shaker way of life in its introduction, is a wonderful source for autumn recipes.
Soups, casseroles, hearty baked savories and sweets fill its pages.


A 90's KIND OF RIVALRY
So de Jonge thinks "tennis is a dying game," only revived by Sampras and Agassi!
I wonder.
This at a time when tickets to the Open in Flushing are hard to come by; at a time when Wimbledon and the French tournaments have commanded worldwide attention; at a time when millions of men, women and children the world over regard tennis as their No. 1 personal sport.
Messrs.
Sampras and Agassi can't take credit for all this.


Old Quarry Suddenly Pulls Crowds
A water-filled abandoned quarry here has always attracted the occasional trespasser, eager to swim in the deep, clear water or dive off the 50-foot cliffs.
But this summer, for reasons nobody quite understands, the quarry in Westchester County has drawn hundreds of unwanted visitors, forcing the owner, the Consolidated Edison Company, to pressure the police to make arrests.


Bang For the Buck
Private enterprise has once again leapfrogged over government.
Instead of considering war an expense, a Nashua, N.H., company has found an unusual way to make money on armed conflict: tourism.
David Booth, president of War Tours Ltd., promises clients front-line battle exposure, including being shot at and viewing the effects of heavy artillery.
For about $6,000, the war traveler receives a package tour of several danger spots.
The price includes boots and body armor, which may be kept as souvenirs.


Lending A Hand To Others
The following is a list of some organizations around the five boroughs that can use your help.
THE MAYOR'S VOLUNTARY ACTION CENTER 61 Chambers Street, Manhattan.
The center is a volunteer clearinghouse, which uses a database that lists more than 2,000 volunteer jobs in the five boroughs to match people with agencies that could most use their help.
Call Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M., for an appointment. (212) 788-7550.
NEW YORK CARES 116 East 16th Street, Manhattan.
New York Cares requires a one-hour orientation at which volunteers receive a monthly calendar that lists 100 to 200 volunteer opportunities to help at 100 to 150 organizations.
No long-term commitment required.
Orientation is by appointment only.
Office hours: Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. (212) 228-5000.
THE VOLUNTEER REFERRAL AGENCY 161 Madison Avenue, Manhattan.
The agency requires a half-hour interview for prospective volunteers to properly place them with more than 500 organizations throughout the boroughs.
Interview by appointment only.
Office hours: Monday through Friday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. (212) 745-8249.
JEWISH GUILD FOR THE BLIND 15 West 65th Street.
Reads to individuals or groups, helps with correspondence and bill-paying, lunchtime help in school dining program, runs a nursery program, reads newspapers over special radio station, tapes best-selling novels for worldwide distribution.
Interview by appointment only.
Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. (212) 769-6217.
Ask for Lynn Stone.
FOSTER GRANDPARENT PROGRAM NYC Department of Aging, 280 Broadway, Room 213.
Elderly volunteers care for children with physical or mental illnesses.
Applicants need to be over 60, and meet low-income requirements.
Transportation, training, and food provided.
Small stipend available.
Five days a week, four hours a day.
Information: Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. (212) 442-3117.
GRANDPARENT SUPPORT PROJECT Department of Aging.
Volunteers assist grandparents in caring for children.
Applicants need to be over 55.
Transportation, training, and food provided.
Volunteers are asked to donate at least three hours a week.
Information: Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. (212) 442-1094.
VOLUNTEER SUPPORT PROJECT Department of Aging.
Project provides basic care and assistance to blind and visually impaired people in communities.
Volunteers can be any age.
Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. (212) 442-3168.
INSURANCE AND HEALTH COUNSELING Department of Aging, 2 Lafayette, Manhattan, 10007.
Elderly volunteers are needed to do clerical work and provide information about health and insurance options to other elderly citizens. .
Volunteers need to be over 60.
Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. (212) 442-1382.
RIVINGTON HOUSE 45 Rivington Street.
The House is a residential health care facility for people with AIDS.
Volunteers visit with and counsel residents and perform clerical and administrative tasks.
Volunteers are required to complete a six-hour orientation.
Office hours: Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. (212) 539-6219.
BIDE-A-WEE 410 East 38th Street, Manhattan, or 3300 Beltagh Avenue, Wantagh, L.I.
This is a privately financed organization for abandoned or unwanted pets.
Bide-a-Wee never destroys its animals.
Volunteers can assist in walking and caring for the animals, raising money, writing newsletters, clerical work and many other opportunities.
Training depends on the job.
Office hours: Manhattan and Long Island locations, Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Manhattan, (212) 532-4986.
Long Island, (516) 785-4199.
SAMARITAN HOT LINE New York's only 24-hour suicide prevention line is in constant need of good listeners.
Volunteers must have a telephone interview, complete 24 hours of training and then commit themselves to four shifts a month, including one weekday shift of 11 P.M. to 8 A.M.
Volunteers must be 21.
Donations welcome. (212) 673-3041.
G.M.H.C.  (Gay Men's Health Crisis), 129 West 20th Street, Manhattan.
The name may be deceiving because the Gay Men's Health Crisis helps everybody with AIDS.
Volunteers take part in all aspects of helping the ill from home care to clerical work in the G.M.H.C. office.
Volunteers must complete a training session.
Office hours: Monday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. (212) 337-3505.


Who Will Watch the Baby? The Unsung Middle Class
To the Editor:
Your front-page article "Who Will Watch the Baby?" (Aug. 20) seems to miss the point entirely.


Some Gardens Main Crop: Trash and Ire
Operation Green Thumb, which runs hundreds of community gardens around New York, is among the city government's most popular programs.
But not in East Harlem.
Officials there say that many of the 75 or so Green Thumb gardens in the neighborhood are filled with trash and too often closed to the public.
"Most of them are eyesores, and about 90 percent of them are locked all the time," said Edward L. Baca, chairman of Community Board 11, who feels the Green Thumb program deters needed housing development.


For Fair Play on Ireland
To the Editor:
Re "Ireland's Path to Peace" (Op-Ed, Sept. 12): Sir Patrick Mayhew does himself and the world a disservice when he states that only Sinn Fein has been associated with violence in the North of Ireland.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Williamson Bogeys Open Door for Kendall
Jay Williamson bogeyed his last two holes yesterday, allowing Skip Kendall to take over sole possession of first place after three rounds of the $1 million B. C. Open at Endicott, N.Y.
Kendall was at 10 under after 54 holes at the En-Joie Golf Course, with a one-stroke lead over Williamson, Craig Stadler, Gary Hallberg, David Edwards and Jeff Sluman. (AP)
MURPHY AND CHARLES SHARE LEAD: Ray Floyd's game left him at the end of his round, and Bob Charles and Bob Murphy, each shooting 68, moved into a one-shot lead after two rounds of the Brickyard Crossing Senior PGA event at Indianapolis.
Floyd, who led the $750,000 tournament after one round, had two bogeys and a double-bogey over his final three holes to finish at par 72 as he fell short in his attempt to set the tour record with his 11th consecutive round in the 60's. (AP) TENNIS  Muster-Schaller Final Is Set
Top-seeded Thomas Muster routed Sandor Noszaly, 6-2, 6-2, yesterday and moved into the final of the Romanian Open against a fellow Austrian, Gilbert Schaller, in Bucharest.
Schaller, seeded sixth, defeated Christian Ruud, 6-3, 7-6 (7-5). (AP) QUALIFIER ROLLS IN FRANCE: Yaya Doumbia, who had to qualify to get in the tournament, moved into the final of the Passing Shot event in Bordeaux, France, with a 6-4, 6-2 victory over eighth-seeded Lionel Roux.
Jacob Hlasek won the other semifinal, beating Jason Stoltenberg, 6-4, 7-5. (AP) YACHT RACING  Brut Cup Semifinals Delayed
Jockeying their 34-foot sailboats like bull riders at a rodeo, the four semifinalists in the Brut Cup of New York toughed it out yesterday for a place in the finals scheduled for today.
But with dusk growing imminent and a waning 10-knot breeze at the Port Washington, L.I., race site, yachting officials postponed two deciding races for today.
Still left to sail are tie-breakers for both sets of yachts competing in the three-of-five race semifinals.
Still in the running are Bertrand Pace of France, in a 2-2 tie so far with Roy Heiner of the Netherlands; and Ed Baird of St.
Petersburg, Fla., even at 2-2 with Peter Gilmour of Australia.
BOXING  Chavez Keeps Title
Julio Cesar Chavez, showing the poise and patience of a champion in his 98th fight, wore down David Kamau in late rounds last night to win a unanimous 12-round decision and excape with his World Boxing Council superlightweight title in Las Vegas, Nev.
In another title fight on the card, Terry Norris retained his W.B.C. superwelterweight title by stopping David Gonzales in the ninth round.
Gonzales had gone down twice earlier and was withering under a barrage of punches when Referee Richard Steele moved in to stop the bout at 2:59 of the ninth round. (AP)


Corrections
A chart yesterday with an article about the Bosnian Serbs' heavy weapons around Sarajevo referred incorrectly to the arms the Serbs have agreed to withdraw.
They are all tanks, artillery pieces with bores larger than 100 millimeters and mortars with bores larger than 82 millimeters -- not all guns with bores smaller than 100 millimeters.


Habitats: 112 East 73d Street; Buying a House With Rent-Regulated Tenants
"WE were the househunters from hell," the stunning blond woman with the Southern accent said, laughing.
"We were every broker's nightmare."
Diane R. Procter and Stephen J. Wang, two young architects with their own interior-design practice and a 4-year-old son, Tyler, are hardly nightmarish.
But they are a very determined duo, adamant about getting the very biggest house in the very best neighborhood for a price many would have deemed impossible.


Chinese Didn't Derail Women's Meeting; Sex Abuse Survivors
To the Editor:
I went to China to share with women from the 180 countries represented what we have learned about child sexual abuse and incest.
In our workshop we tried to encourage others to set up programs in their countries that would help heal the millions of women (and men) who have been crippled by this violence.


Cool


Samantha Conklin, Jonathan Gormin
Samantha Brooks Conklin, a daughter of Page Snow of Philadelphia and Theodore B. Conklin 3d of Sag Harbor, L.I., was married at her father's home yesterday to Jonathan David Gormin, a son of Barbara M. Goldsmith of Clearwater, Fla., and Gary P. Gormin of Seminole, Fla.
Justice Peter Fox Cohalan of State Supreme Court in Riverhead, L.I., performed the ceremony.
The couple graduated from Lehigh University.
Mrs.
Gormin, 24, is an operations specialist at the Bankers Trust Company in New York.
Her father owns the American Hotel in Sag Harbor.
Her mother is a valuation associate at the Pew Charitable Trust in Philadelphia.


Cynthia F. Sotos, Richard Nelli Jr.
Cynthia Fotini Sotos, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hercules P. Sotos of Greenwich, Conn., is to be married today to Richard Vincent Nelli Jr., a son of Charlotte Wescott of Miami and Mr.
Nelli of Stamford, Conn.
The Rev.
Theodore Baglaneas is to perform the ceremony at the Greek Orthodox Church of Our Savior in Rye, N.Y.
The bride graduated from Centenary College.
She is a sales manager at Playtex Products in Westport, Conn.
Her father retired as the vice chairman of the company.


Temperate


Kim P. Bohen, Douglas S. James
Kim Penelope Bohen, a daughter of Halcyone H. Bohen of Washington, and Frederick M. Bohen of New York, was married yesterday to Douglas Storandt James, a son of Paul W. James of Cocoa Beach, Fla., and the late Grace S. James.
The Rev.
Dr.
Giles Milhaven, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony on the Waumbek Cottage lawn on Bustins Island, Me.
The bride 31, was until recently a program manager in corporate contributions at I.B.M. in Armonk, N.Y.
Ms.
Bohen, who is keeping her name, also was an assistant press secretary for New York City public school's Chancellor Joseph Fernandez.
She graduated from Brown University, and received a master's degree in management from Yale University.
Her father is the executive vice president of Rockefeller University in New York.
Her mother is a psychologist in Washington.


LAST LOOK


THE WRITER'S PAD
YOU MIGHT CALL IT THE PROTOTYPE for personal style.
At a time when Victoriana was all the rage, Jean Cocteau's house near Paris ignored the rules of the game as played by the haute bourgeoisie.
The eccentric writer loaded his rooms with the brilliant detritus of a life lived at the cultural epicenter -- Paris between the wars.
Preserved in all its pristine chaos by his adopted son, Edouard Dhermit, it's the one house in "Writers' Houses" (due next month from Vendome Press, with text by Francesca Premoli-Droulers) that looks as modern today as it did when Modern was young.
Cocteau was a surrealist who defied classification precisely because he excelled at everything: plays, ballets, films, poetry, painting.
To him, all life was a theatrical production.
His home was a stage where kitsch, art and memorabilia coalesced with restless vitality.
Although wealthy, Cocteau collected from flea markets and hoarded old stage props from his own productions.
With intimate notes and photos from the likes of Picasso, Chanel, Diaghilev, Colette and Chaplin, his memorabilia could stock a Jazz Age museum.
Every surface, to Cocteau, was for writing.
His desk, laden with papers, "was arranged," as a friend said, "by the wind." Cocteau's possessions, garishly collaged and serendipitously displayed, give resonance to the artist's own words: "I haunt this bric-a-brac."


Deals and Discounts
LONDON WITH WHEELS -- Destination Europe, a division of the rental car company Auto Europe, has a one-week London Skydrive package starting at $749 a person, based on double occupancy, from Nov. 1 to Dec. 15.
It includes round-trip air fare from New York or Boston on Virgin Atlantic, six nights at the 153-room Holiday Inn Brent Cross, eight miles northwest of central London, and seven days' rental of a subcompact Renault Twingo or similar car with unlimited mileage.
Tax (17.5 percent) and optional insurance are not included.
For more information: (800) 223-5555.
ARUBA ON SALE -- La Cabana All Suite Beach Resort and Casino and Air Aruba are offering a six-night Indian Summer package to that Caribbean island for $652 a person, based on double occupancy.
The price includes nonstop flights (Monday to Thursday) between Newark and Aruba on Air Aruba and suite accommodations.
The resort complex, with 803 suites, has a fitness center, three swimming pools, such water sports as snorkeling and wind surfing, five tennis courts and a casino.
Travel must be completed by Dec. 15.
There is a surcharge for weekend travel.
For information or reservations: (800) 677-7888.


Sports of The Times; It's Stand-Up Comic Time For the Jets
THE time is ripe for the Jets to do something so they will be remembered for more than blowing leads of 24-3 and being the worst pro football team in the history of December.
Fate has presented them with a crossroads opportunity of rare distinction.
If they have any theatrical magnetism, the Jets will realize that being the first team to lose to the Jacksonville Jaguars won't be the catastrophe people say it will.
It is time for them to comprehend their hopelessness, recognize that a defeat today at Giants Stadium -- heartbreaking or lopsided, it's their call -- would be, in the long run, a darn good thing.


Brace Yourself
I got into the corset thing via the country-house route: decided to clear a path at a friend's place in Livingston Manor.
Dug my trowel into 30 years worth of sod.
Stood up and yanked.
Next thing you know, I am at Loren, the back doctor, and he is wrapping me in a white nylon corset and discussing the M.R.I.
"A herniated disk is serious business," says Loren.
"It'll heal, but you have to give it time."


Gwyneth L. Jones And John P. Cote
Gwyneth Lundy Jones, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Darlington Jones Jr. of Bay Head, N.J., was married there yesterday to John Pratt Cote, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Anthony Cote of Lewiston, Me.
The Rev.
Robert Cook performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's United Methodist Church.
Mrs.
Cote, 33, is a vice president at Avalon Properties, a real estate investment trust in Princeton, N.J.
She graduated from Swarthmore College and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father retired as the vice president of international business development for Devro Inc., a manufacturer of collagen-casing manufacturer in Somerville, N.J.
Her mother retired as a program director from the Educational Testing Service in Princeton.


Looking for America, Greyhound Style
MY fellow passenger on the bus seemed weary, but he could still appreciate what he was seeing.
"My experience with America is its cities," he said, looking at the cornfields, hills and trees of Iowa.
"But I'm realizing that most of the country is what's out this window now. It's beautiful. Much bigger than I thought. Much more peaceful."


BUSINESS NOTES
Sports Authority Joins A Cluster of Superstores
When Sports Authority selected the site for its first Queens store, which opened recently in Long Island City, it chose a crowded neighborhood that is within easy commuting distance of Manhattan, said Mark Walker, Sports Authority's vice president for real estate.
It also opted for an area with several other superstores that sell different types of merchandise.
The new Sports Authority, which opened on Aug. 17, is in a 43,000-square-foot space on Northern Boulevard, off Woodside Avenue.
It has parking for 130 cars.
"The area has turned into a hotbed of big-box retailers," Mr.
Walker said.
The store, which sells a wide variety of sports equipment, from tennis racquets, golf clubs and bicycles to athletic footwear, is now a Northern Boulevard neighbor of Toys 'R' Us as well as Staples office equipment and Tops appliance superstores.
All are within six blocks of one another.
Mr.
Walker said the demographic profiles of the neighborhood suited the company, which is based in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
He said Sports Authority planned to open another Queens store, probably in Forest Hills or Middle Village, within a year.
Sri Lankan Home Cooking Moves Into a Restaurant
When Kaluwage Wijesinghe moved to the city from Colombo, Sri Lanka, a decade ago, he worked as a clerk in a video store.
Fellow Sri Lankans would meet after work and pay him to cook their native dishes at his Times Square apartment.
Mr.
Wijesinghe honed his culinary skills to the point that on Sept. 6, he opened his own restaurant, Lakruwana, at 358 West 44th Street, at Ninth Avenue.
"There's a big Sri Lankan community in the neighborhood," said Mr.
Wijesinghe (pronounced wee-jee-SING-ha), who has invested $35,000 in the business.
He likened Sri Lankan food to Indian cuisine, but said it is spicier.
Lakruwana specializes in hoppers: round rice-and-flour pancakes that are stuffed with curried lamb, chicken or beef, chutney and basmati rice.
They sell for $6.
Prices for other items range from $3.50 for pureed vegetable soup to $9.95 for entrees like shrimp biriyani.
Japanese Crystal Company Is Moving to Madison Ave.
Hoya, the Japanese crystal company known worldwide for its camera and eyeglass lenses, is moving its only free-standing store in the United States from Park Avenue and 57th Street to Madison Avenue and 52d Street in late November.
The new 1,450-square-foot space is designed to resemble the shape of molten glass at the tip of a glassblower's blowpipe, said Alice M. Chappell, Hoya's president for United States operations.
In its New York store, the company, with $1.3 billion in sales worldwide, sells crystal objects, from a small, round dish for $25 to unique, signed crystal sculptures for $35,000.


Jennifer O'Sullivan, David W. Pogue
Dr.
Jennifer Letitia O'Sullivan, a surgeon, and David Welch Pogue, an author and editor, were married yesterday in Woods Hole, Mass.
Charlotte Hanrahan, a justice of the peace of South Weymouth, Mass., officiated at the home of the bride's godmother, Jeanne Berwind, and her husband, David.
The bride, 32, is keeping her name professionally.
In December she will enter private practice in hand and plastic surgery in Stamford, Conn.
She graduated from Brown University and received her medical degree from the Medical College of Pennsylvania.
Her mother, Dr.
Renee Bennett O'Sullivan of Wellesley, Mass., is a plastic and reconstructive surgeon there.


Snapshots of the U.S. Economy: Some Clouds May Be Moving On; Chip Maker Thrives In World of Its Own
At the sprawling corporate headquarters of the Intel Corporation here, an army of construction workers is racing to complete an addition that will double the capacity of a factory to turn out the next generation of microchips.
But that is just a fraction of the frenzied activity at Intel, which designs and builds the labyrinthine circuits etched on slivers of silicon that lie at the heart of about 80 percent of all the personal computers on desktops today.
Intel is also expanding around the country and around the globe, with new plants added to existing campuses in Arizona, New Mexico, Oregon and Ireland.
And an entirely new operation was just announced for the State of Washington.


PRESIDENT VOICES OPTIMISM ON HOPES FOR WELFARE BILL
President Clinton today signaled markedly improved chances for an overhaul of the nation's welfare programs, praising the Senate for progress and asserting that a week of bipartisan negotiations had brought the nation "within striking distance of transforming the welfare system" in fundamental ways.
In his weekly radio address, Mr.
Clinton said the Senate had incorporated "critical elements" of his own approach to welfare into its plan.
He also applauded the Senate for showing "wisdom and courage" when it rejected measures favored by conservatives that would have denied additional benefits to women who have more children while on the welfare rolls and would have denied cash benefits to teen-agers who have children out of wedlock.


The Crafty Commuter: 11 Spots To Avoid on Roads and Crossings
A look at trouble spots you may encounter in the next week -- or month, or months -- courtesy of Transcom, an interstate transportation agency.
1.
ROUTE 4 Fort Lee.
Eastbound left lane and ramp to northbound I-95 closed, through Nov. 15.
2.
GEORGE WASHINGTON BRIDGE Paving of the Palisades Interstate Parkway toll plaza.
Friday at 10 A.M. through Saturday at 9 P.M.
3.
ROUTE 3 Rutherford.
Various lanes closed at night for repaving, until the end of the year.
4.
OLD MOUNT PLEASANT AVENUE East Hanover and Livingston.
Passaic River bridge is closed for replacement, through December.
5.
ROUTES 1-9 Essex County.
Southbound traffic has been shifted to new northbound express lanes between the Pulaski Skyway and I-78.
Wilson Avenue exit is closed.
6.
INTERSTATE 287 Bridgewater, between Route 22 and Foothill Road.
Work zone setup.
Various lanes closed, until further notice.
7.
EAST DUKES PARKWAY Hillsborough.
Road closed for bridge replacement, through December.
8.
ROUTE 9 Woodbridge and Sayreville.
Edison Bridge over Raritan River.
One southbound lane closed Monday through Thursday, 10 P.M. to 8 A.M., and Sunday, 9 P.M. to 8 A.M.
For repaving; through Oct. 11.
9.
PLAINSBORO ROAD Plainsboro.
The Amtrak railroad bridge is closed for rehabilitation.
Through January.
10.
ROUTE 1 Plainsboro.
Shoulder is closed in both directions between Scudders Mill Road and Forrestal Road.
11.
ROUTE 1 West Windsor.
Northbound shoulder is closed between Nassau Park Boulevard and Alexander Road, until 1996.
The northbound Duck Pond Run jughandle turn is permanently closed.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Humble Homes That Make a Point
They have occupied the vacant lot for more than two months now, proudly insisting that their jury-rigged tent city is a superior alternative to homeless shelters or life on the steets.
On pitted ground of stone, brick and broken glass, some of the 33 residents, a dozen of them children, live in tattered plastic tents, while others occupy shanties of wood, fabric and old carpeting, all held together by rusty nails, and hope.


A Nonintimidating Spot for Thai Cuisine
LONG ISLAND is not fertile ground for Thai food.
From the Queens line to Montauk Point, or more accurately from Seeda in Valley Stream to Chinda's in Sag Harbor, the Island can claim fewer than a dozen Thai restaurants.
Visitors from the West Coast, who are used to Thai restaurants on just about every other corner, are surprised by their scarcity here.
For Long Islanders who cut their baby teeth on Chinese food and order sushi with aplomb, Thai food is still an adventure.


Miss Johnson, Mr. Gammill Jr.
Pamela Barclay Johnson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas G. Johnson of Englewood, N.J., was married yesterday to Kenneth MacNair Gammill Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gammill of New Canaan, Conn.
The Rev.
Norman Ricard, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Siasconset (Mass.) Union Chapel on Nantucket.
The couple graduated from Hamilton College.


Bokgi Choi, Hunter Wessells
Dr.
Bokgi Choi, an assistant professor of anesthesiology, and Dr.
Hunter Buchanan Wessells, an assistant professor of urology, both at the University of Arizona Health Science Center in Tucson, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Daniel Kilmer Sullivan, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Dr.
Choi, 31, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the City College of New York and received her medical degree from New York University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Seung Nam Choi of Purchase, N.Y.
Her parents, who are retired, were the owners of the Lydig Pharmacy in Purchase.


A Leading Man With a Twist
Sid Lidz, the Centerpiece of Diane Keaton's new movie "Unstrung Heroes," seems the quintessential John Turturro role, one that allows him to play both ethnic and eccentric.
Lidz is a Jewish inventor of odd household gadgets who operates on his own frequency and whose peculiarities are exceeded only by two crazier brothers (Michael Richards and Maury Chaykin).
As Sid's son asks his mother at one point, "Is Dad from another planet?"
The 38-year-old actor, who uses bold strokes to capture human vagaries, clearly has an affection for odd ethnic characters.
What is surprising is that the Walt Disney Studio shares his affection and has elevated ethnic types to major players in its films.
Last year Mr.
Turturro played the whining loser Herb Stempel in Disney's "Quiz Show," bringing a much-needed Jewish yang to Ralph Fiennes's golden yin.


Tracy J.Leeds, Evan C. Marwell
Tracy J. Leeds, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Laurence Carroll Leeds, Jr. of New York and Stamford, Conn., was married last evening to Evan Chandler Marwell, the son of Drs.
Barbara and Gerald Marwell of Madison, Wis.
Rabbi Robert Lennick performed the ceremony at the bride's parent's house in Stamford.
Ms.
Leeds, 31, is keeping her name.
She is a director of personal-computer interactive services for Time Warner Cable's digital marketing division, which develops interactive shopping programs, in New York.
She graduated from Yale University and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University, as did the bridegroom.
Her father is a managing director at the Buckingham Research Group, an investment company in New York.
Until 1989 he was the chairman and chief executive of Manhattan Industries , the clothing manufacturing company in New York.


K. L. Georgopulo, Edward Burke Jr.
Katina Louise Georgopulo, the daughter of Elinor M. Georgopulo of Westport, Conn., and the late Panos B. Georgopulo, was married yesterday to Edward John Burke Jr., a son of Carol and Edward Burke of Mount Vernon, N.Y.
The Rev.
Constantine Mathews performed the ceremony at the St.
George Greek Orthodox Church in Norwalk, Conn.
Ms.
Georgopulo, 29, is keeping her name.
She is a candidate for a Ph.D. in social welfare at Columbia University, from which she received a master's degree in social work.
She graduated from Lehigh University.
Her father owned G. A. Georgopulo &amp; Company, a tobacco importer and exporter and a cigarette manufacturer in New York.
Her mother is a psychologist in New York and Westport.


Totally Authentic Flavors of Sicily
Ebeddu e cavuru, e beddu davveru!" -- It's beautiful and hot, it's beautiful indeed!
The voice from the street drifts in over the snipping of the scissors and the gentle hum of a hair dryer across the room in a hairdressing establishment just on the edge of Borgo Vecchio, a popular neighborhood near the port of Palermo.
"Did you hear that? Do you know what he is saying?" Like many of his compatriots, my hairdresser, Gaetano, enjoys testing me, to discover how deeply I have absorbed Sicilian language and culture after 30 years' residence here.


L.I. Vines
Sauvignon Blancs
Bidwell Vineyards, Cutchogue, 1994. About $17 (sold only at the winery).


Gunman in Queens Kills 3 in Family and Himself
A man recently released from prison, enraged after a fight with his girlfriend, opened fire inside their apartment in Corona, Queens, early yesterday, killing their 6-year-old daughter and the woman's two teen-age daughters before fatally shooting himself, the police said.
The woman, Migdalia Sosa, 39, escaped the onslaught uninjured by jumping from the family's third-floor window to a terrace next door, said Detective Dwight Cunningham, a police spokesman.


LAST LOOK


A Word of Praise
To the Editor:
We recently went from Vienna to Prague by train.
Our travel agent had arranged to have us picked up at the railroad station.
Alas, nobody came.
After waiting for an hour I heard a gentleman giving instructions in English.
When I asked him where and how to get a taxi, he told us that many of them overcharge and volunteered to take us to our hotel by Metro.


One Gambler's Story: Hitting the Bottom
I STARTED gambling when I was a child," said a middle-aged man who is fighting to recover from a lifelong gambling addiction. "I liked to take risks.
When I was 6, I cheated at hide and seek and hopscotch.
At 9 or 10, I flipped coins and pitched baseball cards.
I can remember the thrill of winning even in grammar school.
I had to win every game I played."
He said he wonders if compulsive gambling is in his genes.
"Looking back, there were three or four gamblers in the family," he said.


Suspect Is Arrested In Brooklyn Rapes
Detectives in Brooklyn arrested a suspect yesterday who they believe may be responsible for as many as eight rapes and sexual assaults in Park Slope in the past year.
The suspect, Tony Harrison, 26, of St.
John's Place in Brooklyn, was taken into custody about 5:30 A.M. at Seventh and Flatbush Avenues as he was following a woman into an apartment building.
He was charged with rape, sodomy, sex abuse, harassment and resisting arrest, said Lieut.
Laurie Unick.


Bridget R. Healey, Anthony K. Asnes
Bridget Regan Healey, a corporate events planner at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, the New York investment bank, was married last evening to Anthony Ketay Asnes, a consultant at Trinity Associates, a management consulting firm in Greenwich, Conn.
Rabbi Hillel Silverman performed the ceremony at the Pierre in New York.
Mrs.
Asnes, 32, graduated from the University of California at Berkeley.
She is a daughter of Yvonne Healey of Kinderhook, N.Y., and Michael Healey of Novato, Calif.
The bride's father, who is retired, was a lieutenant colonel in the Marine Corps at Camp Pendleton, Calif.
Her mother is the principal of Ichabod Crane High School in Valatie, N.Y.


No Praise For Pop? It's A Bum Rap
A RECENT POLL TAKEN BY THIS NEWSPAPER described a vast collective moan issuing from across the land.
The subject was American popular culture.
Nine out of 10 respondents could think of something bad to say about action movies, television sitcoms, blatant sexuality and provocative song lyrics.
More than half had nothing good to say at all.
Add to the lament the shrill cries of classical-music devotees.
Record sales remain minuscule next to pop; record companies search frantically for new markets, with appeals to mysticism, easy listening, nostalgia, even sexual preference.
Concert audiences, most know by now, are smaller and older.
The recital business has shrunk drastically, and who knows what would happen to symphony orchestras without the massive philanthropic props that now keep them going?


Robinson Victory March Is Stalled by Hampton
Eddie Robinson seems to collect victories the way the Internal Revenue Service collects taxes.
But the college football coach with more victories than anyone else will have to wait to add No. 399 to his collection.
Hampton upset Robinson's Grambling State team, 16-7, tonight in the New York Urban League Classic before a crowd of 61,023 at Giants Stadium.


John W. Gore and Diane Wallach
Diane Wallach, the daughter of Drs.
Judith and Sylvan Wallach of New York, was married yesterday to John W. Gore, the son of Geraldine and John Gore of the Bronx.
Don R. Johnson, the senior leader of the New York Society for Ethical Culture, officiated at Bridgewaters in New York.
Mrs.
Gore, 28, is a social worker at the Howard Haber Early Learning Center, a preschool for retarded children in the Bronx.
She graduated from the College of New Rochelle and received a master's degree in social work from Fordham University.
Her father retired as a professor of mathematics at the C.W.
Post Campus of Long Island University.
Her mother is a psychologist and psychoanalyst in New York and is the president of the New York Society for Ethical Culture.


Yonkers Schools Enter Stage 2
AGAINST a backdrop of threatened teacher strikes and ongoing appeals of a desegregation lawsuit, public schools here in the state's fourth-largest city opened their doors earlier this month, with 22,000 students returning to freshly scrubbed and painted classrooms.
A decade ago, a Federal judge ordered this embattled city to do away with the all-white schools of the east side and the minority classrooms in the poorer sections of town, saying all schools in the district must reflect the racial makeup of the student body, which was 42 percent black and Hispanic.


Political Hands Reach for the Schools
NOT too long ago, big-city mayors like Rudolph W. Giuliani had enough to worry about without sticking their fingers into the messy goo of whatever was going on in the vast bureaucracies of urban schools.
But Mr.
Giuliani, who has spent weeks embroiled in the politics of who would be the next Chancellor of the city schools, is but one of the mayors around the country who find themselves caught up in the local, often chaotic, business of education.
It's My Problem
In truth, big-city mayors generally have no formal power to do anything about public schools.
But either because the problems are so grave, because the need to do something is so obvious, because the lines between what's a school problem and what's a city problem have become hopelessly blurred, or because they figure they are going to get blamed anyway, mayors increasingly are defining the problems of the public schools as their problems.


Nannette Orr, Dalton Gustafson
Nannette Chandlee Orr, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Steers Orr 2d of Katonah, N.Y., was married yesterday to Dalton Lennart Gustafson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerth Gustafson of Rutland, Vt.
The Rev.
Terrence L. Elsberry performed the ceremony at St.
Matthew's Episcopal Church in Bedford, N.Y.
Mr. and Mrs.
Gustafson, both 25, graduated from Union College in Schenectady, N.Y.
The bride is a civil engineer in Boston with McLaren/Hart Environmental Engineering Corporation.
The bridegroom is an associate in Boston with John Nuveen &amp; Company, a municipal bond firm.


Hot Dog Kings Outbid Trump For Wollman
In the 1970's, Donald J. Trump followed in the footsteps of his father, a developer, and began expanding the family fortune into a real-estate empire.
About the same time, George and Tom Makkos emigrated from Greece with their father, who pushed a hot dog cart on midtown streets, and eventually they followed him into the trade.
With some celebrated ups and downs, Mr.
Trump persevered.
So did the Makkoses, whose family company, M &amp; T Pretzel Inc., has become a leading food concessionaire in the parks of Manhattan.


Women of The World Disperse. To What?
SO now what?
At the close of the United Nations Fourth World Conference on Women on Friday, delegates exhausted by days of around-the-clock negotiations were left with a term-paper-sized document called a "Platform For Action," a plan for working toward equal rights for women.


A Theater's Delicate Balance
Lori Ott may have one of the toughest jobs at the innovative Crossroads Theater in New Brunswick.
As director of development, she is responsible for raising the $2.3 million a year that allows the theater to put on 150 to 200 performances of plays by black writers and actors, or plays done from a black perspective.
The Crossroads season opens next month with "The Piano Lesson," by August Wilson.
Recent highlights include "Flyin' West," Pearl Cleage's play about black women in Kansas in 1898, and last season's of "Two Hah Hahs and a Homeboy," starring Ossie Davis and Ruby Dee.


Invisible Men in Tuxedos
A CASINO hotel butler is definitely not like the fastidious, fussy, veddy British fellow Anthony Hopkins played in "The Remains of the Day."
"Some days, your job is not even to be part of the furniture," said Melvin Thompson, 34, one of five butlers employed at The Grand Casino Resort.
"You are invisible. A guest shouldn't even have to think about something they want. You do it before they can ask. I keep cards on what the guests like and when I hear they're coming, I make sure it's in the room. Whatever it is they want -- if it's legal -- it should be there when they arrive."


Nicolle S. Feigin, Robert A. Weiss
Nicolle Sari Feigin, a daughter of Barbara Feigin of Rye Brook, N.Y., and Noel Feigin of Greenwich, Conn., is to be married today to Robert Alexander Weiss, the son of Suzanne and Lawrence Weiss of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Marc Winer, a cousin of the bride, is to perform the ceremony at the Jewish Community Center in White Plains.


Medicare Misfire
House Speaker Newt Gingrich promised a bold, market-driven reform of Medicare.
He has not delivered.
The policy he outlined on Friday would shut off effective competition and possibly damage health care for the elderly.
Perhaps the Senate leadership plan, to be released this week, will do better.
Medicare is, as Mr.
Gingrich never ceases to charge, excessively costly and out of date, having adopted few of the innovative techniques that are used in the private sector to improve quality and lower costs.
Mr.
Gingrich would solve these problems by, in effect, giving the elderly the option of using a Government voucher to buy private coverage.
But the proposal reneges on introducing market competition when it denies health plans the right to rebate part of the voucher to enrollees.
Private plans would have no incentive to cut premiums below the amount of the voucher.


Victoria Kindred, Sanford Keziah 3d
Victoria Stronach Kindred, a daughter of Mrs.
Philo Smith of Greenwich, Conn., and John M. Kindred of Palm Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to Sanford Perry Keziah 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Keziah Jr. of High Point, N.C.
The Rev.
Burns Stanfield, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Church in the Pines in Salina, Colo.
Until recently, the bride and the bridegroom were strategic planners at New York advertising agencies, she at Deutsch Inc. and he at Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS.
In July they started Kindred &amp; Keziah, a marketing consulting business in Boulder, Colo.


Officer Cleared in Student's Death
A grand jury has cleared a police officer in the shooting death of a college student who waved an air gun after being ejected from a Union Turnpike bar.
After three weeks of testimony from a dozen witnesses, the grand jury in State Supreme Court in Queens declined to indict Officer Jeffrey Poje, 28, who killed 20-year-old Raymond B. Murray on June 22.
Two bouncers at the bar, JPO'D's, a popular watering hole near St.
John's University, were indicted for assaulting one of three men ejected with Mr.
Murray for rowdy behavior.


Director With an Entrepreneurial Flair
HOW can the musical director of a professional chamber orchestra describe himself as an entrepreneur?
Easily, said Richard Kapp, musical director of the Philharmonia Virtuosi, the Westchester-based professional chamber orchestra.
The reason, Mr.
Kapp explained, "is that our operating philosophy is more entrepreneurial than that of other music and art organizations."
He pointed out, however, that his group's reputation for the successful marketing campaign it conducts has instilled resentment in rival camps.
"The attitudes of many of the other art groups, which I totally disagree with," he said, "is that because we managed to be so good commercially, we can't be good musically." He added, "That, of course, implies that the two can't coexist."


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
ALL'S FAIR: LOVE, WAR, AND RUNNING FOR PRESIDENT By Mary Matalin and James Carville with Peter Knobler.
Random House and Touchstone/Simon &amp; Schuster, $13.
The chief spin specialists of the 1992 Presidential race explain how they managed not only opposing political campaigns but also their unorthodox courtship.
The result is "a him-and-her comedy, worthy of early Hepburn and Tracy," Gore Vidal wrote here in 1994.
CLOSING TIME By Joseph Heller.
Scribner Paperback, $13.
Appropriately, there are bombs and missiles, both military and verbal, in this novel, which features some of the surviving cast of Mr.
Heller's most famous work, "Catch-22." But now Yossarian and his former comrades from the earlier novel are decades older and fighting a war with mortality.
Last year our reviewer, William H. Pritchard, said, "Rather than thinking of 'Closing Time' as the sequel to 'Catch-22,' I'd call it instead an independent creation in whose best parts the seriousness and the joking are inseparable, as they should be in art."


Sure You Can Practice Law Here, But You'd Better Have an Office
To practice law in New Jersey, a lawyer must have an office in New Jersey, according to a recent ruling by a Federal magistrate, Dennis M. Cavanaugh.
The ruling resulted from a lawsuit filed by Robert Tolchin, a lawyer who lives in Scarsdale, N.Y., works in Manhattan, and passed the July 1992 New Jersey bar exam, according to The New Jersey Lawyer.
Mr.
Tolchin had argued that he had the right to represent clients in New Jersey without being subjected to New Jersey Supreme Court rules, which he said were protectionist and unconstitutional.


Auburn and Alabama: Double Doom in Dixie
Louisiana State 12, Auburn 6  Troy Twillie capped a big night for Louisiana State's defense by intercepting a pass in the end zone as time expired last night and the Tigers upset No. 5 Auburn, 12-6, at Baton Rouge.
L.S.U. (2-1 over all, 1-0 Southeastern Conference) limited Auburn (2-1, 0-1) to 274 yards and two field goals.


The Fitful Reality of a Dream School
With many public school children spending their days in dingy buildings constructed during the first half of the century, the amenities at Public School 92 are luxurious.
The red brick building has sweeping skylights, a computerized heating and cooling system and color-coded corridors.
But what was conceived as a dream school to replace the old P.S. 92, built in 1913, has become a constant irritant to parents and administrators who say the construction was flawed.


Memories of a Catholic Boyhood
THE SIGN OF THE CROSS  Travels in Catholic Europe.
By Colm Toibin. 296 pp.
New York: Pantheon Books. $24.


I Moved to South Jersey, And Promptly Disappeared
To the Editor:
Since I grew up in Bergen County, I understand that South Jersey does not exist in many North Jersey minds.
And so it seems for you.


Taking a Slow Boat To Army Games
KICKOFF time for the Army-Lehigh game at West Point was still more than 28 hours away, but Bill Brennan and Herb Kohn were urging their companions to get a move on, on Sept. 8 in Stamford.
That might seem strange, considering that the distance from Stamford to West Point is about 45 miles and the trip takes no more than an hour and a quarter by car.
But then Mr.
Brennan and Mr.
Kohn, along with 12 friends, were not going by car.
They were taking a boat, as they have been doing for years.
And traveling at a speed of eight or nine knots while covering approximately 80 miles their circuitous trip takes between 8 and 10 hours.


Regarding Emily, Becky and Inky
THREE worried women sat on a park bench last week talking about a fourth woman with whom they have little in common except a love for small dogs.
They shared a story.
Seventeen years ago, a drug dealer called Speedo died leaving a puppy in bad company.
A telephone operator named Emily rescued the year-old black poodle, Inky.
She bought him for $5 from a junkie.
Emily never could pass a dog that needed a home.
"She'd sit on a bench with Inky and Becky, the younger black poodle," said Naomi Meyer, a financial adviser, "and tell us that when she won the lottery she was going to open a hotel for people with dogs."


Money for Art's Sake
LIKE nearly all nonprofit galleries, Aljira: A Center for Contemporary Art, in Newark, is chronically low on cash.
So it was natural that rather than pay someone else, the center would have its own artists design its stationery, brochures and invitations.
The people who received the letters and invitations, including donors and others in business, were struck by the jazzy, colorful look and began asking if the artists would design something equally distinctive for their companies.
From that beginning, a cottage industry is emerging, along the lines of Trappist monks selling homemade jelly.
Now Aljira has received a $50,000 grant to start a graphic design studio that should bring in a bit of cash to support its exhibitions of contemporary art.


Margaret Suzor, David F. Dunning
Margaret Ann Suzor, the communications director of the Public Agenda Foundation, a nonprofit educational research organization in New York, was married yesterday to David Frank Dunning, a recycling technology consultant in Washington.
The Rev.
Charles H. Whiston performed the ceremony at the South Congregational Church in Kennebunkport, Me.
Mrs.
Dunning, 40, graduated from Trinity College in Washington.
She is a daughter of Mary M. Suzor of Springfield, Mass., and the late Dr.
Lester G. Suzor.
The bride's father was an obstetrician and gynecologist in Chicopee and West Springfield, Mass.


Richness and Spice of Autumn In the Tasty Ways of Shakers
AS fall approaches, the culinary palette goes from the vibrant reds, purples, yellows and greens of summer to more honeyed tones.
The palate also changes, preferring warm richness and spice to the salad freshness of summer.
"In a Shaker Kitchen" by Norma Macmillan (Simon &amp; Schuster), which describes the Shaker way of life in its introduction, is a wonderful source for autumn recipes.
Soups, casseroles, hearty baked savories and sweets fill its pages.


BEST SELLERS: September 17, 1995
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
"L" IS FOR LAWLESS, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $24.) Kinsey Millhone on the trail of the cash and the culprits involved in a bank heist perpetrated decades ago.
2
3
2
COMING HOME, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (Dunne/St. Martin's, $25.95.) A British woman comes of age during World War II.
3
1
5
FROM POTTER'S FIELD, by Patricia Cornwell. (Scribner, $24.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta tracks a serial killer in Central Park.
4
2
10
BEACH MUSIC, by Pat Conroy. (Talese/Doubleday, $27.50.) An American living in Rome returns to South Carolina and tries to cope with his troubled past.
5
4
8
MEMNOCH THE DEVIL, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The vampire Lestat is snatched from the world by a mysterious adversary who claims to be the Devil.
6
5
81
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
7
1
DEAD MAN'S WALK, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $26.) The adventures of two young Texas Rangers; a prequel to "Lonesome Dove."
8
7
8
LIGHTNING, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $24.95.) The happy marriage of a lawyer and her husband is suddenly changed after she gets a routine checkup.
9
6
21
THE RAINMAKER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $25.95.) A young man barely out of law school tries to expose a corporation's multibillion-dollar scam.
10
9
3
STORMY WEATHER, by Carl Hiaasen. (Knopf, $24.) A hurricane sweeping across southern Florida leaves in its wake troubled tourists and con artists.
11
11
4
FOR THE ROSES, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $23.) A late-19th-century woman with a checkered past investigates her identity, resulting in romance.
12
1
A PLACE CALLED FREEDOM, by Ken Follett. (Crown, $25.) Two Scots, fleeing the injustices of their native land, seek romance and freedom in 18th-century America.
13
8
162
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
14
10
12
ROSE MADDER, by Stephen King. (Viking, $25.95.) Fleeing an abusive husband, a woman seeks happiness in a strange city by creating her own myth.
15
1
GUMP &amp; CO., by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $22.)
Forrest Gump continues to fumble his way through history.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
2
MY POINT . . .
AND I DO HAVE ONE, by Ellen DeGeneres. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life and the pursuit of happiness by the television star and stand-up comedian.
2
3
13
A GOOD WALK SPOILED, by John Feinstein. (Little, Brown, $23.95.) A sportswriter reports on the P.G.A.
Tour in 1993 and 1994. (+)
3
9
38
SISTERS.
Essays by Carol Saline.
Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of sisters.
4
4
80
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
5
6
16
SPONTANEOUS HEALING, by Andrew Weil. (Knopf, $23.) A physician explains the ways in which the body heals itself. (+)
6
8
6
MY OLD MAN AND THE SEA, by David Hays and Daniel Hays. (Algonquin, $19.95.) A sailing yarn about a father-and-son voyage from Connecticut around Cape Horn.
7
2
10
TO RENEW AMERICA, by Newt Gingrich. (HarperCollins, $24.) The Speaker of the House describes his solutions to the country's problems. (+)
8
5
13
NEW PASSAGES, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $25.) How changing social conditions and longer life expectancies are affecting our lives.
9
1
I'M ONLY ONE MAN! by Regis Philbin with Bill Zehme. (Hyperion, $22.95.) A memoir by the co-host of "Live With Regis and Kathie Lee."
10
7
8
SLEEPERS, by Lorenzo Carcaterra. (Ballantine, $23.) The true story, the narrator claims, of four boys in a reformatory and the revenge they later take.
11
11
2
BUFFETT, by Roger Lowenstein. (Random House, $27.50.) The life of Warren Buffett and how he became one of the country's richest men. (+)
12
13
3
IN THEIR NAME, edited by Clive Irving. (Random House, $25.) The Oklahoma City bombing: the stories of those it affected, told in words and pictures.
13
1
THE HOUSEKEEPER'S DIARY, by Wendy Berry. (Barricade, $19.95.) The lives of Prince Charles and Princess Diana before their separation, recorded by their housekeeper.
14
15
16
DAVE BARRY'S COMPLETE GUIDE TO GUYS, by Dave Barry. (Random House, $21.) A humorist explains the strange ways of a species of males called "guys."
15
12
3
DARK SUN, by Richard Rhodes. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $32.50.) How and why the hydrogen bomb was made.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
121
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Relationships. (+)
2
2
26
THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra. (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $14.) How to "generate wealth in all its forms." (+)
3
3
5
STOP AGING NOW! by Jean Carper. (HarperCollins, $24.) Ways to combat aging and resist disease. (+)
4
1
THE MELATONIN MIRACLE, by Walter Pierpaoli and William Regelson with Carol Colman. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.) Making use of a hormone to slow down aging.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Sept. 2, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk (*) indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
A dagger (+) indicates that some bookstores report receiving bulk orders for a book.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE ANATOMY LESSON, by John David Morley. (St. Martin's, $21.95.) Seeking refuge from a brother's death in urban nihilism, this novel's hero works Rembrandt's famous painting into a harrowing meditation on mortality, mixed motives and the mystery of character.
A CIVIL ACTION, by Jonathan Harr. (Random House, $25.) This tale of a lawsuit (Massachusetts householders vs. industrial polluters) is most disquieting when it suggests that legal quirks and personalities determine who, if anyone, is compensated.
EDWIN HUBBLE: Mariner of the Nebulae, by Gale E. Christianson. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $27.50.) A readable, entertaining life of the brilliant astronomer whose work, fundamental to modern theories of the universe, never interfered with his self-promotion, pretension and vanity.
THE FIRST MAN, by Albert Camus. (Knopf, $23.) Camus's autobiographical novel, long suppressed by his family for fear of offending bloody-minded intellectuals, renders his deep attachment for the Algeria he grew up in and his refusal to choose violence; it appeared in France only last year.
FRIENDS IN HIGH PLACES: The Rise and Fall of Clark Clifford, by Douglas Frantz and David McKean. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) The authors, a reporter and a lawyer, see Mr.
Clifford's crash -- a criminal indictment after 50 years of smooth cruising at altitude in Washington -- as the inevitable end of such a career.
HIGH FIDELITY, by Nick Hornby. (Riverhead, $21.95.) Mr.
Hornby's charming, lively second book and first novel concerns Rob, a London record store owner who understands the world only as it fits the categories of pop culture.
IN CONFIDENCE, by Anatoly Dobrynin. (Times Books/Random House, $30.) The Soviet Ambassador to Washington from 1962 to 1986 writes with remarkable candor from his desk at the center of the cold war, condemning as blunders much he was once obliged to defend.
KONIN: A Quest, by Theo Richmond. (Pantheon, $27.50.) A British film maker's tactful, thoughtful re-creation, through documents and interviews, of his ancestors' town in Poland as it was before 1939, when German troops changed it forever.
RED EARTH AND POURING RAIN, by Vikram Chandra. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) An expansive and disarming first novel, about as big as India itself, in which a monkey (in former life a poet) must keep telling stories to avert the god of death.
SABBATH'S THEATER, by Philip Roth. (Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) Mickey Sabbath, a virtuoso of excess like Mr.
Roth's earlier protagonists, has a lot of thinking about death to do; he bears about him a fine and menacing tone of last things.
VIRTUALLY NORMAL: An Argument About Homosexuality, by Andrew Sullivan. (Knopf, $22.) The author, who is the editor of The New Republic, reflects reasonably on society's dealings with the minority of which he is a member; he thinks society could do a lot better.


The 80th Birthday Of a Library Lion
The New York Public Library, Sept. 11.


BOOKS IN BRIEF: FICTION
THE DOUBLE TONGUE  By William Golding. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $20.
This unfinished novella set in ancient Greece had been through two drafts at the time of William Golding's death in 1993, as we learn in an introductory note from the publisher.
At least one more was apparently planned, and is much needed.
The publisher's note also says that the author had not settled on a title.
The one selected from several he used appears early in the text, when the narrator, Arieka, picked as a 15-year-old to be a handmaid of Apollo at Delphi, notes that the god "speaks with a double tongue." This is a good choice, since the book as it stands is very much about speech and the sound of speech.
For more than 60 years, Arieka has been the Pythia, the human mouthpiece of the oracle.
It is a debased time.
Greece is now dominated by Rome (a young Julius Caesar appears, briefly, to get a typically opaque reading of his career prospects), and Delphi has become little more than a tourist trap.
One of Arieka's more entertaining notions is that a god becomes trivial when his worshipers make only trivial demands of him.
To put a better face on things, she learns to speak in hexameters, so that Apollo will sound like Homer -- which, everyone knows, is how gods sounded in the good old days.
While the plot is thin to the point of nonexistence and has its ragged points and omissions, Arieka's wry voice is a resounding success.
She speaks to us as a very old woman looking back over a gilded career that she respects but has never been able to take seriously.
One of the perks -- or plagues -- of being a Nobel Prize winner is that your heirs get to publish whatever they find on your desk.
It is hard to believe that William Golding would be altogether pleased with this particular book, but Arieka's voice saves him from embarrassment.
DAVID WILLIS MC CULLOUGH


Mia Schilling, John J. Grogan
Marie Isobel Schilling, the daughter of Joan and Richard Schilling of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to John James Grogan, the son of Suzanne and John P. Grogan of Doylestown, Pa.
The Rev.
James Devereux officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Rose in Belmar, N.J.
Mrs.
Grogan, who is 32 and is known as Mia, was Until recently the chair of the English department at the Notre Dame School, a Manhattan high school.
She graduated magna cum laude from Georgetown University and received a master's degree in English from Fordham University.
She is a candidate for a Ph.D in English at the Graduate Center of the City University of New York.
Her father is a partner in Burns, Kennedy, Schilling &amp; O'Shea, a law firm in New York.


'The Guitar Is A Precocious Beast'
To the Editor:
In his article "On an Instrument Made to Soar, Too Many Plod"  [ Aug. 27 ] , Allan Kozinn uses Steve Reich's composition "Electric Counterpoint" as a springboard to bemoan the "wimpy" electric guitar writing of contemporary composers.
To state, as Mr.
Kozinn does, that current composers still treat the electric guitar like an amplified classical guitar is simply out of touch.


A Happier Twist on Housing: From Bad Landlords to Co-ops
When Robert Santiago moved into his apartment on Division Avenue in Williamsburg 20 years ago, it had no boiler, no heat and few tenants, and the landlord did not pay property taxes.
The city took over the building in the mid-1980's.
Now, Mr.
Santiago and the other tenants own the building: they bought it four years ago from the city for $250 an apartment to form a co-op.
Every month, they meet to pay bills and discuss repairs.
"When I came here, it was the Twilight Zone," said Mr.
Santiago, 38.
"I can sleep now. I couldn't sleep before."


Beefcake, Cheesecake and Birthday Cake


Ravitch, Mayor's Choice to Run Schools, Has Extensive Public Record
Ever since Richard Ravitch emerged as Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's first choice to become New York City's Schools Chancellor last week, many of his friends have been calling to deliver a simple message: Don't take the job.
You can't possibly succeed.
Despite Mr.
Ravitch's rough-and-tumble public career -- he has directed the Metropolitan Transportation Authority and stood at the front lines in the Major League Baseball strike -- the schools, his friends are saying, may be one institution whose problems are too intractable to fix.


SEPT. 10-16: Nonpartisan Gerrymandering?; Georgia Votes to Let Federal Courts Redistrict
Redistricting, the most political of political processes, is the natural purview of politicians.
But in Atlanta last week, Georgia lawmakers voted to cede that responsibility to the Federal courts.
The immediate issue is Georgia's 11th Congressional District, which was designed in 1992 to elect a black representative.
It snakes 260 miles from the Atlanta suburbs to Savannah, picking up pockets of black population along the route.


Glimpses of the Microscopist's World
The impulse to share what you've seen is as strong in scientists as in everyone else.
But however esthetically fascinating an image may be, content is primary in the normal course of scientific research and publication.
Dee Breger, who runs the scanning electron-microscope laboratory at Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory in Palisades, N.Y., finally couldn't stand it any longer.
So she collected some of her own favorite images in a book, with no agenda other than to display her world.
The result, "Journeys in Microspace," is due out later this fall.
It contains micrographs of everything from fossils to stockings.
Breger notes in her book that these micrographs are neither digitally enhanced nor produced by computer manipulation.
They are the result of bombarding the material with electrons.
Above are several micrographs of industrial materials, elegant patterns produced by technology turning to view itself.
At left is a surface detail of a partly burned tungsten wire (magnified 14,500 times).
In the middle, a view of the hook side of Velcro (20 times) and at right, the looping curls that make the texture of a nylon stocking (140 times).


A 'Monster' of a Masterpiece in Connecticut
A few weeks ago, however, I saw a new building for which the word masterpiece seems exactly right: a little pavilion Philip Johnson has built for himself at his home here.
Johnson, who turned 89 in July, has announced that he plans to move to Rome when he hits 100.
In the meantime, he is making arrangements to turn his 40-acre Connecticut estate into a historic site.
The new building, situated just inside the entrance to the property, will be the visitors' pavilion.
People will gather there to watch a video on Philip Johnson and narrated by him before touring the Glass House, the Sculpture Gallery and the seven other structures that make up the domain he calls "the diary of an eccentric architect."


CORRECTION
A report in the Postings column last Sunday about the purchase of three buildings by the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center misidentified the seller of the school and convent.
The seller was St.
Catherine of Siena Parish, not the Archdiocese of New York.


For Destitute Veterans, Voluntary Boot Camp
Jamiyl A. Shareef did not want to miss the rehabilitation camp for homeless veterans held here this weekend.
To make sure he stayed awake for the 5 A.M. bus, he said, he spent the night in a Newark housing project smoking crack.
His mushrooming addiction in the last four months costs him $150 a day.
It also cost Mr.
Shareef, 36, his ties to his wife, his cheerleader daughter and three other teen-age children still living in his four-bedroom brick house in suburban Rockville, Md.


The Long Ride Home


Watch Your Words!
To the Editor:
The president of Stevens Institute of Technology, Harold J. Raveche, writes: "I want to produce scientists and engineers who can write and present eloquently and internalize the appropriate ethical parameters in the context of their future professions" ("Needed: Translators of Technology," Viewpoint, Aug. 27).
As a retired engineer who cares about word usage, I hope Mr.
Raveche will refrain from promoting the kind of prose exemplified by the second half of his sentence!
HORACE T. E. HONE Naugatuck, Conn., Aug. 28


Chinese Didn't Derail Women's Meeting
To the Editor:
Re your Sept. 13 editorial on the forum of nongovernmental organizations in Huairou, China:


Site for Intrepid Bargain Hunters
IT is not necessary to have a fat wallet to eat at a nice restaurant.
Disciplined diners with a strategy can enjoy almost any restaurant without breaking the budget.
Penny-wise consumers sometimes order two appetizers or a bowl of soup and an appetizer instead of a main course in upscale restaurants.
They also eliminate or split salads and desserts.
Those who consider dessert a must often stop at a Carvel or Haagen-Dazs store for their sweets at half or less the cost.


Baseball's Iron Men Aren't the Only Ones Made of Sterner Stuff
WHEN Thomas W. Weisel, chairman and chief executive of Montgomery Securities, stands up tomorrow at the Ritz Hotel in San Francisco to welcome the 2,000 people attending his company's 25th annual investment conference, he will invoke the name of Cal Ripken Jr.
As practically everyone in the United States knows by now, Mr.
Ripken is the Baltimore Orioles shortstop who surpassed Lou Gehrig as baseball's iron man by playing in 2,131 consecutive games between May 30, 1982 and Sept. 6, 1995.


F.Y.I.
Moored on High Q. I heard that blimps once docked at the top of the Empire State Building.
Is this true?
A.
Make that blimp, singular.
When the landmark skyscraper was built in 1931, it was indeed designed as a blimp terminal.
The balconies surrounding the top of the building's 16-story metal finial, now the 102d floor, were equipped to secure and dock the dirigibles as well as to house ticket stands and loading docks.
After the building was opened on May 1, 1931, and its mooring mast declared safe, it took four months before a blimp actually moored there.
On Sept. 16, 1931, The New York Times reported that a small privately owned blimp had docked for all of three minutes before taking flight. (This was after it circled for a half-hour in 40-mile-per-hour winds, attracting quite a crowd of gawkers and tying up traffic below.)
Two weeks later a Goodyear blimp dropped a bundle of newspapers, but it failed in an attempt to dock in near-perfect conditions the next day, according to the forthcoming Encyclopedia of New York City (Yale University Press, 1995).
After other docking failures, the mooring tower was abandoned in favor of a safer, more profitable venture: sightseeing.
Lurking for 114 Years
Q.
I often run in Central Park and I notice a strange black carving of a big cat (a cougar, perhaps?) crouched above the East Drive at about 76th Street.
It's partly hidden by trees, there's no pedestal, and sighting it unawares can give you quite a chill.
What is its history?
A.
The bronze kitty is called "Still Hunt." It was created by the sculptor Edward Kemeys, and Parks Department records show it has been scaring the Spandex and its predecessor off joggers and skaters since 1881.
Kemeys's inspiration to sculpt animals came while he worked as an ax man with the Parks Department's corp of engineers in the 1860's.
He traveled around the United States in search of indigenous beasts to sculpt and places to put his works.
His special talent seemed to lie with felines.
"Still Hunt" depicts an American mountain lion; Kemeys's two majestic African lions guard the Art Institute of Chicago's gates.
That Mystifying Hum
Q.
There's a walled compound on Avenue A between Fifth and Sixth Streets that mystifies me.
It looks like some sort of power plant (and it hums!), but there are no signs identifying it, and I never see anyone coming or going.
What is this place?
A. Your instincts were correct.
The compound is a Con Ed substation, one of 14 in Manhattan that distribute power generated at larger plants around the city, Bruce Wittmer, a spokesman for the company, said.
Electric power is generated at very high voltages, which are gradually decreased to allow for use in homes and businesses.
The substation, at 502 Sixth Street, receives power from the East River Generating Station, on 14th Street, and feeds it to the surrounding area.
Some substations are also used by meter readers and maintenance workers, Mr.
Wittmer said, but Sixth Street apparently sees little human traffic, a sign that it is doing its job.
As usual with city infrastructure, you only hear about substations when they aren't doing their job.
The last time they were in the news was August 1990, when a fire at the South Street substation cut power to most of lower Manhattan and parts of the subway system.
Subway Map as Art
Q.
Who draws the subway map?
I love its weird pseudo-Cubist crunching of New York geography. (For instance, the Harlem River ends up twice as wide as the East.)  A. Since 1992, the Transit Authority has used C.A.D. programs to draw and redraw the map three to four times a year, said David Jenkins, of the authority's marketing department.
The computer version is based on a 1979 map that was hand drawn by a graphic designer, Michael Hertz.
Mr.
Hertz said the distortions were inevitable to fit the finished product into subway car map frames.
The result: a massive Manhattan, a widened Queens, a shrunken Brooklyn, and a squat Bronx.
JESSE McKINLEY


BOOKS IN BRIEF: NONFICTION
THE HOUSE OF PURPLE HEARTS  Stories of Vietnam Vets  Who Find Their Way Back.
By Paul Solotaroff.
HarperCollins, $22.
Twenty years after the fall of Saigon, many Vietnam veterans still find the peace a greater danger than the war ever was.
In his first book, "The House of Purple Hearts," Paul Solotaroff movingly chronicles the creation and operation of the New England Shelter for Homeless Veterans, a treatment center founded in 1989 to care for veterans whose psychological problems had led them to drug abuse and homelessness.
The numbers were staggering.
The Veterans Administration was generally unable to help them, the author writes, but the New England Shelter, with its mix of counseling, therapy and job training, has been able to restore scores of veterans to working lives.
Mr.
Solotaroff has deftly combined the terrifying recollections of battle-shocked men with an inspiring story of hope.
MICHAEL LICHTENSTEIN


Chunnel Adding Trips To Paris and Brussels
Passenger service on the high-speed Eurostar train through the Chunnel, the tunnel under the English Channel, will be expanded this fall.
There are currently nine round trips a day between London and Paris, five between London and Brussels.
On Sept. 24 an additional daily round trip on each route will be added.
The London-to-Paris route will expand to 11 daily round trips on on Oct. 22, then to 12 on Jan. 8.


Court Says Denver Can End Forced Busing
Although Denver public schools are more racially segregated than ever, a Federal judge has told the city it can abandon a 21-year-old court-supervised experiment in forced busing and return to neighborhood schools.
The new political power of Denver's black and Hispanic populations will guarantee that a fair share of public school money will be channeled to largely black and Hispanic schools, Judge Richard Matsch said in his ruling on Tuesday.


Work: The Sequel
Jittery after your job?
From singing with barbershop quartets to trimming topiary gardens, many are the offbeat ways to unwind after work.
Send your story to On the Job, Money and Business, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
Or by E-mail to onthejob@nytimes.com.
Include your phone number.
All submissions become the property of The Times and may be republished in any medium.


Warming Up With Mozart, Vivaldi
THE Hartford Symphony doesn't open its subscription season for more than a month yet, but its members in the symphony's Chamber Orchestra will be playing Wednesday evening at the Jewish Community Center in West Hartford and Thursday at the Cigna Auditorium in Bloomfield.
At the 7:30 programs the group's music director, Michael Lankester, will conduct Mozart's Divertimento in D (K. 136) and Vivaldi's "Four Seasons," the latter featuring the violinist Brian Lewis.
A free reception with the musicians follows both performances.
Seating information for the two concerts as well as a brochure listing programs and soloists for the regular season (which begins Oct. 20 and 21 at The Bushnell in Hartford) is available by calling 244-2999.


Snapshots of the U.S. Economy: Some Clouds May Be Moving On
Donald Rataczak, an economist at Georgia State University, checks out the number of buildings with "for sale" and "for lease" signs whenever he goes into downtown Atlanta.
And he usually finds out how full the motels are during the two big furniture shows in High Point-Greensboro, N.C.
Stephen S. Roach constantly talks to securities analysts at Morgan Stanley, his Wall Street firm.
They relay the sentiment they are hearing from executives at hundreds of companies.
As for Henry Kaufman, the renowned prognosticator, "when I drive home in New Jersey, I always look to see how crowded the shopping center parking lots are."


Digging In the Surprises for Next Spring
FORTUNATE indeed are those gardeners, especially those with an eye for the unusual, who remembered to mail in their orders for hardy spring-flowering bulbs during the summer months.
If the orders have already been shipped, these foresighted planners are now able to tuck the bulbs into their appointed places.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: VILLAGES, EAST AND WEST Post-Bohemia Crisis: What Should Bleecker Street Be?; At Old Village Gate, New Acts Are Signed, With CVS as Headliner
The Village Gate -- the sprawling, barn-like Greenwich Village institution where jazz greats like Theolonious Monk and Miles Davis once held forth, where the Byrds made their debut and where Dustin Hoffman worked as a waiter and Sam Shepard washed dishes -- will soon be the home of a quintessentially mallish drug and convenience store: CVS pharmacy, as well as three smaller commercial properties: an Italian restaurant, a health-food restaurant and a jewelry store.
CVS will occupy 9,000 square feet in the historic building at 160 Bleecker, built in 1897 as a single-room-occupancy hotel.
Its lease is for 10 years, and it is expected to open around the beginning of 1996.
Under a 12-year lease, Trattoria Bologna, described by a lawyer for the owner as a northern Italian restaurant, will occupy 3,000 square feet and an outdoor cafe.
Ziggy's Jewelry Salon will take up 550 square feet and is expected to open at the end of October, said Ziggy Appias, who owns another Bleecker Street jewelry store, Ziggy's Originals.
The contractor for the health-food restaurant, Christopher Rozycki, said the owner was out of town and unavailable for comment.


To Find New-Issue Players, Use a Scorecard
IF the stock market has been a party in 1995, nowhere have the champagne corks popped more loudly than among initial public offerings.
So: Here's to Netscape Communications, an Internet venture which rose 167 percent during its first day..
Here's to Redhook Ale, a Seattle microbrewer, up 68 percent since its debut in mid-August.
And then there's Premisys Communications, a maker of telecommunications equipment, up an astonishing six-fold since April.
It's not just a few standouts, either.
Three of every four new issues over the last 12 months have surpassed this year's soaring stock market, and dozens have doubled in price.
"God should be so generous every 12 months," said John Fitzgibbon Jr., editor of the IPO Aftermarket.


Pope's South Africa Visit Honors 2 Vows
By making his first official visit to South Africa today, Pope John Paul II kept two promises.
The first he made last year to Africa's Christian bishops when he said he would come to Africa to close their synod because they had gone to Rome to open it.
The second he made long ago, when he said he would not set foot in South Africa until it mended its ways.


Now, a Debate Over Trolleys In South Jersey
In the 25 years since Burlington and Gloucester Counties last had commuter rail service, people here have had good reason to suspect that mass transit is mainly for people in North Jersey.
But things may soon change.
Next month, New Jersey Transit is expected to unveil its recommendations for a trolley line linking the Gloucester suburbs to Philadelphia via Camden, with a possible extension into Burlington later on.


The Chain Gang Show
ANY ANIMAL WITH TEETH ENOUGH will chew off its leg to escape a trap.
Human beings behaved similarly when chain gang imprisonment -- a successor to slavery -- swept through the labor-starved South during Reconstruction.
Beaten and driven like maltreated beasts, shackled to one another around the clock, prisoners turned to self-mutilation to make themselves useless for work.
They slashed their bodies, broke their own legs, crippled themselves by cutting their tendons.
A public outcry beginning in the 30's gradually shamed even the most backward states into abolishing the gangs.
Their return this spring to Alabama -- followed by Florida and Arizona, with several other states mulling them over -- signals an end to the fiction of rehabilitation and a resurgence of the American appetite for spectacles of punishment and humiliation.
Calls for corporal punishment in schools and for the caning of petty criminals tell a similar story.


Penn Keeps Streak Alive With Big Second-Half Rally
Penn 20, Dartmouth 12
No one ever said that all of the games in Penn's winning streak were pretty.
Victory No. 22, a 20-12 battle with Dartmouth yesterday, certainly wasn't.
After a lackluster and sloppy first half, the Quakers (1-0) scored 17 second-half points while holding the Big Green (0-1) scoreless.


Charlotte Daniel, Michael B. Wray
Charlotte Bemiss Daniel, a daughter of Sally L. Chase of Washington and Robert W. Daniel Jr. of Spring Grove, Va., was married yesterday to Michael Bateman Wray, a son of Anita E. Stahlgren of Denver and Michael B. Wray of Houston.
The Rev.
Dr.
John C. Harper performed the ceremony at the Brandon (Va.) Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Wray, 29, is a candidate for a Ph.D. in higher education administration at New York University.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College and received a master's degree in counseling psychology from Boston College.
Her father, formerly a Republican member of Congress from Virginia, owns Brandon Plantation in Spring Grove.
The bride is a descendant of Salmon P. Chase, the first Secretary of the Treasury and later the Chief Justice of the United States.


To Be, or Not to . . . O.K., Cut!
WITH OTHELLO AND HIS entourage seated in all their finery behind a long table weighed down with food, Cassio escorts Desdemona into the sumptuous hall where she demurely performs a solo bridal dance.
Inspired, Othello jumps onto the table and offers a slow and sensual Moorish dance in return.
Then just as suddenly he springs down and leads his young wife in a stately pavane.
For Othello and Desdemona, played by Laurence Fishburne and Irene Jacob, it is a moment of exquisite happiness.
For Oliver Parker, who is directing his film adaptation of "Othello," the scene is crucial to explaining the tragedy that follows.
"This has to be a film that anyone can come and see," the British director said.
"You don't have to know anything about Shakespeare to understand it."


What's Really New? Watch the Ripples
THE dress was pale, crisp and geometric, with a flat silver buckle below the waist.
It was the hit in Paris this month at the ready-to-wear show, where even the exhibition hostesses wore ice-blue outfits.
They, like the buckled dress, were recognizable by fashion professionals as Prada-esque.
Trade shows, where buyers choose the clothes that reach the stores, are part of fashion's food chain but are fed by few designers.
No one is surprised to find low-end manufacturers serving up their versions of Prada's styles or of other high fashion outfits that have appeared at runway shows.
After all, for years gilt-chained quilted purses and braided boucle suits have shrieked "Chanel style," even though Chanel challenges counterfeits.


Cells and Silicon
CAN MAN REALLY merge with machine, as in the bionic hybrids of science fiction?
Is human nature so orderly beneath its chaotic exterior that quivery nerve cells can coexist with the transistor's either-or certainties?
And if a silicon chip can enjoy true intimacy with a network of neurons, does that mean humans, too, are just machines of a special kind?
Such questions came to mind after scientists at the Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry in Martinsried, Germany, reported last month that they had established dialogue between a nerve cell of a leech and a silicon chip.
One chip, with a junction pressed against the cell surface, can induce the electrochemical changes that trip the cell's natural mechanism for propagating a nerve-to-nerve signal.
Another kind of chip developed by the German team can sense this signal.


Along With Youth: Mets' Young Players Do It Again
When Rico Brogna's 20th home run of the season barely cleared the center-field fence in the third inning, he quickly rounded the bases and smiled broadly as he headed toward the dugout.
"After all the expectations carried over from last season, I'm starting to feel like I've had a good season," said Brogna, the second-year first baseman.


Surrounding the Bride With the Aura of Generations Past
SUSAN ALYSON YOUNG has degrees in art and education and a professional background in ballet dancing, costume design and college teaching.
But it was in the 1960's, while working as a bridal consultant in the salon at G. Fox &amp; Company, the now-defunct Hartford department store, that she found her calling.
"It was an exquisite salon, and service was the key word," recalled Ms.
Young.
"We worked on appointment. We wrote the articles for the newspaper. We went and dressed the brides the morning of the wedding."


Nancy J. Brown, Andrew M. Danzig
Nancy Judith Brown, a senior planner at Buckhurst Fish &amp; Jacquemart, urban planners in New York, and Andrew Michael Danzig, a financial analyst at the Federal Reserve Bank in New York, are to be married today in Little Silver, N.J.
Rabbi Steven Fineblum, a cousin of the bride, is to perform the ceremony at the home of the bridegroom's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Leonard Danzig.
The bride graduated from Humboldt State University and received a master's degree in urban planning from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Bernice Brown of Encino, Calif., and Arthur Brown of Las Vegas, Nev.


Experts to Review AZT Role As the Chief Drug for H.I.V.
After years of recommending AZT as the first-line drug for treating the virus that causes AIDS, Federal health officials are considering a change because of surprising results with other drugs.
Dr.
Anthony S. Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said in an interview that he planned to convene a meeting where independent experts could decide whether AZT should remain the first choice.


Mr. Bush's Asian Tour
President Bush's economic advisers tried to convince him that America's hopes for future prosperity lay in ties to Asia.
Belatedly, Mr.
Bush has decided they were right, and in the last two weeks he has raked in millions of dollars on an Asian swing that has not exactly been a testament to diplomacy.
In Vietnam Mr.
Bush said former Defense Secretary Robert McNamara's confessional about American mistakes during the war was a "revisionist" history.
In Beijing he seemed to undercut the Clinton Administration's efforts to persuade authorities to lift their repressive hand on the United Nation's Women's Conference, saying the forum has not helped Sino-American relations.


Snapshots of the U.S. Economy: Some Clouds May Be Moving On; A Buzz, Not a Roar, In Record Business
The meeting of marketing executives came to order -- with a boom.
The air in the conference room at Geffen Records was suddenly throbbing to the new Sonic Youth song, "The Diamond Sea." The assembled goatees and ponytails bobbed to a screeching guitar riff that improbably got even louder.
"The album is definitely catching a buzz," David Grant, in charge of college promotion for Geffen, a unit of MCA Inc., told his colleagues once the noise had died down.
There followed a brief discussion of how many hundred thousand albums the group would sell -- a performance that would be solid but unspectacular in an industry that loves multimillion-selling albums.


Foreign Affairs; Long Live Saddam Hussein
Which Arab leader would you say is most likely to remain in power longest?
Well, if you were to answer that question on the basis of which Arab leader had the most colleagues rooting for him, the answer would be obvious: it would not be Hosni Mubarak, or King Hussein, or Yasir Arafat.
It would be Saddam Hussein.
That's right.
Saddam Hussein may look as if he's in trouble, and he could fall tomorrow or in the year 2010.
But whenever he goes, be sure of one thing: more leaders in the Middle East will put on a black tie and mourn his passing than would for any of his colleagues.
This would be funny if it weren't so tragic: while the Clinton Administration is working and praying for Saddam's demise, most of his fellow rulers like him just the way he is.
That is, strong enough to hold Iraq together, weak enough not to threaten his neighbors, embargoed enough not to be able to sell too much oil and caged enough not to be a factor in inter-Arab politics.
That is a Saddam that serves a lot of people's interests, and the Clinton Administration is fooling itself if it thinks otherwise.


Louise Townsend, Benjamin Schmidt
Louise Davidson Townsend, an editor of history textbooks at Bedford Books, a publisher in Boston, was married yesterday in Princeton, N.J., to Benjamin Schmidt, a lecturer in history and literature at Harvard University.
The Rev.
Dr.
R.
Morton Darrow of the Universal Life Church performed the nondenominational ceremony at Prospect House, the faculty club at Princeton University.
Ms.
Townsend, 31, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Barnard College and received a master's degree in history from the University of California at Los Angeles.
She is a daughter of Janet L. Townsend and Prof.
Charles E. Townsend of Princeton.
Her father is a professor of Russian and Czech linguistics and the chairman of the department of Slavic languages and literatures at Princeton.


Budapest
As residents of the capital stream back into Budapest after the long summer break at Lake Balaton and elsewhere in the countryside, their mood is likely to be cheerful, despite the fact that the Hungarian economy is in the doldrums.
Fall is irresistibly pleasurable in Budapest, with the trees on the hills above the Danube matching the russet and yellow ornamental tiles of cathedrals and churches.


Jennifer Stoller, Mohammed Barakat
Jennifer Ruth Stoller, a daughter of Marjory and Martin Stoller of Bethesda, Md., was married yesterday to Mohammed Adel Barakat, a son of Rihab and Adel Barakat of Moorpark, Calif.
The Rev.
Dean McDonald, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at Woodend Manor, a historic house in Chevy Chase, Md.
Mrs.
Barakat, 29, was until recently the senior project designer at Louis Nelson Associates, graphic and industrial designers in New York.
She did the design and drawing for a mural engraved in granite at the Korean War Veterans Memorial that was dedicated this summer in Washington.
She graduated from Carnegie Mellon University.


Even With State Permit, Handicapped Can't Park
To the Editor:
The article about the troubles a New Jersey resident with disabilities faced in obtaining a handicap parking permit in New York City ("Long Road to Handicap Permit Is Paved With Tickets," Sept. 3) tells only a part of the story.


ON THE TOWNS
ALBERT MUSIC HALL The Pinelands Cultural Society presents "Sounds of the Jersey Pines," a series of Saturday night concerts, through the end of the year.
The program features live presentations of bluegrass, country and Pinelands music.
Show time, 8 P.M.
Admission: $4; $1 for children under 12. 139 Wells Mill Road (Route 532), Waretown. (609) 971-1593.
COMMUNITY THEATER OF MORRISTOWN Stephane Grappelli, violinist, and his quartet present a jazz concert.
Sept. 24 at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $30. 100 South Street, Morristown. (201) 539-8008.
MAXWELL'S Junior Brown and Kate Jacobs.
Tonight at 9.
Tickets: $12.
Witchy Poo, The Thrones and Branch Manager.
Thursday at 9 P.M.
Tickets: $5.
Seam and Spent.
Friday at 10 P.M.
Tickets: $7.
The Gefkens and Room Eleven.
Saturday at 10 P.M.
Tickets: $7.
Heather Nova and Ben Folds Five.
Sept. 24 at 9 P.M.
Tickets: $5. 1039 Washington Street, Hoboken. (201) 798-4064.
STATE THEATER The Guitar Summmit, a Who's Who of guitar players spanning a spectrum of musical styles, features performances by Steve Morse, Jorma Kaukonen, Manuel Barruco and Kenny Burrell.
Thursday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $16-$25. 15 Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick. (908) 246-7469.
TENAFLY PUBLIC LIBRARY A free jazz concert with Allan Namery on saxophone, Brian Glassman on bass, Noreen Gray on piano and Tim Pleasant on drums.
Today at 2:30 P.M. 401 Tenafly Road, Tenafly. (201) 568-8660.
TURNING POINT Kenny Rankin.
Today at 5:30 and 8:30 P.M.
Tickets: $17.50.
Open mike with Rick Ilowite.
Tuesday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $2.
John Stewart.
Wednesday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $14.
Chris Smither.
Thursday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $12.50.
Robert Gordon.
Friday at 7:30 and 10 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
Might Sam McClain.
Saturday at 10 P.M.
Tickets: $12.50. 468 Piermont Avenue, Piermont, N.Y. (914) 359-1089.
WATCHUNG ARTS CENTER The Jazz Series continues with a tribute to Sammy Cahn with Babey, Keith Ingham, Randy Reinhart and Murray Wall.
Friday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $10. 18 Stirling Road, Watchung. (908) 753-0190.
WILLIAM PATERSON COLLEGE The New Music Festival begins with a chamber music concert by the Talujon percussion quartet.
Monday at 8 P.M.
Free.
The 1995-96 Midday Artists Series continues with a jazz concert.
Thursday at 12:30 P.M.
Tickets: $3.
Next week, Diana Falk.
Shea Center for Performing Arts on campus, 300 Pompton Road, Wayne. (201) 595-2315.
BERGEN COUNTY PLAYERS The community theater group begins its 63d season with the Stephen Sondheim-James Lapine musical "Into the Woods." Friday and Saturday at 8:30 P.M., next Sunday at 2 P.M. and Sept. 28-Oct. 1.
The Little Firehouse Theater, 298 Kinderkamack Road, Oradell. (201) 261-4200.
BLACK RIVER PLAYHOUSE The Chester Theater Group continues its 1995-96 season with "Lips Together, Teeth Apart," by Terrence McNally.
Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M.
Through Oct. 7.
Tickets: $12; $11 for students and the elderly. (908) 879-7304.
CIRCLE PLAYHOUSE The Circle Players present "Lost in Yonkers," by Neil Simon; directed by Michael Monaco.
Friday and Saturday at 8:30 P.M. and Sept. 29-30.
Tickets: $11. $1 discount for students and the elderly. 416 Victoria Avenue, Piscataway. (908) 968-7555.
EASTERN CHRISTIAN CHILDREN'S RETREAT The Look Sharp Performing Company presents "A Road to Anywhere," directed and choreographed by Colleen Cross and Deborah Tomkins.
Saturday at 2 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $8.
Bethlehem Lutheran Church, 155 Linwood Avenue, Ridgewood. (201) 238-1466.
ELIZABETH PLAYHOUSE "End of Summer." Starts Friday.
Friday and Saturday at 7:30 P.M. and Sunday at 2 P.M.
Through Oct. 15.
Tickets: $8. 1100 East Jersey Street, Elizabeth. (908) 355-0077.
GEORGE STREET PLAYHOUSE "The Mousetrap," by Agatha Christie.
Saturday through Oct. 22.
Tuesday through Saturday at 8 P.M. and Sunday at 2 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $18-$30. 9 Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick. (908) 246-7717.
LUNA STAGE "Two One-Acts in Two Weekends" presents "Lou Gehrig Did Not Die of Cancer" and "Third and Oak: The Laundromat." Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. and Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $10-$20. 6 Erie Street, Montclair. (201) 744-3309.
PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE "Nine" explores the life and libido of an Italian film director and the women encircling his imagination.
Wednesday and Friday at 8 P.M., Thursday at 2 and 8 P.M., Saturday and Sunday at 3 and 8 P.M.
Through Oct. 15.
Tickets: $31-$46.
Brookside Drive, Millburn. (201) 376-4343.
RITZ THEATER "Ten Little Indians," by Agatha Christie.
Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. and Sunday at 2 P.M.
Through Oct. 7.
Tickets: $12-$14. 915 White House Pike, Oaklyn. (609) 858-5230.
SOMERSET VALLEY PLAYHOUSE "Nunsense," the musical comedy by Dan Googin, presented by the Somerset Valley Players.
Directed by Linda Giordano.
Tonight at 7.
Tickets: $15. (908) 369-7469.
ANNE REID ART GALLERY Oils, collages and painted papier-mache sculptures by Anne Eaton Parker.
Through Oct. 16.
Monday through Friday, 8 A.M. to 4 P.M. and Sunday, 1 to 4 P.M.
Princeton Day School, The Great Road, Princeton. (609) 924-6700.
ART FORMS A new group show featuring "Ceramic Pieces," by Steffanie Samuels and Arthur Gould; "Functional Metalwork," by Mark Haines, and "Art Objects," by Dan Cuthbert.
Through Sept. 30.
Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M., and Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. 16 Monmouth Street, Red Bank. (908) 530-4330.
ARTISTS SHOWCASE "Beyond Earth: Visionary and Ethereal Art" offers fantasy, surrealistic, angel and mystical paintings, sculpture, jewelry and craft items by artists from around the country.
Through Jan. 31.
Wednesday through Friday, noon to 6 P.M.; Saturday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M., and Sunday, 11:30 A.M. to 5 P.M. 10 Budd Avenue, Chester. (908) 879-9552.
ART MUSEUM OF PRINCETON UNIVERSITY "What Photographs Look Like." Through Oct. 22.
Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. and Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
The campus of Princeton University.
Free. (609) 258-3788.
BERGEN MUSEUM OF ART AND SCIENCE "Kenneth Licht: 10 Years of Art Boxes" displays 85 boxes filled with collages and collections of objects.
Through November.
Tuesday through Saturday, 9:30 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Suggested admission: adults, $2.50; children, $1. 327 East Ridgewood Avenue, Paramus. (201) 265-1248.
FINKELSTEIN MEMORIAL LIBRARY "Star Trek Collectibles Exhibit" includes toys, books, comics, cards, recordings, craft items and other memorabilia from around the world.
Through October. 24 Chestnut Street, Spring Valley, N.Y. (914) 352-5700.
GALLERY AT SCHERING-PLOUGH "Celebration of Light and Shadow" displays more than 35 oils, pastels and sculptures by Marilyn Ostrich-Nelson.
Through Sept. 29.
Monday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. 1 Giralda Farms, Madison. (201) 822-7000.
GROUNDS FOR SCULPTURE "Spring-Summer 1995 Exhibition," with recent works by James Dinerstein, Jesse Moore and Yuyu Yang.
Through Sept. 30.
Tuesday through Thursday by appointment, and Friday through Sunday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. 18 Fairgrounds Road, Hamilton. (609) 586-0616.
GUILD OF CREATIVE ART "35th Anniversary Special Art Show," featuring works by charter and new members of the guild.
Through Oct. 5.
Tuesday through Saturday, noon to 4:30 P.M. 620 Broad Street and Route 35, Shrewsbury. (908) 741-1441.
HISTORICAL SOCIETY OF ROCKLAND COUNTY Through objects, stories and photographs, "Hidden Children: The Youngest Survivors of the Holocaust" chronicles the histories of 17 children who escaped Nazi persecution in sanctuaries from convents and farms to underground bunkers.
Through Nov. 12.
Tuesday through Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Suggested donation: $3.
Jane Marks, author of "The Hidden Children: The Secret Survivors of the Holocaust," presents a lecture and book-signing.
Today at 3 P.M. 20 Zukor Road, New City, New York. (914) 634-9629.
HUNTERDON ART CENTER "The Fine Art of Illustration," original art of the greatest illustrators past and present, featuring work by artists ranging from Norman Rockwell and Charles Dana Gibson to Bernie Fuchs, Milton Glaser and Joseph Bowler Jr.
Through Oct. 22.
Wednesday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. 7 Lower Center Street, Clinton. (908) 735-8415.
JERSEY CITY STATE COLLEGE Recent works by bachelor of fine arts degree candidates.
Through Oct. 5.
Monday through Friday, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
The Courtney Gallery of Brossnickle Hall, 2039 Kennedy Boulevard, Jersey City. (201) 200-3214.
J.
RICHARD GALLERY The gallery commemorates its 30th anniversary with a retrospective of works by Donald Purdy, an American Impressionist.
Through Oct. 18.
Monday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 64 East Palisade Avenue, Englewood. (201) 871-1050.
LENA DI GANGI GALLERY Bill Block displays his reverse glass paintings.
Through Sept. 30.
Tuesday through Friday, 1 to 6 P.M., and Saturday, 1 to 4 P.M. 744 McBride Avenue, West Paterson. (201) 345-1210.
LONG BEACH ISLAND FOUNDATION OF ARTS AND SCIENCE "Island Invitational Art Opening," a retrospective of artists who live or have lived on Long Beach Island.
Through Sept. 30.
Monday through Saturday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M., and Sunday, noon to 4 P.M.
Free. 120 Long Beach Boulevard, Loveladies. (609) 494-3169.
LOUIS ARMSTRONG EXHIBITION Paintings, collages, drawings and collages illuminating the life and music of Louis Armstrong.
The show, subtitled "A Cultural Legacy," is running at two Camden locations through Oct. 7: the Walt Whitman Cultural Arts Center, 2d and Cooper Streets, Monday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. (609-964-8300), and the Stedman Art Gallery, on the campus of Rutgers University, Monday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. (609-225-6245).
MONMOUTH COUNTY HISTORICAL ASSOCIATION MUSEUM AND LIBRARY "Optical Delights: Stereographic Views of Monmouth County" presents images of Victorian life.
Through February.
Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M., and Sunday, 1 to 4 P.M.
Admission: $2 for adults, $1 for children and $1.50 for the elderly. 70 Court Street, Freehold. (908) 462-1466.
MONMOUTH MUSEUM "Red Bank, Looking Back: A Photograhic Exhibition" and "Imaging New Jersey, From the Printmaking Council of New Jersey." Through Oct. 29.
Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M. and Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Brookdale Community College campus, Lincroft. (908) 747-2266.
MONTCLAIR ART MUSEUM "Still Life Works From the Collection" offers 13 paintings by American artists ranging in style from 19th-century realism to 20th-century modernism.
Through September.
"Elizabeth Berdann," a self-titled installation featuring portraits of elderly women in a nursing home.
Through Oct. 1."Affinities and Influences: Native American Art and American Modernism." Through Oct. 1.
Wednesday through Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Admission: $4; $3 for the elderly and students with ID. 3 South Mountain Avenue, Montclair. (201) 746-5555.
MORRIS COUNTY HISTORICAL SOCIETY "A Bouquet of Brides" displays more than a dozen wedding gowns dating to 1750 and reflecting a variety of styles and histories.
Through October.
Admission: $3.
Thursday, 11 A.M. to 3 P.M., and Sunday, 1:30 to 4 P.M. 68 Morris Avenue, Morristown. (201) 267-3465.
MORRIS MUSEUM The New Jersey Fine Arts Annual features 26 visual artists and crafts people throughout the state and their works in sculpture, photography, textiles, painting and mixed media.
Through September.
"Albert Green: The Celebration of a Master Potter," a posthumous retrospective.
Through Oct. 8.
Today, 2 to 5 P.M.
Monday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., and Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Admission: $4; $2 for students and the elderly. 6 Normandy Heights Road, Morristown. (201) 538-0454.
NATHANS ART GALLERY Salute To Women In the Arts presents "Judge's Choice," oils, watercolors, sculpture and serigraphs by Harriet Goldstein, Carolyn Lackey, Mildred Kaye and Mara Lehmann.
Through Oct. 28.
Opening reception on Sept. 30.
Tuesday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M., Saturday, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M. 1205 McBride Avenue, West Paterson. (201) 785-9119.
NEWARK MUSEUM "New Jersey Arts Annual: Celebrating Diversity in Crafts" takes a look at traditional and modern works in the state.
Through Oct. 15.
"American Art Pottery: An Uneasy Evolution, 1880-1930." Through Oct. 22.
"Astronauts: The Star Travelers," photographs of the Apollo XI flight.
Through Dec. 31.
Wednesday through Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 49 Washington Street, Newark. (201) 596-6550.
NEW JERSEY CENTER FOR VISUAL ARTS "The Creative Process: Drawings by Sculptors," featuring the works of Roy Crosse, Robin Hill and John Van Alstine.
Through Oct. 22.
Monday through Friday, noon to 4 P.M., and Saturday and Sunday, 2 to 4 P.M. 68 Elm Street, Summit. (908) 273-9121.
NEW JERSEY HISTORICAL SOCIETY "Moving Through Memory: Caribbean Folk Arts in New Jersey." Through April.
Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. 230 Broadway, Newark. (201) 483-3939.
NEW JERSEY STATE MUSEUM "From Folk Art to Abstraction," the works of 20 artists.
"Baskets and Brooms: Delaware Adaptation to European Contact," wood splint baskets made by the Delaware Indians from the 18th to the early 20th century.
"Birds by Edward Marshall Boehm," more than 40 porcelain figures depicting birds in their natural habitats.
Through Oct. 22.
Tuesday through Saturday, 9 A.M. to 4:45 P.M., and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 205 West State Street, Trenton. (609) 292-6308.
NOYES MUSEUM "Drawing Outside the Lines: Works on Paper by Outsider Artists." Drawings in pencil, crayon and other media by Eddie Arning, Minnie Evans, Bill Traylor and Martin Ramirez.
Through today.
"Fields of Vision: Photography by Leonard Balish." Through Oct. 15.
"From Object to Subject: Constructions and Collages by L.A.D. Montgomery." Through Dec. 19.
Wednesday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Admission: $3; the elderly, $1.50; students and children under 18, 50 cents; free on Fridays.
Lily Lake Road, Oceanville. (609) 652-8848.
PATERSON MUSEUM "Now and Then: Sculptures and Paintings by Joe Ruffilo." Through Sept. 30.
Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, 12:30 to 4:30 P.M. 2 Market Street, Paterson. (201) 881-3874.
PATERSON PUBLIC LIBRARY "Imagenes Contra el SIDA/Images Against AIDS," a series of silk-screen prints created by 36 Latino artists to heighten awareness of the disease.
Through Sept. 30.
Monday through Thursday, 9 A.M. to 8 P.M., and Friday and Saturday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. 250 Broadway, Paterson. (201) 948-5200.
PETERS VALLEY CRAFT CENTER "Artists in Residence," featuring works in wood, fiber, ceramics, fine metals, blacksmithing metals and photography.
Through Dec. 31.
Sunday through Thursday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., and Friday and Saturday, 10 A.M. to 9 P.M. 19 Kuhn Road, Route 615, Layton. (201) 948-5200.
PIERMONT FINE ARTS GALLERY "Around the World in 18 Days" presents paintings, sculpture, ceramics, prints, drawings and collage inspired by places near and far.
Through today.
Recent paintings by Ludlow Smethurst open Thursday.
Through Oct. 1.
Opening reception today, 1 to 5 P.M.
Thursday and Sunday, 1 to 6 P.M., and Friday and Saturday, 1 to 9 P.M. 218 Ash Street, Piermont, N.Y. (914) 398-1907.
PRINCETON UNIVERSITY "Oasis Series: Drawings by Leni Paquet-Morante." Through Oct. 17.
Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 4:40 P.M.
Program For Women's Studies, 113 Dickinson Hall, Princeton. (609) 258-3060.
PRINTMAKING COUNCIL OF NEW JERSEY "Dimension Dementia: Prints Pushed Into Three Dimensions." Through Oct. 7.
"Award Show: Best-in-Show Winners From the 21st Juried Members Exhibit." Through Friday.
Wednesday through Friday, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M., and Saturday 1 to 4 P.M. 440 River Road, North Branch. (908) 725-2110.
RARITAN VALLEY COMMUNITY COLLEGE "Observer Highway" features paintings and drawings by Serena Bocchino.
Through Sept. 28.
Monday through Friday, 10 to 6 P.M.
Route 22 West, Somerville. (908) 218-8876.
RIDGE AND VALLEY CENTER The Ridge and Valley Conservancy Inc. presents "Bears and Other Neighbors." Saturday, 11 A.M. to 2 P.M.
Through Nov. 25. 16 Main Street, Blairstown. (908) 362-8760.
SCHERER GALLERY "The Kaleidoscope Show of the Decade" features a large selection of handcrafted and antique kaleidoscopes. 93 School Road West, Marlboro. (908) 536-9465.
SETON HALL UNIVERSITY ART GALLERY "Rocks in the Head," a solo exhibition of new color photographs by H. Lisa Solon.
Through Nov. 3.
Free.
Daily, 10 A.M. to 10 P.M.
The Bishop Dougherty Student Center, 400 South Orange Avenue. (201) 761-9459.
STEAMROLLER GALLERY "The Black Eddy," a collaborative occurence led by Nell Bernstein.
Through today.
Landscapes by Corrinne Lalin and John Schmidtberger.
Through Oct. 22.
Friday and Saturday, noon to 9 P.M. and Sunday, noon to 6 P.M. 52 Bridge Street, Frenchtown. (908) 996-7279.
STONY BROOK GALLERY "Farms and Farming in New Jersey," a juried photography exhibition.
Through Oct. 21.
Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 31 Titus Mill Road, Pennington. (609) 737-3735.
SWAIN GALLERIES "Recent Paintings," by Richard Nagrodsky, incorporates elaborate borders within or on mats of boldly sculptural gouaches of flowers and vegetables.
Through Oct. 6.
Monday through Friday, 9:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M. and Saturday, 9:30 A.M. to 4 P.M. 703 Watchung Avenue, Plainfield. (908) 756-1707.
TRENTON ARTISTS WORKSHOP ASSOCIATION "Trenton Takes: 24 Hours in the City," a photo documentary featuring the works of 32 regional photographers.
Through Oct. 8.
Tuesday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 3 P.M., and Sunday, 2 to 4 P.M. (609) 989-3632.
UNTITLED (#130) LTD Ginger Schmidt displays her furniture created primarily around animal themes.
Through today.
"Trilogy," presents the installation, photography and assemblage by Joey Carradori, Linda Nieman and Marenann Sinocchi.
Thursday and Friday, 5:30 to 8:30 P.M.; Saturday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M., and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 130 Ryerson Avenue, Wayne. (201) 633-6767.
WATCHUNG ARTS CENTER "Annual Member Show." Through Sept. 30.
Monday through Saturday, 1 to 4 P.M. 18 Stirling Road, Watchung. (908) 753-0190.
WESTFIELD MEMORIAL LIBRARY "The Many Realms of King Arthur" explores the legends of Camelot through their appearance in folk tales to their modern-day incarnations in movies and video games.
Through September. 550 East Broad Street, Westfield. (908) 789-4090.
WILLIAM PATERSON COLLEGE "The Urban Aboriginal," organized by Jan Weiss; "Installation and Sculpture," by Michael Gerard, and "Five Printmakers From the Printmaking Council." Through Oct. 20.
Monday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
The Ben Shahn Center for the Visual Arts on campus, 300 Pompton Road, Wayne. (201) 595-2654.
ZIMMERLI ART MUSEUM "Art for Children" presents recent acquisitions to the Rutgers Collection of Original Illustrations for Children's Literature.
The exhibition features works from William Pene du Bois's "Otto at Sea," Ginnie Hofmann's "Who Wants an Old Teddy Bear" and Lynn Curlee's "Horses With Wings." Through March 1996.
Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Rutgers, George and Hamilton Streets, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7237.
THE CENTER FOR HELP A workshop for those dealing with separation or divorce will be held for three consecutive nights beginning Thursday and ending Oct. 5, from 7 to 9 P.M. 326 Hillsdale Avenue, Hillsdale. (201) 666-0009.
ENGLEWOOD PUBLIC LIBRARY The League of Women Voters sponsors a focus group discussion on the problems facing young people in "Juvenile Justice." Tuesday at 7:30 P.M.
Free.
Phyliis Rutigliano will give a watercolor demonstration.
Wednesday at 8 P.M.
Free. 31 Engle Street, Englewood. (201) 568-2215.
FINKELSTEIN MEMORIAL LIBRARY Greg Mitchell and Robery Jay Lifton of "Hiroshima in America: Fifty Years of Denial" will discuss their book.
Today at 2 P.M.
Free.
The Community Meeting Room and Gallery, 24 Chestnut Street, Spring Valley, N.Y. (914) 352-5700.
JERSEY CITY STATE COLLEGE The College's Women's Center hold two discussions tomorrow: "Women Raising Their Self-Esteem," from 4:30 to 6 P.M. and "Legal Education Night," 6 to 8 P.M.
Free. 32 College Street, Jersey City. (201) 200-3189.
NEW JERSEY POETRY CALENDAR "Dove Gathering of the Arts." Today at 2 P.M.
Free.
The Deli-plus Out Door Cafe.
Journal Square Path Station, Jersey City. (201-656-2201).
Barry Seiler and Joe Well.
Wednesday at 7:30 P.M.
Free.
Barnes and Noble. 160 Route 17 North, Paramus. (201-261-6995).
"Open reading" with Laura Boss.
Thursday at 7:30 P.M.
Free.
Borders Books and Music, East Brunswick. (908-238-7000).
The New Jersey Ethnic and Diversity Festival with Maria Mazziotti Gillan.
Saturday, all day.
Raritan Center, Exposition Hall, Edison. (201) 808-0506.
RAMAPO COLLEGE OF NEW JERSEY The Fall Master Lecture Series presents "Clash of Civilizations or Global Village? The United Nations and a Changing World," a weekly lecture and discussion session.
Wednesdays, 9 A.M. to 10:40 A.M.
This week the focus is on "Global Perspectives on Diversity: Voices and Visions." Next week, "Human Rights." Through Dec. 13.
Free.
Student Center, 219. 505 Ramapo Valley Road, Mahwah. (201) 529-7602.
SOMERSET MEDICAL CENTER "He Said, She Said. Now What Did They Really Say?" is a program on communication skills and whole brain thinking.
Tuesday at 7 P.M.
"Remember This," an advance course on improving your memory.
Thursday at 7 P.M.
Both programs are free and feature Dorothy L. Zufall, the director of community health education. 110 Rehill Avenue, Somerville. (908) 685-2827.
WILLIAM PATERSON COLLEGE The Art at Lunch series focusing on "The American Experience at Mid-Century," with a lecture by Nancy Einreinhofer titled "The Seeds of Abstract Expressionism." Thursday at 11:30 A.M.
Admission: $3.
Ben Shahn Galleries, 300 Pompton Road, Wayne. (201) 595-2371.
LIBERTY SCIENCE CENTER Visitors have their choice of two films that will take them on a journey into the far reaches of outer space or to the murky depths of the sea.
"Destiny in Space," narrated by Leonard Nimoy, gives viewers a look outside the Earth with film from nine space shuttle missions.
Daily, noon and 2 P.M.
"The Living Sea," narrated by Meryl Streep, with original music by Sting, sends you into an underwater world with exotic sea creatures.
Daily, 10 and 11 A.M. and 1, 3 and 4 P.M.
Admission: $7 for adults; $6 for students and the elderly; $5 for children under 12. 251 Phillip Street, Jersey City. (201) 451-0006, extension 295.
NEWARK MUSEUM Mr.
Star Hustler shares the power of knowledge as he teaches about galaxies, stars and nebulae in "The Power." Today at 1 and 3 P.M.
Through October.
Learn African myths and legends behind the constellations in "African Skies." Today at 2 and 4 P.M.
Through October.
Admission: $2; children under 12, $1. 49 Washington Street, Newark. (201) 596-6550.
RARITAN VALLEY COMMUNITY COLLEGE The 10th annual Sunday Sampler Children's Theater series begins with a Theaterworks/ USA presentation of "Babar's Birthday." Today at 1, 3:30 and 6 P.M.
Tickets: $6.
Route 28 and Lamington Road, North Branch. (908) 725-3420.
STUDIO PLAYERS "House at Pooh Corner," a play adaptation of the children's story by A. A. Milne.
Today, Saturday and next Sunday at 1:30 P.M., 3:30 and 5:30 P.M.
Tickets: $5. 14 Alvin Place, Upper Montclair. (201) 744-9752.
"DARING TO BE DIFFERENT" FILM SERIES This Fifth Annual Silver Screen Bistro Series, with films focusing on gay life styles and issues, continues with "Boys Life" on Friday at 7 P.M.
"Complaints of a Dutiful Daughter," Sept. 29; "Strawberry and Chocolate," Oct. 6; "The Sum of Us," Oct. 13 and "A Litany for Survial: The Life and Word of Audre Lord," Oct. 20.
Tickets: $6; $5 for students and the elderly.
Unitarian Church of Montclair, 67 Church Street, Montclair. (201) 744-0076.
FOR FILM LOVERS Moviegoers have two options if they want a sneak peek at a horde of new films and the chance to speak to some of the creative talents behind them.
"American Buffalo," "Sabrina," "Casino," "Home for the Holidays," "From Dusk Till Dawn," "Heat," "Now and Then," "The American President" and "The Grass Harp" are among the movies tentatively scheduled to be screened.
"Sneak Preview Symposium" offers a six-week subscription for $115 or 12 weeks for $198.
Begins tomorrow at the AMC Headquarters 10 Theater in Morristown (201-228-4424, extension 544) or Tuesday at Hazlet Multiplex Cinemas in Hazlet (908-571-3483).
"Coming Attractions" offers a four-week subscription for $129 or eight weeks for $199, each with a $20 registration charge.
Mondays, beginning Oct. 2, at Sony Theater Meadows 6 in Secaucus. (800) 934-5699.
FLEA MARKET The Chester Lions Club Flea Market offers craft items, linens, books, children's clothing, housewares, plants and produce, makeup, jewelry, scarves, handbags and other accessories.
Sundays, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M., through Dec. 19.
Free.
West Blackwell Street, Morris and Sussex Streets in downtown Dover. (201) 442-1494.
KEYPORT JAZZ FESTIVAL The day kicks off at noon with the Rich Reiter Swing Band with Tricia Slafta, vocalist.
John Paul Biagi performs at 2 P.M.
Lenore Raphael, pianist, and her quartet featuring Mark Lopeman, on tenor saxophone, and Rasheema, vocalist, take the stage at 3:30 P.M. with mainstream and be-bop-influenced jazz.
Sept. 30.
Free.
Route 36, exit 117 off the Garden State Parkway. (908) 264-3626.
MUSEUM OF EARLY TRADES AND CRAFTS "Kids Club Kickoff" allows children to participate in a Human Chess Match of Tradespeople, watch craftspeople demonstrate their work, or take a chance at winning a free membership in the museum's Kids Club or Past Finders Saturday Club.
Main Street and Green Village Road, Madison. (201) 377-2982.
MURDER TO GO "Murderous Crossings," an interactive wedding and Agatha Christie-style mystery that challenges the audience to solve "whodunit." Saturdays, 8 P.M.
Through Sept. 30.
Il Giardino Restaurant, Cedar Knolls.
"Killing Mr. Withers," an Alfred Hitchcock-style comic mystery thriller set in the 1950's.
Saturdays, 8 P.M.
Through Dec. 30.
Woodbridge Sheraton, Woodbridge.
The $42 ticket includes a four-course meal. (201) 301-0562.
NEW JERSEY FILM FESTIVAL "Art for Teachers of Children," Thursday, "Little Odessa," Friday, and "Once Were Warriors," Saturday.
"The Tempest" on Sept. 26, "Wigstock: The Movie," Sept. 29 and "The Englishman Who Went Up A Hill, But Came Down A Mountain," Sept. 30.
The films are shown on Thursdays at Art History Hall, Room 200; Fridays at Scott Hall, Room 123, and Saturdays at Milledoler Hall, Room 100.
All on the campus of Rutgers University, New Brunswick.
Show time is 7 P.M.
Tickets: $4-$7. (908) 932-8482.
ROCKAWAY TOWNSQUARE "Making a Difference: One Square at a Time" exhibits 24 quilts made by artisans in the area for children with H.I.V. or AIDS.
Through next Sunday.
Monday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 9:30 P.M., and Sunday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Route 80 and Mount Hope Avenue, Rockaway. (201) 361-4070.
UKRAINIAN FESTIVAL The 21st Annual Ukrainian Heritage Festival begins with a soccer tournament at 9 A.M.
Traditional arts, crafts and food will be available until 6 P.M. and native dance groups witll perform beginning at noon.
The 3:30 P.M. stage show features Stefan Andursiak, Oleksa and the Hromovytsia Dance Ensemble.
Tickets: $6-$20; mall activities are $4.
Exit 16 and the Garden State Parkway, Holmdel. (908) 442-9200.
One-Woman Show Vinie Burrows portrays 15 women of different ages, races and backgrounds in "Sister! Sister!"  MONTCLAIR STATE UNIVERISTY Tuesday at 5:30 P.M.
Free.
Room 135, Calcia Building.
Valley Road and Normal Avenue, Upper Montclair. (201) 655-5114.
A Musical Soliloquy The JCC MetroWest and the America-Israel Cultural Foundation present a concert by Inbal Segev, an Israeli-born cellist, performing works by Bach, Brahms, Stravinsky and Popper.
JEWISH COMMUNITY CENTER OF METROPOLITAN NEW JERSEY Today at 3 P.M.
Maurice Levin Theater, 760 Northfield Avenue, West Orange. (201) 736-3200.


WHO WILL FACE THE MUSIC?
Kolbert's article is a thoughtful treatment of Social Security.


Helen B. Garey, Leonard Brous
Helen Beth Garey, an editorial supervisor for Edelman Public Relations Worldwide, and Leonard Brous, a vice president of Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, were married last evening in West Caldwell, N.J.
Dr.
Barry H. Greene, a rabbi, officiated at the Mountain Ridge Country Club.
Ms.
Garey, 30, is keeping her name.
She and the bridegroom work in New York.
She graduated from Carnegie Mellon University and received a master's degree in public health from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of William Garey of Hope, R.I., and Arlene Kearney of Addison, Tex.
The bride's father, the former president of Gold Bond Pharmaceutical in Cranston, R.I., is a commodities trader there.
Her mother is a legal secretary at Settle &amp; Pou, a law firm in Dallas.
The bride's first marriage ended in divorce.


Move 'em Out
Westerns may be something of an endangerered species now, but Howard Hawks's "Red River," is one from the days (1948) when westerns really were as big as all outdoors, and lusty and brawling, too.
And who better to lead the way in this saga of the first cattle drive along the Chisholm Trail from Texas to Kansas than John Wayne, with Montgomery Clift providing the conflict as his ward and heir apparent.
Old pros like Walter Brennan, Noah Beery Jr., Harry Carey (Sr. and Jr.) and John Ireland lend their grit to the stampedes and gunplay, and Joanne Dru makes sure that everyone knows there's more to life than dust and longhorns - Tuesday at 10:35 P.M. on TNT Lawrence Van Gelder


Hold the Pledge. A Little Grime on the Finish, Please.
GOURMETS WOULD PROBABLY agree more quickly on the best crust to be found on bread than connoisseurs would on the choicest crust on 18th-century American furniture.
Crust, also known to the cognoscenti by the inelegant word crud, is the decomposed varnish, wax, dust and grime that accumulates, dulling the finish of even the most magnificent furniture.
This delightfully esoteric topic is likely to dominate conversation in Americana circles between now and Jan. 20, when some of the crustiest 200-year-old furniture to be auctioned in decades is offered at Sotheby's in New York.
Of the 230 items for sale, 85 remain in an untouched -- some might say shabby -- state, with mucky surfaces and torn upholstery.
Sotheby's bills the pieces as the "premier collection of American furniture ever to come on the market" and expects them to take in about $6 million.


Mariners Still Lead In Race For Playoff
Mariners 5, White Sox 3
Dan Wilson hit a go-ahead homer in the top of the ninth inning last night as the Seattle Mariners beat the Chicago White Sox, 5-3, to stay ahead in the American League wild card race.
Wilson's ninth homer of the season was a solo shot with one out off reliever Matt Karchner (3-2) and broke a 3-3 tie.
"These are the kinds of games we have to win down the stretch," Wilson said.


Who Wants to Have to Ask for X-Rated Cable?
The right of privacy is something Community Board 6 takes seriously, especially when it comes to anyone finding out where cable television viewers like to land as they channel surf.
The board voted 28 to 12 last week to oppose a plan by Time Warner to scramble Channel 35, its X-rated late-night outlet, for subscribers unless they sent the company a form requesting the service.


Pushing the Envelope
Inspiration hit when mail to Thom Zajac's political cartoon newspaper, The Santa Cruz Comic News, arrived with defaced Nixon stamps.
The ex-President's image was adorned with mustaches, horns and comments like "I am not a crook." So Zajac produced his own Nixon envelope (below).
Until he began selling the envelope, Nixon stamp sales in the Santa Cruz, Calif., post office were among the slowest in the nation.


Zagat Rediscovers New Jersey, and Likes It
The book is slim and green, and to food lovers, the text ("Ever seen a filet mignon the size of a meatloaf?") might sound like poetry.
But how about the meal?
They can decide for themselves this week, when the first Zagat restaurant guide devoted to New Jersey will appear in bookstores around the state.
Fans of Zagat's New York City guide, a standard reference on the food scene, will soon know the publishing company's take on hundreds of New Jersey restaurants, from The Abbey in Ramsey to Zio Michel in Cliffside Park.


SEPT. 10-16: The Cold War Lives On; Balloonists Shot Down Crossing into Belarus
The end of the Cold War encouraged Europeans to envision an era of peace and open frontiers, no longer punctuated by disasters like the shooting-down of Korean Airlines Flight 007 by Soviet fighters in 1983.
Last week, the optimism was shown to be premature.
On Sept. 9, 17 hydrogen-filled balloons, each piloted by two crew members, lifted away from a field at Wil, Switzerland, in the annual running of the Gordon Bennett Balloon Race.
The winner was to be the balloon ending up farthest away from the starting point.
But instead of a festive award ceremony that had been planned yesterday by race organizers in Switzerland, the sport ballooning community was in mourning.
The race ended Tuesday with two Americans killed and four others forced down by Belarus military aircraft after their balloons crossed the frontier from Poland.
Race officials said they had received clearance months earlier, but officials in Minsk denied it.


Becky P. Bleifeld, Matthew F. Black
Becky Paula Bleifeld, a daughter of Stanley and Naomi Bleifeld of Weston, Conn., is to be married today to Matthew Freedland Black, the son of Henry and Hallie Black of Chicago.
Rabbi Andrew Sklarz is to perform the ceremony at the Fox Hill Inn in Brookfield, Conn.
The couple graduated from Brown University.


Catherine Regan, William Lawliss
Catherine Harper Regan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James S. Regan of Pennington, N.J., was married yesterday to William Bradley Lawliss, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William A. Lawliss of Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
Dr.
Howard M. Fish, a Congregational minister, officiated at the home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Lawliss, 23, graduated from Lehigh University and from the French Culinary Institute in New York.
Her father is a managing general partner in Harbourton Enterprises, investment bankers in Princeton.


Miss Goodling And Mr. Robards
Gretchen Laura Goodling, the daughter of Sally B. Penrod of Carmel, N.Y., and the late James H. Goodling, was married yesterday to Jeffrey Sherman Robards, a son of Susan R. Kane of Sarasota, Fla., and Terry Robards of Lake Placid, N.Y.
The Rev.
F.
Forrester Church, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the Boathouse in Central Park in New York.
Mrs.
Robards, 25, is an account executive at A.C.
Nielsen, the marketing research company in New York.
She graduated from Georgetown University.
Her stepfather, C. Michael Penrod, is the director of corporate design at Colgate-Palmolive in New York.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
FLUSHING  The Wave of the Future, Circa the 1960's
In 1964, Robert Moses, Parks Commissioner and president of the World's Fair Corporation, boasted that the New York World's Fair had "something for everyone." Today, the Flushing Town Hall mounts a tribute to the event that drew an international throng to Flushing Meadows-Corona Park.
"Something for Everyone: The 1964-65 New York World's Fair" features more than 300 objects, including the "Aries" bronze (left) from sculptor Paul Manship's Armillary Sphere of the 12 signs of the zodiac, an early Geiger counter, modules from NASA rockets and early advances in technology, such as Sony's all-transistor, five-inch television set.


He Who Saves The Day Gets The Princess
Unstrung Heroes  Andie MacDowell, John Turturro, Michael Richards, Nathan Watt Directed by Diane Keaton PG: : 93 minutes


Jessica Parsons, Daniel E. Hickey
Jessica Dwight Parsons, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John Morford Parsons of Leeds, Mass., was married yesterday to Daniel Edward Hickey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael J. Hickey of Boothwyn, Pa.
The Rev.
Michael Collins, a Roman Catholic priest, officiatedin the Helen Hills Hills Chapel at Smith College in Northampton, Mass.
The couple graduated cum laude from Dickinson College.


Low Graduation Rate at Purchase
WITH its adult-education programs, first-rate art museum and panoply of cultural offerings, Purchase College plays a major role in Westchester County's intellectual life, drawing residents by the thousands to its secluded campus here.
The school's magnetism also extends to its incoming students: based on preliminary registration figures, this year's 438-member freshman class is 17 percent larger than last year's, and the number of transfer students -- 348 -- is 16 percent higher.


Schools Struggle To Find Places For New Pupils
Joseph P. Seluga, the principal of Public School 175, was calmly touring his crowded building.
The cafeteria, designed in 1950 as a soup and sandwich kitchen for a few hundred children, now feeds hot meals to more than 900 students daily in four shifts, he said, adding: "We're McDonald's all day long." .
He reported that the gymnasium is being converted into two fourth-grade classrooms, which will be separated by partitions.
That is because classrooms are needed for the extra 100 kindergarten students who have been sent over from P.S. 139, an even more crowded school across Queens Boulevard.
Desks and chairs for the gymnasium are being ordered and borrowed while the fourth-grade classes are held temporarily in the library and the science room.


Diehards


Getting Back Into the Book Business
THE sign on the door said, "This Library Will Close Effective 6 P.M. Monday, November 7, 1994." Through dirty windows, the afternoon sun lit the plastic jackets on books stacked neatly on the shelves.
Welcome to one of the wrong turns on the information superhighway -- the tiny Avenel branch of the Woodbridge public library system, where the books have now been locked up nearly as long as the O. J. Simpson jury.
Last year, Avenel was one of five neighborhood branches shut down by library trustees.
Money being tight, buying computer technology for the town's main library was deemed more important than spending it on a dreary roomful of books, tables and chairs.


Pamela D. Wick, Steven M. Backer
Pamela Deanne Wick, a daughter of Mary Jane and Charles Z. Wick of Los Angeles, was married on Friday to Steven Marc Backer, the son of the late Evelyn and Bernard L. Backer of New Haven.
Rabbi Laura Geller performed the ceremony at Temple Emanuel in Beverly Hills, Calif.
Ms.
Wick, who is keeping her name, is a playwright and screenwriter in Los Angeles.
She graduated from the University of California at Berkeley.
Her father, who was the director of the United States Information Agency under President Ronald Reagan, is a businessman with interests in nursing homes and other ventures.
The bride's first marriage ended in divorce.


FORE!
Holly Brubach's article on the traditional lack of fashion in golf clothing (Style: "Fore!" Aug. 13) prompted me to send you the this photo of my mother, Blanche VanBuskirk, circa 1918, to prove it was not always so!
The dress, I'm told, was silk.
M.
A.
WHELAN, M.D.
Cooperstown, N.Y.


The History Of Greenpoint
To the Editor:
The Aug. 13 article on the Greenpoint section of Brooklyn makes a few little errors and omissions that I could not allow to pass.
John Rather writes that Dirck Volckertsen, one of the early settlers, "was known as 'Dirck the Norman' despite being Scandinavian." This also seems to have confounded a number of local historians.
Actually, he was called "de Noorman" precisely because he was Scandinavian.
Norman/Noorman means Norseman or Northman in Dutch.


People Want More Information For Health Choices, Survey Finds
Most people would like to have more information to help them choose hospitals, doctors and health care plans, a new survey by Louis Harris and Associates has found.
Many large employers already receive reports from health maintenance organizations and other health plans on how satisfied their members are.
Many employers and health plans also collect appraisals of doctors and hospitals by patients.
But such reports are not often shown to the consumers themselves, company benefits executives say.


Japan, a Superpower Among Superheroes
HAYAO MIYAZAKI COULD teach Walt Disney a thing or two.
Every year, Mr.
Miyazaki and his collaborators produce an animated movie that is breathtaking for its lush, detailed scenery and its subtle use of colors.
Almost every year, the movie is among the top hits in Japan.
And every time a Miyazaki film goes head to head with a Disney animated feature at the box office in Japan, the Miyazaki film wins.
For all his success in Japan, however, Mr.
Miyazaki is barely known to audiences elsewhere.
But that probably won't be for long.
Japanese animation is starting to sweep through the world, becoming the nation's first big pop culture export.


Italy Demands A Little Respect
FINALLY, Italy put its foot down hard, really hard.
Enough of this kid-brother treatment, it told its allies in so many words last week, as it denied a request to station Bosnia-bound stealth fighter planes on its military runways.
If you don't let us into your tree house and treat us like one of the big boys, then we won't let you play with our toys.
So there.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL
P.S.A.L.: Lehman routed Fort Hamilton, 43-0, behind the strong running of ADAM RAMOS, who rushed 25 times for 151 yards and three touchdowns.
PAUL THOMAS (13 carries for 129 yards) contributed a 44-yard scoring scamper.
On the day, Lehman totaled 375 yards on the ground and held Fort Hamilton to 104 yards rushing.
BEING IN THE RIGHT PLACE: Wide receiver MARIO MARTINEZ recovered his teammate ED ROIAS's fumble in the end zone late in the fourth quarter to catapult New Dorp (2-0) over Bayside (0-1), 28-21.
In a seesaw match that Bayside led, 21-14, in the fourth quarter, Martinez pulled New Dorp within one point when he caught a 50-yard touchdown from KEM NEWMAN.
A DEFENSE OF A CROWN: Kennedy, the league's defending champion, knocked off Lafayette, 31-8, in a game in which TERRACE WILLIS (9 carries for 71 yards) rushed for two touchdowns and VATALY PISETSKY kicked four extra points and a 32-yard field goal.
Quarterback CHRIS LAMBERT (46 yards) and RUDY VALENZUELA (8 yards) each rushed for a touchdown for the 2-0 Knights.
NEON DEON?: DEON SAMUALS returned the opening kickoff 63 yards and caught a 6-yard pass from ANDRE POPON with 2 minutes 22 seconds remaining to propel Flushing (2-0) over Midwood (0-1-1), 22-15.
SAMUALS also had a 39-yard scoring reception in the second quarter.
Midwood got its points on a 13-yard run by HASSAN GRANT and a 44-yard scoring reception by DISHAMEL CHERRY from NELSON POPON.
C.H.S.F.L.: Mount St.
Michael (1-0) scored on five of its first six possessions in its 33-6 rout of Cardinal Spellman (1-1).
The sophomore running back NCHENDIA TAJONG had scoring runs of 22 and 9 yards to stake Mount St.
Michael to a 14-0 lead.
Mount then exploded with long runs by BRIAN ALDEBOT (66 yards), RAUL DELEON (39 yards), SEAN ROXBURY (44 Yards).
NEW JERSEY: Sayreville coach GEORGE NAJJAR learned on Friday night that New Jersey football can be every bit as tough to coach as city ball.
NAJJAR, who was the coach of Lincoln in Brooklyn for the last 12 years, watched helplessly as DEJON WELCOME, a senior halfback from Piscataway, rushed for four touchdowns and 95 yards to catapult Piscataway over his new team, 46-20.
CASHING IN: Taking advantage of two fumbles, Delbarton (1-0) yesterday beat Essex Catholic, 9-0.
JOHN GERBA kicked a 26-yard field goal with 5:34 left in the half after his brother, DAVID GERBA, a defensive tackle, recovered a bad snap at Essex's 26-yard line.
Delbarton's second score was set up by MIKE MCGOWAN, a defensive tackle, who recovered an Essex Catholic fumble on the opposition's 34-yard line.
Five plays later, RODNEY TRAFFORD on a quarterback sneak, scored on a 3-yard run.
CERMINARO FOR THREE: Highland Park defeated Memorial of West New York, 28-8, Friday night, behind the strong arm of MARK CERMINARO who tossed three scoring strikes to JAMES BOYD (35 yards) in the first quarter, BRET ZDANOWIZ (12 yards) in the second and NILO GARVIN (5 yards) in the third.
WESTCHESTER: In Roosevelt's 18-6 victory over Mount Vernon yesterday, Coach TONY DEMATTEO earned his 170th victory to become Section I's career leader in wins."There were so many former players and friends here that I just wanted them to play hard for me," he said.
"Nothing would have embarrassed me more than if the team didn't play hard for me. But they came through. They played harder than any team that I've ever coached. I'm real proud of them." Roosevelt's first score, an 18-yard run by JASON MANDARA, was set up by linebacker LEWIS WEBB'S 36-yard interception return.
On Roosevelt's next possession, CARLTON MAJOR capped an 11-play, 95-yard drive with a 6-yard scoring run.
In the third quarter, COREY SAVAGE raced 88 yards off tackle to account for Mount Vernon's only points.
The Indians closed out the game's scoring on their next possession, when DAVE GOLDBERG dove in from 1 yard out to punctuate a 51-yard, 9-play drive.
With the victory, Roosevelt upped its record to 2-0.
CONNECTICUT: Quarterback PETER MAZZA (7 of 9 for 112 yards) rushed for one touchdown and threw for another and BRIAN PERRY added two short-yardage scores as Cheshire (1-0) cruised past Hamden, 26-0.
MAZZA hit JOE MAESTO with a 21-yard touchdown and ran one in from 1 yard out.
PERRY'S scores came on 1-yard and 2-yard bursts.
IAN MCINTOSH, of Cheshire, was the game's leading rusher with 123 yards.
Cheshire's defense picked off three passes on the day, two by MAESTO, playing cornerback, and one by BRENDAN QUINN.
The Rams defense held Hamden to 26 yards rushing and 32 yards passing.
PREPS: Tailback ALEX SHULMAN rushed for two touchdowns and BEN BERG caught an 80-yard pass from JOHN FINLEY and also scored on a 6-yard run as Riverdale (1-0) routed Xaverian (0-2), 42-7.
JOE MCGOWAN (60 yards) and RON KIM (2-yard run) each contributed touchdowns to the blowout.
Linebacker MATT VALSIC (14 tackles), ALEX KITCHENS (9 tackles) and DEON REED (7 tackles) led Riverdale's defense.


William Deverell Jr., Jennifer Watts
Jennifer Armstrong Watts, a curator, and William Francis Deverell Jr., a history professor, were married yesterday in Summit, N.J.
The Rev.
Christopher Brdlik performed the ceremony at Calvary Episcopal Church.
Ms.
Watts, 32, is keeping her name.
She is a curator of historical photographs at the Henry E. Huntington Library in San Marino, Calif.
She graduated from Wellesley College and received a master's degree in crosscultural studies from the Fuller Theological Seminary.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David Watts of Summit.
The bride's father is a managing director of J.&amp;W.
Seligman &amp; Company, an investment management concern in New York.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: September 17, 1995
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
NOTHING LASTS FOREVER, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $6.99.) Three women doctors contend with lovers, betrayers and killers.
2
5
INSOMNIA, by Stephen King. (Signet, $7.50.) A widower and a widow, victims of sleeplessness, behold a sinister force at work in a Maine town.
3
7
THE BODY FARM, by Patricia Cornwell. (Berkley, $6.99.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta investigates the murder of a small North Carolina girl.
4
13
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Bantam, $6.99.) A journalist and a psychologist track down a murderer in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
5
19
THE STONE DIARIES, by Carol Shields. (Penguin, $10.95.) The journey of a woman from childhood to motherhood through old age.
6
4
THE LAST INNOCENT MAN, by Phillip Margolin. (Bantam, $6.50.) A lawyer defends an attorney who may have killed a vice cop.
7
3
PRIME TIME, by Sandra Brown. (Warner Vision, $6.50.) A television reporter finds love when she tries to interview a reclusive general.
8
3
THREE WEDDINGS AND A KISS, by Kathleen E. Woodiwiss, Catherine Anderson, Loretta Chase and Lisa Kleypas. (Avon, $5.99.) Four short historical romances.
9
12
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $7.50.) Jack Ryan vs. a Japanese plot.
10
4
PLAYING FOR THE ASHES, by Elizabeth George. (Bantam, $6.50.) Arson, infidelity, cricket and murder in the English countryside.
11
1
ONE TRUE THING, by Anna Quindlen. (Dell, $6.99.) A woman who cared for her fatally ill mother is charged with killing her.
12
3
LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $7.99.) The demon Lasher pursues the witch Rowan and their child; a sequel to "The Witching Hour."
13
25
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Island/ Dell, $7.50.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing.
14
4
TRUST ME, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $6.50.) A canceled wedding leads to a curious romance between the groom and the caterer.
15
7
THE 13TH JUROR, by John T. Lescroart. (Island/Dell, $6.50.) A lawyer defends a woman accused of murdering two husbands and a son.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
4
DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion, $5.99.) Anecdotes and meditations on life by the star of "Home Improvement."
2
9
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Anchor/ Doubleday, $6.99.) The discovery of the deadly Ebola virus in Virginia and the efforts to keep it from spreading. (+)
3
4
DANGEROUS MINDS, by LouAnne Johnson. (St. Martin's, $4.99.) A woman's experiences teaching English in an inner-city high school.
4
12
APOLLO 13, by Jim Lovell and Jeffrey Kluger. (Pocket, $6.50.) The 1970 moon mission during which an oxygen tank exploded.
5
52
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
6
25
REVIVING OPHELIA, by Mary Pipher. (Ballantine, $12.50.) The dangers that beset teen-age girls. (+)
7
88
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
8
619
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (+)
9
131
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence. (+)
10
2
TAO TE CHING, by Lao Tzu. (Penguin, 95.) A classic Chinese philosophical work.
11
1
TRUE NORTH, by Jill Ker Conway. (Vintage, $12.) The memoir of an Australian woman: from graduate student at Harvard to president of Smith College.
12
51
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
13
19
MOTHERLESS DAUGHTERS, by Hope Edelman. (Delta, $12.95.) The experiences of women after the deaths of their mothers.
14
53
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
15
40
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Love and relationships.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
51
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) Uplifting stories. (+)
2
20
A 2ND HELPING OF CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) One hundred more stories. (+)
3
12
TEN STUPID THINGS WOMEN DO TO MESS UP THEIR LIVES, by Laura C. Schlessinger. (Harper Perennial, $10.) Counsel. (+)
4
228
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (S&amp;S, $12.) (+)
5
2
RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $8.95.) The 1995 edition.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Sept. 2, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk (*) indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
A dagger (+) indicates that some bookstores report receiving bulk orders for a book.


Richness and Spice of Autumn In the Tasty Ways of Shakers
AS fall approaches, the culinary palette goes from the vibrant reds, purples, yellows and greens of summer to more honeyed tones.
The palate also changes, preferring warm richness and spice to the salad freshness of summer.
"In a Shaker Kitchen" by Norma Macmillan (Simon &amp; Schuster), which describes the Shaker way of life in its introduction, is a wonderful source for autumn recipes.
Soups, casseroles, hearty baked savories and sweets fill its pages.


If You're Thin, You're In
As Americans get fatter and fatter, new studies continue to show that for the sake of health and longevity and not just fashion, thin is in.
In the latest report, published last week in The New England Journal of Medicine, researchers from Harvard and Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston found that among women who were initially healthy and had never smoked, those who were 15 percent thinner than average were least likely to succumb to heart disease, cancer or other causes in middle age.
Those women who gained as little as 22 pounds after age 18 were 20 percent more likely to die prematurely than those who gained less than 10 pounds.
The greater the gain, the greater the risk, reported Dr.
JoAnn E. Manson and colleagues from their 16-year study of 115,000 female nurses.
They found that a third of cancer deaths and more than half of all "premature deaths" that occurred among the nurses could be attributed to overweight.


Fans Crowd First Signing on Book Tour
About 2,000 people were lined up to meet Gen.
Colin L. Powell, the former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and possible Presidential candidate, when the doors opened today at a Washington area bookstore -- the first stop on a 26-city book tour for his autobiography, "My American Journey."
"We're here to see one of the great men of our time," said Kris Polly of Arlington, Va., who arrived at 8 A.M., only to realize that about 250 people had already lined up.
"We would like to see him as a Presidential candidate."


By the United Nations, The Global Palate
CAFE DE PARIS + (212) 486-1411; 924 Second Avenue, at 49th Street; $; American Express, Mastercard, Visa
A reliable neighborhood spot, this inviting little bistro can be recommended for its pleasing wholesome French fare at moderate prices.
The menu features a three-course dinner, including a mixed green salad with vinaigrette, tender sliced entrecote (actually a shell steak) served with a house-secret herb sauce and french fries, dessert and coffee for $25.50 (cash only).
From the a la carte menu, there are appetizers of mussels a la mariniere; baked snails in Pernod and gratinee, and smoked salmon with dill sauce, onions and capers.
Main courses include roast duck with mixed fruits and wild rice; grilled rack of lamb with a medley of vegetables; chicken Basquaise, with a sauce of white wine, tomatoes, peppers, onions, olives and almonds, served over rice pilaf, and grilled steak with a green peppercorn sauce. (Articles: 11/3/ 89, 2/4/94)  CHIN CHIN **  (212) 888-4555; 216 East 49th Street; $$$; all major credit cards
Fans of "uptown"-style Chinese cooking flock to this superior establishment, handsomely designed with banquettes, Oriental pottery and flattering lighting.
Recommended to start are the pan-fried dumplings with a pork and ginger filling; crisp fried squid, clams in ginger broth, and shredded duck salad with coriander.
Among the main-course selections are Mongolian shredded pork in a spicy chili and cucumber sauce, accompanied by steamed watercress; steamed or fried whole sea bass; diced chicken with candied walnuts and leeks; prawns Sichuan style; three-glass chicken, and Peking duck. (Review: 5/3/91; revisited: 2/24/95)  DIWAN GRILL ++ (212) 593-5425; 148 East 48th Street; $$; all major credit cards
This elegant branch of the popular Jackson Diner, in the Jackson Heights section of Queens, specializes in a vibrant mix of northern Indian dishes.
The setting is spacious, with comfortable tables, colorful banquettes and attractive lighting, and service is amiable.
A good way to begin is with the platter of diaphanous papadums or peppery lentil wafers accompanied by small dishes of sweet-and-sour tamarind sauce and spicy coriander-mint sauce; a fried dish of minced shrimp mixed with sesame seeds, flour and spices called shrimp ki tikki; crisp and clean pakoras, or fried wedges of zucchini, cauliflower florets and other vegetables coated with chickpea flour, and smoky karare quails, marinated in yogurt and cooked in the clay oven.
Familiar entrees include rogan josh, tender morsels of lamb in a complex spicy sauce; seekh kabab, and fish tikka, bite-size pieces of salmon roasted in the tandoor. ($25 and Under: 5/6/94)  MARICHU ++ (212) 370-1866; 342 East 46th Street, Turtle Bay; $$; all major credit cards
Brick walls and wood beams characterize the setting of this inviting little mom-and-pop operation, which specializes in Basque cooking.
At lunch, the restaurant is packed with patrons from the United Nations; dinner is a more tranquil affair.
The food comes in large portions and includes appetizers of shrimp in garlic sauce; a subtle fish soup with shrimp, monkfish and clams in a broth with white wine and saffron; cold gazpacho; Serrano ham with olives, and dill-marinated salmon served on a bed of greens.
Among the main courses are tender baby squid in a deliciously nutty black ink sauce, made with sauteed leeks, onions and tomatoes; red snapper in a garlic vinaigrette with scalloped potatoes; and sauteed medallions of monkfish in a parsley and garlic sauce with clams and shrimp, and a hearty stew of fresh tuna, green peppers and potatoes in a tomato broth. ($25 and Under: 1/20/95)  MEE NOODLE SHOP AND GRILL ++ (212) 888-0027; 922 Second Avenue, at 49th Street; $; American Express
This little Chinese noodle parlor is not only uncomplicated and efficient but also delivers pleasing fare at bargain prices.
There are more than 190 selections on the menu, but if you focus on the noodle dishes you can't go wrong.
Seven kinds of noodles are featured -- complete meals in themselves -- from rice noodles to egg noodles to spinach noodles.
They include thin lo mein with paper-thin slices of red-edged roast pork or roast duck in bowls of fragrant chicken broth; mee fun rice noodles, served with shavings of chicken breast in soy sauce, and dan dan noodles in an earthy meat and mushroom sauce.
Other dishes to consider are the light mixture of scrambled eggs, shrimp and scallions; sweet and spicy cold sesame noodles, and dry sauteed green beans with pork. ($25 and Under: 3/18/94)  SMITH &amp; WOLLENSKY *  (212) 753-1530; 201 East 49th Street; $$$$; all major credit cards
An East Side institution of sorts, Smith &amp; Wollensky is a big, clamorous space done in brass and wood with starched white tablecloths and decorated with duck decoys, ornithological prints, lanterns, weather vanes and other Americana.
The menu includes appetizers of split pea soup, Cobb salad, shrimp cocktail and cold asparagus vinaigrette.
But huge, tasty slabs of meat are really what attract the crowds.
And steaks are done right indeed: nicely textured, flavorful and beautifully cooked.
Other options include rosy triple lamb chops, beefy prime ribs, succulent veal chops, calf's liver, steamed lobster and lemon-pepper chicken.
Side dishes include thick cottage fries, onion rings and fried zucchini. (Review: 3/30/90; article: 1/21/94)  ZARELA **  (212) 644-6740; 953 Second Avenue, near 51st Street; $$; American Express, Diner's Club
This festive bilevel establishment, named for its ebullient owner, Zarela Martinez, is one of the most spirited and authentic Mexican restaurant in Manhattan.
Zarela's cooking is aggressive yet refined, and varied enough for all tastes.
One might begin with poblano chilies stuffed with a corn and white cheese mixture and topped with roasted tomato sauce; a spiced hash of red snapper, tomato and scallions; fried calamari with a sauce of jalapeno, tomato, onion and olives; and chicken enchiladas with a mole sauce.
Among the main courses are skirt steak fajitas with guacamole and salsa; sauteed calf's liver that has been marinated in pickled jalapeno juice and then served with onions and bacon; roast duck with red chili and tomato sauce and complemented by a dried fruit compote of apricots, prunes, raisins and pineapple. (Review: 8/23/91) Simply Meat  THE PALM *  (212) 687-2953; 837 Second Avenue, near 45th Street; $$$$; all major credit cards
This bustling steakhouse, with its sawdust-strewn floor, is a model of consistency when it comes to delivering a first-rate sirloin strip, crusty and caramelized on the outside and juicy inside.
Also recommended are the double-cut lamb chops, pork chops, prime ribs of beef and steamed lobsters.
Cottage fries, creamed spinach, and crisp and buttery hash browns are all fine side dishes.
To begin, there is the traditional sweet crab meat or shrimp cocktail, baked littleneck clams and spinach salad. (Review: 8/21/92; article: 1/21/94) Summaries of reviews use the star system; others are culled from articles (indicated by +), the $25 and Under column (++) and Diner's Journal (


School Board Considering Chancellor Candidates
Richard Ravitch may be Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's leading choice to be schools chancellor, but the Board of Education makes the decision, and the board members are considering nine other people for the job, including an educator who is a professional musician and another who saved geese from starvation.
In any event, Michael Casserly, executive director of the Council of Great City Schools, a group representing the country's 50 largest urban school systems, believes much of the public speculation about who will be chosen is off the mark.


Beyond the Waterfront, and Into the Water
MIKE DAVIS knows exactly why he likes rowing.
"The thing is," says Mr.
Davis, a 53-year-old archeologist, "you're in a completely different element. You are far from all the hard edges. Out there you're dealing with wind and current and an occasional thunderstorm. Out there you're in nature's realm, and you don't quibble with the rules. You don't get a lawyer to get you out of it."


A Los Angeles Show On Wright and Japan
The Japanese artworks that served as an inspiration to Frank Lloyd Wright are displayed for the first time in "Frank Lloyd Wright and Japan" at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art through Jan. 7.
More than 190 objects and documents collected by the architect are housed in the museum's Pavilion for Japanese Art.
The exhibition includes Japanese folding screens, textiles, sculptures, ceramics and prints, which will be rotated during the course of the exhibition, as well as 50 surimono, or limited-edition woodblock prints, typically commissioned by poets for special occasions.


Like the Dutch, Let Us Think Again About Death and Suffering; Doctor's Ethical Duty
To the Editor:
The Royal Dutch Medical Association, in revising rules on physician-assistant euthanasia (news article, Sept. 11), has moved closer to the thousands of American doctors who believe it is morally and ethically wrong to administer death to patients.
The American Medical Association believes inducing death is incompatible with the physician's role as healer.
Our Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs has developed policies prohibiting physician participation in euthanasia and assisted suicide.
The Dutch experience proves there is great risk in legalizing euthanasia.
It is difficult to confirm a patient's terminal status and assess mental competence to make the decision to die.
Vulnerable, critically ill patients can be coerced subtly.
Physicians must do better at discussing end-of-life treatment decisions with patients and at providing optimal comfort care and emotional support in the final stages of disease.
"Unacceptable suffering" cannot serve as a ground for euthanasia because in almost all cases severe pain can be relieved.
We urge our Dutch colleagues to keep at the forefront in preserving patient rights and the integrity of the medical profession.
CHARLES W. PLOWS, M.D.
Chmn., Council on Ethical &amp; Judicial Affairs, American Medical Assn.
Chicago, Sept. 12, 1995


How to Judge? Flip a Coin
SCORE one for proponents of the efficient market theory, which holds that prices change so rapidly to reflect new information that professional investors have no edge over the little guy.
By extension, it is folly for investors to think that they can consistently beat an efficient market.
Recent work by Burton G. Malkiel, a professor at Princeton University, supports that view as it applies to mutual fund investing and contradicts several other recent studies that suggested winning funds tend to repeat their glowing performances.


Ohio Judge Allows Inmate to Use Marijuana if Medically Needed
When Ohio State Troopers asked Todd McCormick about the smell of marijuana in his car after they stopped him on Interstate 80 in July, he said he had a prescription from a doctor in Holland.
They arrested him anyway, saying the prescription was meaningless in the United States.
Then, they searched his car, and found more than 30 pounds of marijuana marked "Not for sale." Mr.
McCormick told them that he was taking it to his home town, Providence, R.I., to start a group that would give marijuana to the seriously ill.
He was held on $150,000 bail, which he was unable to raise.


Chatter: Surviving the Drought; Point Pleasant Beach Six Ways And Counting
The drought has affected me in several ways.
1. My lawn is dead.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate
1.
Child Care: Vote to kill an amendment to a welfare reform bill that would double, to $11 billion over five years, the amount earmarked for child care.
Approved 50 to 48, Sept. 11.
2.
Welfare Spending: Vote to kill an amendment to a welfare reform bill that would prevent states from slashing their contributions to basic welfare programs.
Approved 50 to 49, Sept. 12.
3.
Families: Vote on an amendment to a welfare reform bill that would delete requirements in the bill intended to deny additional benefits to women who have more children while on welfare roles.
Approved 66 to 34, Sept. 13.
4.
Teen-agers: Vote on an amendment to a welfare reform bill that would deny cash benefits to teen-agers who have children out of wedlock.
Rejected 76 to 24, Sept. 13.
5.
Bonuses: Vote on an amendment to a welfare reform bill that would delete a provision that gives states a bonus for reducing the number of children born out of wedlock without increasing the number of abortions.
Rejected 63 to 37, Sept. 14.
Connecticut  Dodd (D) . . .
N. . .
N. . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y  Lieberman (D) . . .
N. . .
N. . .
Y. . .
N. . .
N  New Jersey  Bradley (D) . . .
N. . .
N. . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y  New Jersey (cont'd)  Lautenberg (D) . . .
N. . .
N. . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y  New York  D'Amato (R) . . .
Y. . .
Y. . .
Y. . .
N. . .
N  Moynihan (D) . . .
N. . .
N. . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Running Argument
TELLTALE HEARTS  The Origins and Impact of the Vietnam Antiwar Movement.
By Adam Garfinkle. 370 pp.
New York: St.
Martin's Press. $24.95.


U.S. Consumers Gain From Mexico Trade Pact
To the Editor:
Bob Herbert's "Nafta's Bubble Bursts" (column, Sept. 11) plunges into the pitfall of one-sided storytelling in which he calls politicians (like Bill Clinton) and companies (like Mattel) to task.
It is true that on the one hand, job loss in the United States is a critical issue.
Certainly we would not want to hear the horrible "sucking sound" that protectionist rhetoric like Ross Perot's predicted.


Linda A. Bolton, Jeffrey R. Weiser
Linda Ann Bolton, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roland Bolton of Sterling, N.Y., was married yesterday to Jeffrey Richard Weiser, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jacques Weiser of Melville, L.I.
The Rev.
Dr.
Melvin Hawthorne, the chaplain of the Church Center of the United Nations, officiated at the Stanhope in New York.
Rabbi Roy A. Rosenberg took part in the service.


Erika Christensen And David Scully
Erika Christensen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Poul Erik Christensen of Madison, Conn., was married there yesterday at her parents' house to David Brinton Scully, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Alison Scully of Bernardsville, N.J.
The Rev.
Frank Hall performed the Unitarian ceremony.
Mrs.
Scully, 26, was until recently an assistant producer in broadcast at Tarlow Advertising in New York.
She graduated from William Smith College.
Her father is the managing director and a partner of Masten-Wright, an export management firm in New Haven.


Catherine Conners And Robert Reif
Catherine Lynn Conners, the daughter of Elizabeth A. Conners of Altoona, Pa., and J. Thomas Conners of San Luis Obispo, Calif., was married yesterday to Robert Reif, a son of Eva and Friedrich Rief of Ridgewood, Queens.
The Rev.
Bruce Forbes performed the ceremony in the chapel St.
Bartholomew's Episcopal Church in Manhattan.


Doctor Who Cut Off Wrong Leg Is Defended by Colleagues
A Tampa surgeon who has been widely vilified and ridiculed for mistakenly amputating the wrong leg of a patient on Feb. 20 sought this week to regain both his license to practice medicine and a measure of his once-solid reputation.
In a three-day hearing before the state official who will make recommendations on his professional future, the surgeon, Dr.
Rolando R. Sanchez, and his lawyer, Michael Blazicek, publicly presented their side of the story for the first time.


Streetscapes: Temple B'nai Israel; A Church Tackles Renovation
ALTHOUGH hidden away on a side street, the 1923 Temple B'nai Israel, at 604 West 149th Street, was one of the grandest synagogues in upper Manhattan until its congregation finally left in 1979.
Now, after years of neglect and decay, a Baptist church is trying to revive this behemoth.
In the 1900's and 1910's, Broadway above 125th Street along the new subway route sprouted apartment houses on land that had been largely vacant before the turn of the century.
The new line brought the area within commuting range of downtown factories and offices.


Ruling Passions
EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE  By Daniel Goleman. 352 pp. New York: Bantam Books.


Digging In the Surprises for Next Spring
FORTUNATE indeed are those gardeners, especially those with an eye for the unusual, who remembered to mail in their orders for hardy spring-flowering bulbs during the summer months.
If the orders have already been shipped, these foresighted planners are now able to tuck the bulbs into their appointed places.


At D.M.V., Speeding Is Encouraged
Waiting in line at the Department of Motor Vehicle's Worth Street headquarters is a rite of passage for many New Yorkers, a social equalizer that brings people of every caste and class together in grumbling solidarity.
But these days, the average waiting time is 22 minutes, down from 97 minutes two and a half years ago, department officials say, thanks to an all-out assault on the problem that started in 1993.


NATO Warns Serbs
The Serbs were slow to remove their heavy weapons from around the besieged Serbian capital, Sarajevo, and they blocked an aid convoy, leading NATO to issue new warnings of air strikes.
Page 12.


1 Is Killed, Others Are Hurt Amid Shooting at Block Party
At least one man was killed and an off-duty transit police officer was shot and seriously wounded last night when gunfire erupted at a raucous block party in Bushwick, Brooklyn.
Investigators believe that as many as four people may have been struck by bullets, including a woman and another man, at 10:10 P.M., near an apartment building on Halsey Street between Bushwick and Evergreen Avenues.
Many details, including the exact number of people who were wounded and what led to the shooting, remained unclear several hours after the incident.


Boston College Can't Hold On
Boston College curbed the Michigan offense for all of the first period and most of the second tonight.
But then came big plays by the Wolverines, Eagles errors and points for the Big Ten team.
The visitors won, 23-13, before a capacity crowd of 44,500.
Michigan's record went to 4-0 for the first time since 1986, while Boston College fell to 1-2.


Anita Tishman, Andrew Winkler
Anita Diane Tishman, a daughter of Peter V. Tishman of New York and the late Ellen Morse Tishman, is to be married this evening to Andrew Scott Winkler, a son of Mimi Winkler of New Rochelle, N.Y., and the late Arthur Winkler.
Rabbi Peter Weintraub is to officiate at the St.
Regis hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Winkler, 31, recently received a master's degree in clinical social work from New York University.
She graduated from the New School for Social Research.
Her father owns Peter Tishman Real Estate, an investment and development company in New York.
The bride's great grandfather the late Julius Tishman founded the Tishman Realty and Construction Corporation in New York.
Her grandfather the late Norman Tishman was the president of Tishman Realty.


Prosecuting Prosecutors: It's Happening All Over
Who will prosecute the prosecutors?
Plenty of people, as it turns out -- mostly other prosecutors.
The past week found several courtroom crime-fighters in the public eye.


Dramatic Field Goal Gives Edge To Duke
A gallant comeback by an Army team that had lost its starting quarterback was negated today by a 10-yard punt.
The Cadets overcame the first-quarter loss of Ron McAda to build a 1-point lead, but the poor punt set up a 28-yard field goal with four seconds left that lifted the Blue Devils to a 23-21 victory before a crowd of 33,031 at Michie Stadium.
The unraveling began with Army ahead by 21-20, 2 minutes 51 seconds remaining and the Cadets at their 35-yard-line.
The new punter, Ian Hughes, skied his punt out of bounds at the Cadets' 45.


Musical Insult
To the Editor:
Allan Kozinn's entreaty that composers compose specifically for the electric guitar deserves to fall on increasingly deafened ears.
Among this century's numerous musical insults, the most egregious are those grounded on technological gimmickry.
Prospects for a kinder, gentler, better-sounding 21st century would be enhanced if we could somehow uninvent the electric guitar and undiscover nuclear fission.
OWEN OLPIN  Teasdale, Utah


For the Elderly, Increasing Options in Housing
AFTER 10 years in Florida, Arthur and Jean Dempsey are coming back north.
They relocated from the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn to Port Richey, near Tampa Bay, in 1985.
Now they are in their middle 60's and feeling that they must see more of their children and grandchildren in New Jersey.
"Many families feel as we do," said Mrs.
Dempsey.
"We want to go back to be near our families."


Gangs Find Shop Owners Easy Prey at Home
Since he arrived from Pakistan 15 years ago, Mohammed Malik has managed to follow the age-old script for immigrant success in New York.
First he drove a taxicab, then he opened a delicatessen and today he lives in a comfortable apartment with his wife and brother on a shady street in Bayside, Queens.
But he said his confidence in his family's future in America had been shaken for the first time last month, when three Spanish-speaking men shrouded in black masks and armed with semiautomatic handguns broke into his apartment early one Friday morning.


Underneath It All
The first cool days have arrived, and along with them a new shirt for men.
The turn-of-the-century laborer's undershirt in heavy cotton knit is having a revival among young men of the 1990's.
Worn on its own, with short sleeves or long sleeves pushed up and the three (or five) buttons at the neck left open, the style suggests the nonchalantly rugged look of a longshoreman in the early decades of this century.
This former undershirt could challenge the supremacy of the T-shirt, which came out from under the dress shirt in the 1950's to be worn on its own with blue jeans.


In the Region: Westchester; A Huge White Plains Presence Seeks Rezoning
TWO weeks ago New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, which sits on this city's largest piece of undeveloped property, petitioned the Common Council to rezone a portion of its 235 acres for retail use.
The petition, filed on Sept. 5, zeroes in on 47 acres now zoned residential.
The Westchester division of the hospital, which is a psychiatric center, is seeking to have 25 of those acres devoted to retail, leasing part of the remainder to the city for recreation use and preserving the rest as open space.


Artwork at Tiffany's
The paintings of Fares Rizk arrive in Tiffany's windows, just in time for breakfast, Sept. 9.


How Holocaust Rescuers Found Humanity and Courage
THE Holocaust created a drama of victims, perpetrators, rescuers and bystanders," Malka Drucker said. "Most of us are bystanders."
It was the exception to that, and not the rule, that became the topic of "Rescuers: Portraits of Moral Courage in the Holocaust" (Holmes &amp; Meier) by Ms.
Drucker, a children's writer, and Gay Block, a portrait photographer.


Technology in the Schools: First, Teach the Teachers
To the Editor:
I applaud your insightful front-page article on the state of technology in New Jersey's schools, and particularly your emphasis on the need for teacher training ("Backpack, Pencil Case, Modem," Sept. 3).
Our district has been remarkably farsighted in providing release time so teachers can be trained in their own buildings on their own equipment during the school day, and can apply their new skills with their students the very next day.


At the Casinos
What's happening on stage at all the Atlantic City casinos this week.
Tickets are available through Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Bally's Park Place  Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 225-5977.
PARK CABARET "Legends in Concert," impersonations of Neil Diamond, Judy Garland, Whitney Houston, Roy Orbison, Tom Jones, Elvis Presley, Tina Turner, Madonna, Elton John and the Blues Brothers.
Sunday through Thursday at 7:30 and 10 P.M.; Saturday at 8 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $20; Caesars Atlantic City  2100 Pacific Avenue. (800) 677-7469.
CIRCUS MAXIMUS THEATER Don Rickles.
Tonight at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $45.
COMING UP Richard Jeni, Sept. 29-Oct. 1.
Claridge Hotel  Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 257-8585.
COMING UP Al Martino, Oct. 6-8.
The Grand  Boston at Pacific Avenue. (609) 340-7200.
CAMBRIDGE BALLROOM Liza Minnelli.
Tonight at 7.
Tickets: $50-$75.
COMING UP Paul Anka with Stewie Stone, Oct. 7-8.
Harrah's Hotel Casino  Harrah's Boulevard and Huron Avenue. (800) 242-7724.
BROADWAY-BY-THE-BAY Preservation Hall Jazz Band.
Tonight at 7 and 10.
Tickets: $20.
The Mills Brothers and Kay Starr.
Friday through Oct. 1.
Tuesday and Friday at 7 P.M.; Wednesday, Thursday, Saturday and Sunday at 7 and 10 P.M.
Tickets: $20.
Merv Griffin's Resorts Casino Hotel  1133 Boardwalk. (609) 340-6830.
COCONUT BALLROOM Ron O'Brien's "Four of a Kind," with the Four Aces, the Four Lads, the New Chordettes and the Platters.
Tonight at 3 and 6 P.M.
Tickets: $20-$25.
COMING UP Wayne Newton, Sept. 28-30.
Sands Hotel and Casino  Indiana Avenue and Brighton Park. (800) 257-8580.
COPA ROOM "Sophisticated Rhythms." Six singers, a five-piece live band and Walter Freeman, dancer, accompany Clint Holmes as he covers hits by the Mills Brothers, Smokey Robinson, Louis Armstrong, Nat King Cole, the Supremes and the Pointer Sisters.
Sunday through Wednesday at 3:30 and 8 P.M.; Saturday at 8 and 11 P.M.
Through Nov. 26.
Tickets: $20.
Showboat Hotel Casino  Delaware and Pacific. (609) 343-4000.
MARDI GRAS SHOWROOM "The Basin Street Follies," a revue with birds, song and comedy, with new acts every month, featuring Corey Schmidt, animal trainer, and his four birds; Alto and Mantai, sketch comedians, and Duke Daniels, singer.
Monday through Saturday at 8 and 10:30 P.M.
Through Sept. 30.
Tickets: $10.
Tropworld  Boardwalk and Brighton Avenue. (800) 257-6227.
SHOWROOM Ben Vereen.
Wednesday and Thursday at 8 P.M., Friday and Saturday at 9 P.M., Sept. 24 at 7 P.M. and Sept. 25 at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25-$35.
Trump's Castle Casino Resort  Huron Avenue and Brigantine Boulevard. (800) 777-8477.
KING'S COURT SHOWROOM Dick Clark's "American Bandstand Live: The Beat Goes On." Four decades of rock-and-roll, presented through song, dance, magic, comedy and novelty acts.
Today at 6 and 9 P.M.; Monday through Thursday at 3:30 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $12.50.
One-drink minimum.
Steve Lawrence and Eydie Gorme.
Friday at 9 P.M. and Saturday at 8 and 11 P.M.
Tickets: $40.
One-drink minimum.
Trump Plaza  Boardwalk at Mississippi Avenue. (800) 759-8786.
COMING UP Frank Sinatra Jr., Sept. 28-Oct. 1.
Pat Cooper, Oct. 6-8.
Trump Taj Mahal  1000 Boardwalk, at Virginia Avenue. (609) 449-1000.
CASBAH The Diamonds.
Sunday through Thursday, 7:30 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $12.50 on weekdays and $15 on Saturdays.
One-drink minimum.
"The Voice of 1,000 Stars," with Fernando Pereira.
Starts Saturday.
Through Nov. 2.
Sunday through Thursday, 7:30 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $12.50 on weekdays and $15 on Saturdays.
XANADU Buddy Hackett with Sandy Hackett.
Friday at 9 P.M., Saturday at 8 P.M. and next Sunday at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $35.


For Gators, It's the Last 30 Minutes That Count
Drained yet smiling, Florida offensive tackle Mo Collins sat at his locker room stall tonight and kept reminding anyone who would listen: "It's a 60-minute game. They don't stop the game after 30 minutes."
For the Gators, those last 30 minutes were something special.
"They don't call this 'The Swamp' for nothing," Collins crowed after Florida used 41 second-half points to run away from previously unbeaten Tennessee, 62-37, before 85,105 at Ben Hill Griffin Stadium.


Mudslinging?
To the Editor:
The essay by Elizabeth Roper Marcus ("Resisting the Charms of the Napa Valley," July 9) reflects the narrow-mindedness of a typical city dweller who casts a sarcastic glance at anything outside the city limits and, at the same time, is opinionated and becomes an instant expert on all matters.


Juliet F. Nezhad, Peter Seymour
Juliet Farrokh Nezhad, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Michael F. Nezhad of Middlebury, Conn., was married there yesterday to Peter Du Bois Seymour, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Seymour of Arlington, Va.
The Rev.
John D. Regan performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
John of the Cross Church.
Mrs.
Seymour is a director of marketing at Twentieth Century-Fox Home Entertainment, in Beverly Hills, Calif.
She graduated from Columbia University and received an M.B.A. from Stanford University.
Her father is a gastroenterologist in Waterbury, Conn.


Beth A. Kressley, Dennis Goldstein
Beth Ann Kressley and Dennis Gerard Goldstein, consultants in the New York office of the Boston Consulting Group, a management concern, were married yesterday in Allentown, Pa.
The Rev.
Theodore C. Schlack performed the ceremony at the Christ Lutheran Church.
Mrs.
Kressley Goldstein, 30, graduated from the University of Virginia and received an M.B.A. and a master's degree in public policy from Harvard University.
She is the daughter of Nancy and Dr.
Vernon D. Kressley of Allentown.
The bride's father is a dentist there.


Dr. Hoffman, Dr. Mitchell
Dr.
Margaret Louisa Hoffman, the daughter of Lily Hoffman and Dr.
Joel S. Hoffman of New York, was married last evening to Dr.
W.
Beauregard Mitchell, a son of Barbara and Billy Mitchell of Hood River, Ore.
Rabbi Burt Aaron Siegel performed the ceremony in New York at Studio 450, a loft rented for parties and weddings.
The couple received their medical degrees from Tufts University.


Languedoc
To the Editor:
In addition to eating the Pic St.-Loup (the meringue and chocolate concoction), Linda Wolfe could have climbed it.
Three miles south of St.-Martin-de-Londres, the D113 branches east from the D986 to Cazevieille, where signs lead to a parking lot where the trail up the Pic.
St.-Loup starts.
The walk is roughly a two-and-half-hour round trip beginning on a gravel path that later becomes surfaced with the polished limestone of the mountain.


INSIDE
In Stickley country: a symposium on the Arts and Crafts Movement and how it left its mark on New Jersey. 9 ON THE MAP  Trails are closed and firefighters are wary near the Delaware Water Gap. 3 N.J.
LAW  Combines roar.
Livestock and pesticides smell.
Roosters crow.
Newcomers had better get used to it.6 ATLANTIC CITY  The butler did it!
How to coddle high rollers, from getting tickets to packing bags.15


WHO WILL FACE THE MUSIC?
Elizabeth Kolbert's article "Who Will Face the Music?" (Aug. 27) was blunt and focused.
My generation is in trouble.
We are too busy and/ or apathetic to organize, as A.A.R.P. does so effectively.
We are working harder than ever for a diminishing dollar, and when we retire in 2030 at age 70, all we'll get after contributing to Social Security for more than 50 years will be lame apologies.


Precinct Shift: A New Chief For the 84th
When Deputy Inspector William J. Dwyer, commanding officer of the 84th Precinct, was abruptly relieved of his command last July, accused of showing up intoxicated at a meeting with senior police officials, many merchants and members of community groups lamented his departure.
They wondered whether Inspector Dwyer's successor would be able to match his record for improving the quality of life in the neighborhood.
Now they are about to find out.
Capt.
Joseph McGrann, 39, took command of the precinct on Sept. 8.
And he brings to the post 16 years of experience in communities very different from downtown Brooklyn.
At the 75th Precinct in East New York, there were 129 murders in 1993, the year Captain McGrann arrived as executive officer.


A Regular Guy Under That Slinky Dress
REVENGE OF THE nerd might not be a bad title for the work in progress that is John Leguizamo's life.
The concept?
A goofy kid from Queens trades his highwaters for high fashion as a queen.
As Chi Chi, the hip-hop hottie in "To Wong Foo, Thanks for Everything, Julie Newmar," Mr.
Leguizamo vamps his way across country as a "drag princess" seeking fulfillment and pursuing a fantasy.
And a killer gown.


POSTINGS: Buying Back Mortgage From F.D.I.C.; Refinancing With a Bonus
Edward T. Braverman, the lawyer, calls it "a very sweet deal." Representing Celtic Park, a 26-building co-op complex in Woodside, Queens, Mr.
Braverman arranged to buy the co-op's mortgage back from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, which had inherited it after Seamen's Bank for Savings, the original lender, went out of business.
Celtic Park's mortgage stood at $7.65 million.
The complex bought the mortgage back from the F.D.I.C. in August for $5.5 million, using money lent it by the Republic Bank for Savings.
It then arranged a new mortgage with Republic for $6.65 million and used the more than $1 million it got back from Republic to upgrade the complex.
Improvements included asbestos abatement and new elevators.
Total savings: more than $2 million.


He Who Saves The Day Gets The Princess
Angus  Charlie Talbert, Chris Owen, Ariana Richards, Kathy Bates, George C. Scott and Rita Moreno Directed by Patrick Read Johnson PG-13: : 91 minutes


Columbia Finally Defeats Harvard
At long last, Columbia managed to beat Harvard and, at the same time, win its opening game of the season.
A 1-yard run by John Harper, his third touchdown of the game, with 19 seconds remaining today gave the Lions a 28-24 victory, their first triumph over the Crimson since the 1979 season opener.
Every year since, Columbia had opened the season against Harvard and every year it had lost, including a painful, last-minute 39-32 defeat last season.


A 90'S KIND OF RIVALRY
I was moved to a very audible "Bravo!" by the concluding paragraph of Peter de Jonge's compelling story on Andre Agassi and Pete Sampras ("A 90's Kind of Rivalry," Aug. 27).
Healing, transforming imagery indeed for all.
Know your opponent so well that when the final point is scored you have competed fully to a "tie"?


Where Crime Is Low, Splitting the Tab for Police Gains Appeal
Sometimes reluctantly, New Jersey towns are learning to share.
After years of maintaining their own services, many towns are teaming up to split the costs of sewage treatment, police and fire dispatching, construction inspection.
But try suggesting a merger of police forces, and voters usually balk.
Even though policing is usually the largest expense in a municipal budget, few towns are willing to give up the control that comes from a hometown police force, even if it is less efficient.
But even that may be changing.
Two clusters of small towns in northern Bergen County have begun looking at the possibility of forming regional police forces.
And Governor Whitman's administration, which has been pushing municipalities to team up, has started putting its money where its policy is.
This week the state awarded $125,000 in grants to towns that are looking into sharing police services.


U.S. Consumers Gain From Mexico Trade Pact; Real Job Losses
To the Editor:
With all due respect to Senator Richard G. Lugar (letter, Sept. 8), it's time for a reality check on the North American Free Trade Agreement and United States job loss.


If 15 Salads Aren't Enough, Invent Your Own
The name alone should make you try this gourmet cafe and ice cream shop.
But it is the salads, in particular, that have made Tickle Your Tastebuds a popular stop in Haddonfield.
There are 15 salads on the menu, including Marina's Dream (crab, shrimp, tomatoes, cucumbers, onions, peppers, olives, mixed greens); Pasta Carpollo (grilled chicken, broccoli, olives, tomatoes, carrots); Pasta Pomodoro (spinach, sun-dried tomatoes, artichokes, tomatoes, onions, olives, pasta); and Novelle Tuna (mixed greens, tuna, onions, egg, tomato, cucumber, pasta, peppers).


The C.I.A. Security Blanket
Aldrich Ames, the American spy turned Soviet mole, left a lot of wreckage behind him at the Central Intelligence Agency.
But in one way he may have done the agency a favor.
The Ames case, the worst betrayal of American intelligence secrets in the cold war, exposed the futility of the C.I.A.'s lie-detector testing.
Three times while he was hip-deep in betrayal and deceit, Mr.
Ames passed a polygraph test.
John Deutch, the new Director of Central Intelligence, has ordered the agency to reconsider its elaborate polygraph program, a system that has grown over the years into an Orwellian nightmare.
The review is another promising sign that Mr.
Deutch is prepared to reform his troubled agency, an organization sometimes immobilized by its obsession with secrecy.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
FLUSHING  The Wave of the Future, Circa the 1960's
In 1964, Robert Moses, Parks Commissioner and president of the World's Fair Corporation, boasted that the New York World's Fair had "something for everyone." Today, the Flushing Town Hall mounts a tribute to the event that drew an international throng to Flushing Meadows-Corona Park.
"Something for Everyone: The 1964-65 New York World's Fair" features more than 300 objects, including the "Aries" bronze (left) from sculptor Paul Manship's Armillary Sphere of the 12 signs of the zodiac, an early Geiger counter, modules from NASA rockets and early advances in technology, such as Sony's all-transistor, five-inch television set.


Day-Care Centers, 100, Fill New Era's Needs
PLASTIC Fisher-Price toys may have replaced the wooden puzzles and blocks of yesteryear, and the children gleefully running around the playground now wear overalls from Gap Kids instead of tidy sailor suits and dresses, but beyond these differences, little has changed at the New Rochelle Day Nursery since it was founded in 1895 as the first licensed day-care center in New York State.
For the last century, this day-care center has provided an educational and nurturing environment for toddlers and pre-schoolers.
Concern about what to do with pre-school-age children while their mothers are at work did not develop two decades ago with the influx of women into the work force.
Nor did it arise during World War II, when many mothers worked in defense plants.


3 Airlines Add Latin And Caribbean Stops
Three airlines are establishing new routes from the United States to the Caribbean and South America.
Nonstop flights between New York and Buenos Aires will be offered starting Oct. 3 by American Airlines, (800) 433-7300.
Southbound flights using Boeing 767-300ER jets will leave Kennedy International Airport on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.
The northbound flights will leave Argentina on Wednesday, Friday and Saturday.
A round-trip ticket bought at least 14 days in advance is $1,312.
A Saturday-night stayover is required.


From Internet to Wharton's Inner Sanctum
ONCE YOU'VE COMMITTED YOURSELF TO the view that theater takes place all around, there is no such thing as a vacation.
Denied the usual run of openings in the usual houses on and off Broadway, you visit all sorts of theaters: a theater in a stable or a park, a theater on the edge of a forest or in a back room the size of a studio apartment, theaters that link you to the larger world of nature and history or theaters that seal you off and become as self-contained as Alice's rabbit hole. 'Love in the Void'
"Love in the Void (alt.fan.c-love)" took place in a black hole of a room at Here, a performance space in SoHo.
The stage (the front of the room, really) was all white; there were white sheets from ceiling to floor, white projection screens and a big white web.
When the lights went down, you found yourself on the Internet, inside a war of words and wills being fought between a rock star and her greedy, needy audience.


Saratoga Dance
To the Editor:
It was with mixed delight and disappointment that I read Kevin Sack's article "What's Doing in Saratoga" (July 2).
He mentioned all manner of entertainment, restaurants, special events and museums, but he neglected entirely the National Museum of Dance, where I work as a volunteer.
It is the only museum in the country for American professional dance.


Got a Message, Do You? You Can Send It by Plate
With the help of state officials, various nonprofit organizations and causes across the country are moving beyond the bumper sticker to the specialty license plate, an effort to raise awareness as much as to raise money, or more so.
Thirty-six states now have specialty-license-plate programs, which charge motorists extra fees for tags bearing the name of a group or a message promoting an approved cause, the American Association of Motor Vehicle Administrators says.
In most cases, the association says, the sponsors can keep part or all of the premium.


The World's a Stage
No business may be like show business, but the show business portrayed on screen is usually upbeat, colorful, glamorous.
The bleak flip side propels "The Entertainer" with Laurence Olivier mesmerizing as a seedy, self-loathing English music-hall hack named Archie Rice - Thursday at 4 P.M. and Friday at 1:30 P.M. on BRV.
Tony Richardson's acidic 1960 film is based on John Osborne's script, adapted from his play, often interpreted as a metphor for the post-World War II decline of Britain on the world stage.
The first-rate cast includes Brenda de Banzie, Joan Plowright, Roger Livesey, Shirley Ann Field and, in their film debuts, Albert Finney and Alan Bates.
Lawrence Van Gelder


Coree Greenbaum And Ned Kirsch
Coree Lynn Greenbaum, a daughter of Susan and Arthur Greenbaum of Brattleboro, Vt., was married yesterday to Norman Howard Kirsch, a son of Anne Kirsch of Westhampton Beach, L.I., and the late Charles Kirsch.
John Burgess, a justice of the peace in Brattleboro, officiated at the home of the bride's parents.


Report of Lido's Demise Is Very Much Exaggerated
To the Editor:
As president of the Lido de Paris nightclub, I would like to say that, contrary to your Aug. 27 article "The Shifting Sands of New York Restaurants," we are very much alive and kicking and definitely not being replaced by a new Planet Hollywood.
While both establishments are located on the Champs-Elysees, Planet Hollywood occupies space the Lido vacated back in 1977 before moving to our current location.
CHRISTIAN CLERICO  Paris


Flying Business Class Isn't Always High Class
ON business trips, getting there can be half the fun -- or all the misery.
To minimize the pain, Smart Money offers "an inside look at the high end of airline travel."
The magazine makes clear in "Class Wars" that business travelers are entitled to great service because even though they buy just a third of all airline tickets, they account for about half of the airlines' revenues.
Just asking for good service is not enough though because service can vary widely, the article found.


A Curve of Binding Energy
THEY say the neon lights are bright on Broadway, and they say there's a broken heart for every one of them.
Nobody says there are 21 gas stations on Broadway, but it's true and I know because one day last week, I walked its length from north end to south end and counted them.
This is an odd fact, sure.
But for the walker, the plodding chronicler and observer, the size and sweep of Broadway, New York City's legendary and vainglorious Main Street, yields a set of dizzying impressions that seem suitable to either poetry or quantification.


A Tough Job, but . . .
Despite Richard Ravitch's rough-and-tumble public career -- he has directed the Metropolitan Transportation Authority and stood at the front lines in the baseball strike -- the schools may be the one institution whose problems are too intractable to fix.
Nonetheless, he has emerged as Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's first choice to become chancellor.
Mr.
Ravitch's friends have a simple message: Don't take the job.
Articles, page 48.


CHRONICLE
ROCKY AOKI, the founder and chairman of the Benihana restaurant chain, says he is such a firm believer in the value of cultural exchange that he is helping to bankroll a Japanese folk festival at Carnegie Hall and giving tickets away.
More than 500 musicians, dancers and singers from Japan will perform at the hall tomorrow and Wednesday nights.


After the Digital Videodisk War
The compromise that ended the format war over the digital videodisk on Friday was hailed as a victory for both sides.
In reality, however, the side led by the Sony Corporation and Philips Electronics was about to lose.
I.B.M. told Sony and Philips last month that it would support the rival system developed by the Toshiba Corporation and that other computer companies were likely to do the same, according to industry executives.


INSIDE
Conditions for Schools Job
Richard Ravitch has told friends he would agree to run the schools only if given unprecedented powers over the system.
Metro Matters, page B1.
From Cuba, Intriguing News
The United States learned that a renegade C.I.A. agent was being held by Cuba, but it was unclear whether he would be handed over.
Page A6.
Woman Slain in Central Park
A woman who the police believe had gone for a twilight run in Central Park on Saturday was found slain, her body brutally beaten.
Page B1.


Corrections
A listing of the National Research Council's 10 top-ranked graduate programs on Wednesday omitted a university cited for its religion department.
The University of Pennsylvania tied with Jewish Theological Seminary for 10th place.


For Next Generation, New Kunstlers
Like many of his classmates, Randolph Scott-McLaughlin (Harvard Law School '78) headed straight to New York after graduation.
But instead of following his friends down the centuries-old crimson brick road to Wall Street, he took a detour at Union Square to confront one of the founding lawyers of an unusual law center.
"I went right up to him and said, 'Bill, you're the best trial lawyer in the country, and you owe me the obligation to teach me what you know,' " Mr.
Scott-McLaughlin announced to William M. Kunstler.
Never one to overlook an accolade, Mr.
Kunstler laughed and took him under his wing.


Seattle to Vote Its Hopes, or Fears, on Stadium and Park
Having exported its coffee, music and software trends to the rest of the world, residents of the biggest city in the Pacific Northwest are not accustomed to evoking other American cities when discussing civic dreams.
But as Seattle approaches an election that will shape its future, people here are talking -- favorably -- about once disparaged places like New York, Baltimore and Cleveland.


Apple's Newton Poised for a Rebirth
The Newton, Apple's hand-held computer, is on the brink of a second life, and industry analysts who have seen prototypes say the new version comes significantly closer to meeting its original promise than the first model, which was widely derided as John Sculley's folly.
At a closed meeting for about 400 software developers in San Francisco early this month, Apple Computer Inc. introduced new Newton software.
People close to the company said the new operating system, called the Newton OS 2.0, will go on sale in November.


As TB Surges, Drug Producers Face Criticism
Fifty years after tuberculosis became curable, a worldwide surge in drug-resistant strains of the disease is occurring, not just because of the limits of medical science but also because of the profit motives of pharmaceutical companies, experts at an international meeting said here last week.
Worldwide, there are more cases of tuberculosis today than ever.
At least two million people die from it each year, many from strains of the bacteria that have become resistant to the available drugs.


Wild-Card Race Causes Case of Double Vision
Jay Buhner said last week that he's becoming increasingly irritated by all this talk about his Seattle Mariners team gaining its first post-season berth by way of a wild-card invitation.
After all, Buhner points out, the Mariners, having pulled to within three games of the American League West-leading California Angels, are trying to win their division right now, thank you.
They are not, he said, even thinking about baseball's newfangled method of selecting teams for its fall classic.


From Boston to Manhattan, Pedaling to Combat AIDS


Sir Grahame Clark; Archeologist, 88, Studied Stone Age
Sir Grahame Clark, an archeologist and authority on prehistoric Europe, died on Tuesday at his home in Cambridge, England.
He was 88.
Sir Grahame was knighted for his work in 1992.
He was master of Peterhouse College at Cambridge University from 1973 to 1980; Disney Professor of Archeology at Cambridge from 1952 to 1974, and head of the department of archeology and anthropology there from 1956 to 1961 and from 1968 to 1971.


24 Bundles of Nerves, One Goal
It might be hard to believe, and it certainly is hard to remember, but not long ago Ryder Cup matches were just a whole lot of fun.
Really.
The contest was a unique little event performed for the cognoscenti by players who felt little or no pressure as they tried to win a diminutive gold cup.
In the last decade or so, though, the competition between 12-man teams from the United States and Europe has turned into golf's agony in the garden spot.
When it all starts again this week at Oak Hill Country Club in Rochester, the only people having any real fun -- besides giddy spectators who will witness three days of golf on the high wire -- will be the officials of the P.G.A. of America who are counting the take.


Bridge
Good players who would like to improve their bidding judgment could profit by reading "A Bidder's Bible" by Frank Stewart.
This is a series of essays on a wide variety of bidding topics, copiously illustrated with examples from practical play.
It is available for $16.95, including mailing, from The Bridge World, 39 West 94th Street, New York, N.Y. 10025.
Standard bidding methods are assumed, and artificial conventions are not dealt with.
The author warns against doubling freely-bid contracts on the strength of a wealth of high cards, since the opponents usually have compensating distributional values.
He gives the diagramed example, which is decidedly humorous though not entirely apposite.
It occurred in the 1973 Team Trials for international selection, and East and West were Michael Becker and Andy Bernstein.


Rhyming Latin With Manhattan and Rice au Gratin
Solo theater acts are a dime a dozen these days.
The prospect of another man or woman doing a no-intermission shtick, the kind of act that costs nothing to produce, is beginning to summon pure dread, even among the most dedicated theatergoers.
But hang on.
There is fantastic talent out there.
Case in point: "Danny Hoch: Some People," entering the HBO schedule tomorrow at 9:45 P.M.
If ever Hollywood does "The Danny Hoch Story," the title role has to go to John Turturro.
New York Italian?
New York Jewish?
Who cares?
The look is perfect.
In the manner of Eric Bogosian and John Leguizamo, Mr.
Hoch glides dazzlingly through a repertory of New York characters.
He's a master impersonator, the rhythms and cadences of his various people caught perfectly.


English-Only Plan Slights Puerto Ricans
To the Editor:
In "Campaign English From Senator Dole" (editorial, Sept. 10), you refer to Senator Bob Dole's declaration while addressing the American Legion convention in Indianapolis last week in support of making English the official language of the nation.


One Reason To Cheer: Riesenberg
He is not talkative, and getting him to converse about exactly what he did today was tough.
But on a day when so many things went wrong for the Giant offense, one thing did go right: Offensive tackle Doug Riesenberg held his own against Reggie White, the most feared defensive lineman in football.
What made what Riesenberg did worth noting is that while most teams usually use at least two men to guard White -- a future Hall of Famer who, by the end of this season, will have the most sacks in National Football League history -- the Giants mostly left Riesenberg alone with the 11th-year player.
And the gamble, for the most part, paid off.


A Mysterious Statue Dogs 'Don Giovanni'
The New York City Opera's production of Mozart's "Don Giovanni" dates back to the days of the company's unseemly flirtation with Broadway musicals, and was assembled by a team that straddled the line between music theater and opera.
Harold Prince, a man of the theater who has also left his fingerprints on several operas and borderline works, oversaw the production.
And Rolf Langenfass, the costume designer for the Met's recent string of Wagner stagings, designed the costumes and sets.
When it opened in 1989, the production was greeted mostly with yawns and shrugs, and it was immediately consigned to storage, where it languished until the company revived it on Saturday evening.
It is a modest, traditional staging: there are no radical ideas or objectionable shifts of time and place, and Albert Sherman, the stage director, seems to have cut away some of the buffoonery that was criticized in the original run.
But interpretive insights are few, and the slight touches of novelty are pointlessly and sometimes distractingly odd.


Property Concerns in Pinelands
The State Senate Legislative Oversight Committee will hold public hearings this week in Toms River and Ocean City on whether property owners in the state-protected Pine Barrens are being unfairly deprived of their property because of regulations intended to protect the environmentally sensitive area.
Senator John P. Scott, Republican of Lyndhurst and the committee chairman, had proposed eliminating the Pinelands Commission, which oversees development in the roughly one million acres of the Pine Barrens in South Jersey, but he has since backed off from that position.


They Were Amused
Nunley's Carousel and Amusements in Baldwin, L.I., was closing its doors after 56 years.
So despite the rain that put all but one ride and a few games out of commission, yesterday's children streamed in to pay homage and take a last ride.
Article, page B6.


U. of Bridgeport Hasn't Given Up Its Nonsectarian Tradition
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 8 report on the honorary degree awarded to the Rev.
Sun Myung Moon has harmed the University of Bridgeport by citing the unsubstantiated allegations of Rabbi Israel C. Stein and William A. Finch concerning the conditions under which scholarships are offered to foreign students.
The university has never made attendance at sessions sponsored by any religious group a condition for scholarships.


A Grinding Debate
Thanks to a recent vote of the City Council, up to a thousand pioneering New York households will be chosen to test a futuristic kitchen appliance known as the "garbage disposal." Supporters of this device claim it will actually chop up overripe produce and stale leftovers, and wash them down the drain.
Sensible city residents will naturally be skeptical: If such a miraculous machine exists, why have we never seen it before?
Ever since garbage disposals first hit the market, they have been banned in most of New York City, Staten Island excepted.
Officials worried that so much pulverized produce, eggshells and coffee grinds would overload the sewer system.
They decreed that the city was not going to dip its toe in the chilly waters of modern kitchen technology until some tests could be conducted.
That was in 1966, and appliance aficionados are still waiting for the results.


A Man Who Would Be Chancellor on His Own Terms
MAYOR RUDOLPH W. GIULIANI'S leading candidate not only to head the city school system but also to revamp its whole governing structure is holding out for assurances that he would be given the power to do the job.
Richard Ravitch, a builder best known for extracting billions of dollars from Albany and Washington to rebuild the New York subways, has told friends that he would serve as schools chancellor only if New York's political leaders agreed in advance to give him unprecedented authority.


Officer Suspended After Woman Is Killed
A bullet from a New York City police officer's service revolver glanced off a man's wrist before striking a woman in the head, killing her, during an early morning fight in a Washington Heights restaurant, the police said.
The officer, who was off duty when he apparently got into a fight with another customer at the restaurant, was suspended pending an investigation.


Carnegie Hall Concrete
To the Editor:
Re "A Phantom Exposed: Concrete at Carnegie" (front page, Sept. 14): Any decent general contractor could have told Isaac Stern and the architectural firm that carpenters usually do what is called "floating" uneven surfaces with concrete before they lay the final wood surface.


Taking In the Sites; A Note for Statistical Surfers: Be Wary in Surveying the Net
Many marketing executives who want to join the dash for the digital dollars to be made on the World Wide Web are facing a familiar roadblock -- a request by management for some hard data on the market.
Not surprisingly, the Web itself has a number of sites that have statistics about Internet users and usage.
Many established marketing research firms, especially those dealing with technology, have Web sites.


The Bar Sets an Example
The 20,000-member Association of the Bar of the City of New York chose to celebrate its 125th anniversary last week in a public-minded fashion.
The organization, the city's most influential flock of lawyers, used the occasion to raise $3 million to expand its Community Outreach Law Program, which provides free legal services to indigent children and their families, the elderly, newly arrived immigrants, the homeless, the disabled and others in need.
This valuable effort is well in keeping with the mission, stated at its founding, of "facilitating the administration of justice." Begun in 1987, the community outreach program trained 1,000 volunteers last year and provided help to more than 3,000 people.
The success of the group's anniversary fund-raising drive, which was led by former Secretary of State Cyrus Vance, a past City Bar Association president, should allow it to do much more.


Senator D'Amato's Chance
The House leadership proposes to cut the earned-income tax credit -- a Federal rebate to low-paid workers -- by about $20 billion, or 15 percent, over seven years.
The cuts would undermine the worthy policy of the Clinton Administration to "make work pay" by using tax policy to assure that minimum-wage workers earn enough to lift their families out of poverty.
The House plan is misguided, but Senate Republicans are considering something far worse.
William Roth Jr., the new chairman of the Finance Committee, proposes whacking over $60 billion out of the tax credit.
That would devastate the smartest anti-poverty weapon Congress has ever devised.


Cuba Holds Ex-C.I.A. Man U.S. Sought For 15 Years
Cuba has detained Frank Terpil, the cashiered C.I.A. officer who has been fleeing American justice for 15 years and is wanted on an array of charges that include conspiracy to commit murder and the sale of plastic explosives to Libya, a Canadian official said today.
Colin Stewart, a spokesman for the Canadian Foreign Ministry in Ottawa, said in a telephone interview that his country's embassy in Havana had learned in recent weeks that the Cuban authorities were holding Mr.
Terpil.
Cuban officials could not be reached for comment today.


Zip Drive Revives a Maker of Storage Devices
The computer wars are rife with casualties, and just two years ago the Iomega Corporation was one of those left for dead.
Despite the company's reputation for high-quality products, sales of its aging flagship product -- the Bernoulli Box, a storage device for personal computers -- were foundering.
In 1993, the company interrupted a long string of profitable years by posting a $14.5 million annual loss, and then it lost money again last year.


Doctors, Lawyers and Silicone: A special report.; Implant Lawsuits Create A Medical Rush to Cash In
Fresh out of medical school and in need of money, Dr.
Gail Mullen signed up with a temporary help service for professionals last year and was sent to the Houston office of Dr.
Robert I. Lewy.
What she found there startled her.


Suspect in Series of Rapes Is Arrested in Park Slope
A man who the police believe is responsible for attacking or sexually assaulting several women in two Brooklyn neighborhoods was arrested early Saturday morning as he was about to attack another woman, the police said.
The man, Tony Harrison, 26, of 418 St.
John's Place in Prospect Heights, was under surveillance by the police and, they said, was seen following a woman into an apartment building on Union Street in Park Slope shortly before he was arrested about 5:20 A.M.


Joggers Find Slain Woman In the Park
A woman who apparently went for a twilight run Saturday in Central Park was found dead yesterday in the northeast corner of the park after having been savagely beaten, and the police were trying to determine if she had been raped.
The woman, whom investigators were still trying to identify, was apparently attacked on the East Drive, near Lasker Rink in the vicinity of 106th Street, said Assistant Chief John J. Hill, Chief of Manhattan Detectives.
He said that based on evidence collected at the scene, the police believe the woman had been dragged about 20 feet down an embankment, under a canopy of trees alongside the northern fringes of the narrow finger of water known as the Loch, and left for dead under the stone arch formed by the road she had been pulled from.


The Return of Andersen A Kick in Saints' Teeth
Falcons 27, Saints 24
Morten Andersen, who had made the winning kick eight times for the New Orleans Saints against the Atlanta Falcons before switching teams this year, kicked a 21-yarder in overtime yesterday to give Atlanta (2-1) a 27-24 victory over New Orleans (0-3) in the Superdome.
"I couldn't have scripted it any better," Andersen said his fourth field goal of the game beat the team he had played with for 13 seasons.
"There's got to be a movie made about this. It was fun there at the end."


Yes, Give Amtrak a Share of Gasoline Tax
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 13 news article raises a point bigger than just Amtrak and the demise of a national passenger rail service.
Amtrak wants half of one cent of the Federal gasoline tax in exchange for giving up Federal operating subsidies.


Steve Cady, 68, Sports Reporter
Steve Cady, a former New York Times sports reporter who mainly covered horse racing and boating, died yesterday at his home in Brewster, Mass., on Cape Cod.
He was 68.
He died after a long illness, said his wife, Carmel.


Playing Hardball With the Networks' Fall Schedules
Network programmers don't carry guns; they carry squares.
But they carry them everywhere, just the way Dirty Harry carried his Magnum.
The night-by-night grid of the four network prime-time schedules is known as the squares because the shows are laid out in separate boxes for each time period.
And the shows on the squares are quite literally thought of as weapons.


Hasty Plays the Hero as Chiefs Rally to Remain Perfect
The Oakland Raiders built a 17-7 lead against the Kansas City Chiefs today at Arrowhead Stadium and lost it.
But the Raiders were able to overcome that and push the game into overtime.
The Raiders committed two turnovers in regulation, one an interception of Jeff Hostetler in combination action by Chiefs linemen Neil Smith and Dan Saleaumua.
Smith, a defensive end, batted the pass upward and Saleaumua, a tackle, plucked it from the air, snaring the third interception of his career.
This one was at the Raiders' 22-yard line with 2 minutes 38 seconds to play and with the score tied at 17-17.


LEADERS IN HOUSE AGREE TO TAKE UP LOBBYING MEASURE
House Republican leaders, under pressure from their own freshmen, caustic Democrats and loyal senior Republicans, have decided to bring anti-lobbying measures to the floor in the next few weeks, abandoning their plan to wait until next year.
They plan to take up the bill the Senate passed in July, which would require the registration of thousands of lobbyists who now escape the loose restraints in the current law.
They also expect to duplicate the Senate's gift ban, which imposes a limit of $100 in gifts and meals to legislators or their aides from any person in a single year.


Showman, Dancer And Drums Of Guinea
There are great performing artists who communicate naturally across the continents to every kind of audience, and Mamady Keita, a master drummer from Guinea, is surely in that category.
The United States debut of his ensemble, Sewa Kan, billed as "drums and dances of West Africa," at Symphony Space on Saturday night, was a revelation.
Above all, there was the exceptional power of Mr.
Keita's drumming.
But there was also his showmanship.


Tensions Ease in Sarajevo, But Fears Rise on New Front
The Bosnian Serbs earned a second 72-hour reprieve from NATO bombing today by pulling back heavy weapons around Sarajevo, but a continuing Bosnian Army and Croat offensive in northwest Bosnia raised fears that recent tentative moves toward peace could unravel.
United Nations and NATO commanders, who had stopped the bombing of Bosnian Serb positions on the condition that the Serbs withdraw most of their big guns on the heights around Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital, said that the Serbs had made "substantial progress" and that the bombing pause would be extended for another 72 hours.


The Beat Generation: Giants Are Cool, and 0-3
No one has lost his cool yet.
There have been no locker-room tantrums.
There has been no finger-pointing.
The Giants are cool and calm and saying all the right things.
There was no outward indication after the Giants lost their third consecutive game this afternoon that the team was aware it was stuck in quicksand with a lead weight around the ankles.
Yet, after the Giants' 14-6 loss to Green Bay -- in which the defense played superbly against one of football's best offenses and the offense could not score a touchdown -- they know they are in deep trouble.
And they don't know what to do to turn the season around.


Wireless Move by a Stock Exchange
The American Stock Exchange, which once operated by having brokers shout orders across the streets of New York's financial district, is going wireless again.
The exchange is planning to install a local area network above the trading floor that would transmit buy and sell orders from almost anywhere in the world to hand-held computers used by brokers and traders.
The system is expected to replace, to a large extent, the current practice of recording trades on slips of paper.


U.S. Utilities Helping Czechs to Curb Greenhouse Gases and Air Pollutants
Here in the heart of one of Europe's most polluted regions, three American utility companies are embarking on a project that environmentalists hope will show the world a new way to reduce the greenhouses gases that are believed to be altering the world's climate.
The utilities are to break ground on Monday for a gas-fired power plant to replace a coal-burning plant that has been spewing heat-trapping gases and poisons into the air since it was built in 1980.


At SUNY, Long Lines Form at Aid Offices
After state budget battles led the State University of New York to increase tuition for the third time in five years, students who chose public education to save money are finding they have to take out loans, or find jobs, anyway.
As the school year began this month, the long lines snaking outside financial aid offices on SUNY campuses like Stony Brook included many students from families that never believed they would need help.
But with tuition increasing $750 this year for in-state students, to $3,400, and rising living costs, the true expense of attending a state public college is closer to $10,000.


Haitian Runoff Vote Seen as Favoring Aristide
In quiet balloting marked by low turnout, Haitians voted today in runoff parliamentary and local elections seen as likely to stabilize the Government of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
Although official results will not be available for at least a week, projections based on the first round and informal voter canvassing today suggested that the vote would ratify President Aristide's deep popularity and give him overwhelming political control.


Johannesburg Journal; With Flair All Its Own, South Africa Greets Pope
Occasionally waving her small Vatican flag in his direction, Monica Thiyane watched from a distance of about 20 yards today as Pope John Paul II slowly toured the infield of the Gosforth Park race track here in his glass-enclosed Popemobile.
Mrs.
Thiyane had been up all night waiting to see him.
At the entrance to the park, she had bought a small locket with his enamel picture and now, as he drove by waving back, she said she was satisfied.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about "Hidden Treasures Revealed," the catalogue for the exhibition of Impressionist art at the Hermitage in St.
Petersburg, Russia, misstated the title of another book by the same publisher, Harry N. Abrams.
The book, which describes cave paintings discovered last year in France, is "La Grotte Chauvet," not "La Grove Chauvet."


Corrections
An obituary on Aug. 20 about Honeychile Wilder, whose married name was Princess Alexander Hohenlohe, misstated her husband's nationality.
He was a German prince, not Austrian.


Behind the Scenes; Mighty Morphin Makeovers: Updating Media Icons
General Mills announded last week that it would update its 75-year-old Betty Crocker trademark by morphing, or digitally combining, photos of 75 ethnically diverse women.
But that seems needlessly complicated.
As shown below, a name-brand character's image can be freshened through a single, complementary morph to give it a more contemporary feel.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY THE POWER OF THE MAYORALTY
For months now, Mayor Giuliani has complained that he has no control over New York City's Board of Education -- and the purse strings for a quarter of the city's budget.
But in the tumult of events over the last week, he has showed just how much power the mayoralty has.
Even as the Mayor has wielded more influence than the law gives him, he has made it equally clear that, for him, that power is not enough.
Using his bully pulpit with the usual vigor and his ties to the teachers union with increasing transparency, the Mayor forced the board to back off its threat, which loomed all summer, to lay off teachers to meet the Mayor's budget goals.
News analysis.  [ B3. ] SUSPECT IN BROOKLYN RAPES IS ARRESTED
A man who the police believe is responsible for sexually assaulting or attacking several women in brownstone Brooklyn neighborhoods was arrested early Saturday morning as he was about to attack another woman, the police said.
The man, Tony Harrison, 26, of 418 St.
John's Place, was under surveillance by the police and, they said, was seen following a woman into an apartment building on Union Street in Park Slope shortly before he was arrested.  [ B3. ] HOW NONEDUCATOR COULD BE CHANCELLOR
The State Education Commissioner said that he was open to having a qualified noneducator become schools chancellor in New York City, but he declined to say whether Richard Ravitch, the top contender, fit that bill.
The Commissioner, Richard P. Mills, has final say on whether someone without an educational background can become the top administrator of a public school system.  [ B3. ] BLOCK PARTY ENDS IN SPRAY OF BULLETS
The block party in Bushwick, Brooklyn, on Saturday was one last end-of-summer bash for the children of Halsey Street.
And then, as the party was winding down about 10:10 P.M., there was the flash of guns, a spray of bullets, blood and panic.
When the pandemonium subsided, two men, including a bystander, had been killed and four other people, including an off-duty transit police officer, had been wounded.  [ B5. ] OFFICER SUSPENDED AFTER WOMAN DIES
A city police officer was suspended after an early morning fight at a Washington Heights bar left a woman dead, struck with a bullet from the officer's gun.
The authorities have not determined whether the off-duty officer fired the gun or whether it accidentally discharged during the dispute.
The woman was a bystander, the police said.  [ B5. ] ARMED ROBBERY AT MIDTOWN RESTAURANT
The crocodiles and skeletons were fake, but at least one gun was real at the Jekyll and Hyde Club in mid-Manhattan when three robbers tied up two employees and dashed away with $25,000 to $30,000 in cash, the police said.
No one was hurt in the robbery at the restaurant and bar.  [ B2. ] REGION  RISING COST OF PUBLIC SCHOOLS
After state budget battles led the State University of New York to increase tuition for the third time in five years, students who chose public education to save money are finding they have to take out loans, or find jobs, anyway.
As the school year began this month, the long lines snaking outside financial aid offices on SUNY campuses like Stony Brook included many students from families that never believed they would need help.  [ B6. ] PATAKI TO SEEK BUSINESS TIES ABROAD
On his first trip overseas as the Governor of New York, George E. Pataki will travel to Hungary and Italy in search of business and family ties.
Mr.
Pataki plans to tour the Hungarian village of Debrecen, which his paternal grandparents left to come to America.
And Mr.
Pataki's mother, making her first trip overseas, will accompany him to the Italian town of Reggio Calabria, where her father was born.
The Governor will meet with corporate and political leaders and is taking his economic development director to promote business ties.  [ B6. ] RAIN FINALLY FALLS ON A THIRSTY REGION
It slanted down from the lowering sky like showers of silver javelins.
It lashed dusty windowpanes, beat tattoos on parched leaves and darkened the bone-dry earth.
After months of deepening drought in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, a soaking, drenching, cooling rain fell for 12 hours -- 1 to 2 inches in most areas -- bringing nourishment to wilting vegetation, a trickle of hope for sunken reservoirs and welcome relief from a monotonous skein of sunbaked days.  [ B4. ]


New Laser Printer From Hewlett-Packard
The Hewlett-Packard Company will introduce an improved laser printer on Monday.
The world's biggest maker of computer printers said the new H-P LaserJet 5L would sell for about $479 and would have better features than its other low-end laser machines.


Scientists Say Earth's Warming Could Set Off Wide Disruptions
The earth has entered a period of climatic change that is likely to cause widespread economic, social and environmental dislocation over the next century if emissions of heat-trapping gases are not reduced, according to experts advising the world's governments.
The picture of probable disruption, including adverse changes and some that are beneficial, emerges from draft sections of a new assessment of the climate problem by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and from interviews with scientists involved in the assessment.
The panel, a United Nations group of 2,500 scientists from around the world, advises parties to a 1992 treaty that are negotiating reductions in heat-trapping greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide.


Pro-China Party Appears Big Loser in Hong Kong Election
Hong Kong voted for a new legislature for the last time under British rule on Sunday and appeared to deliver a stunning blow to pro-Beijing candidates, according to early results and exit polls.
By noon, candidates from the Democratic Party, the party that has challenged China's plans for Hong Kong's future, and its allies were winning in all but two directly elected seats.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Turner Broadcasting Deal Seems Set for Approval  Time Warner's $8 billion purchase of Turner Broadcasting System seems likely to be approved by the companies' boards this week, ending a tortuous, monthlong courtship.
Time Warner apparently overcame a major roadblock in negotiations, individuals close to the talks said, when it agreed to modify its bylaws so that John C. Malone, the cable entrepreneur whose Liberty Media Corporation owns a large stake in Turner, would be able to acquire an even more valuable stake in the new company.  [ Page A1. ] A Face-Saving Concession  The compromise on the digital videodisk technology was hailed as a victory on Friday, but in reality, one side in the format war was about to lose.
Wireless on Wall Street  The American Stock Exchange plans to install a local area network that would transmit buy and sell orders from almost anywhere in the world to hand-held computers.  [ D2. ] Lobbyist Rules, Redux  House Republicans plan to bring anti-lobbying measures to the floor, taking up the bill the Senate passed in July.
That would require lobbyists to register and would impose a $100-a-year limit on gifts and meals to legislators or their aides from any person.  [ A1. ]
Poised to Snap Up Stations  Usually, Howard Stern, radio's "shock jock," attracts more attention than his bosses at Infinity Broadcasting.
But soon, Infinity may be drawing the attention -- and the fire.  [ D7. ]
Makeovers for Media Icons  Morphing, the digital combination of images, will soon transform Betty Crocker, a 75-year-old General Mills brand, into a mixture of 75 women.
But changing a brand's look need not be quite that complicated, if an extreme image is chosen to begin with.  [ D7. ]
Drug Makers Under Fire  At an international medical meeting, experts said tuberculosis has surged in part because pharmaceutical companies have not invested in bringing new drugs to market.  [ A1. ] A Harder Look at General Magic  Staff departures and a reorganization have refocused attention on General Magic, which has managed to bask in the media spotlight while hiding its light under a basket.
Denise Caruso: Digital Commerce.  [ D5. ] A Power Plant With Promise  Three American utility companies are to break ground today for a gas-fired power plant in the Czech Republic that environmentalists hope will demonstrate a new way to reduce "greenhouses gases."  [ A8. ] A Harmful European Ruling  In a blow to Amgen, the European Patent Office has opened the door for a licensee of Amgen's archrival, Genetics Institute, to sell erythropoietin in Europe.
The drug, known as EPO, is used to treat anemia in people on dialysis.
Teresa Riordan: Patents.  [ D2. ]


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
According to traders, by the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 5.27 percent and on a six-month bill, 5.25 percent.


Most Wanted; Profiting From Windows 95
Between purchases of the Window 95 computer operating system and upgrades to new software, consumers have made the phenomenon a cottage industry unto itself.
The operating system was the No. 1 program for Windows and DOS machines last month.
Apple Comtuter saw its stock fall 19.8 percent last week after it disclosed that some of its Powerbook portable computers caught on fire while charging.


A Triumph That Jets Hope To Expand On
In many ways important to their emotional well-being, the Jets started and ended something today.
Something very close to a sigh was the first sound out of Coach Rich Kotite as he analyzed the first victory of his regime, a 27-10 rout of the Jacksonville Jaguars.


Novell Readies a Response to Windows
It's never easy getting recognition as No. 2, and during the last few weeks Novell Inc. has had an especially hard time being heard above the clamor and the Rolling Stones backbeat of Microsoft Corporation's Windows 95 rollout.
But this week Novell, the world's second-largest producer of personal computer software, intends to raise its voice.
In a presentation to Wall Street analysts on Thursday, Novell's chief executive, Robert Frankenberg, plans to articulate a strategy for protecting the company's lead in the one part of the PC software market that Microsoft does not yet dominate: corporate computer networks.


Gramm Is a Strong First in Straw Poll
Once again showing surprising strength in a Presidential straw poll, Senator Phil Gramm of Texas finished a strong first here today in a candidate "beauty contest" held at a convention of the National Federation of Republican Women, a major arm and fairly good cross section of the Republican Party.
Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the front-runner in recent months in national voter surveys conducted by professional pollsters, finished a weak third in this afternoon's poll, beaten out of second by a single vote by former Gov.
Lamar Alexander of Tennessee.


Abroad at Home; The Authentic Quality
When talk of Gen.
Colin Powell as a Presidential candidate began, political experts said his extraordinary approval rating would plummet as soon as he took positions on issues.
I thought and think that is quite wrong.
What attracts people to General Powell is not his view on this or that question of public policy.
It is the quality they sense in him as a person: authenticity.
People believe that what they see is what they would get.


Gingrich Predicts Agreement On Welfare Bill by Thanksgiving
Speaker Newt Gingrich predicted today that Congress would complete an overhaul of welfare by Thanksgiving and come up with legislation drastically reducing Federal "strings" on how states conduct welfare programs.
"The President is eager to sign a welfare reform bill, and I think we will have one by Thanksgiving," Mr.
Gingrich said in the keynote address to a meeting here of the Southern Governors' Association.
"There are arguments about the strings we will attach, and we will not be sending you governors the money totally without strings. But there will be about 3 percent of the strings that our liberal friends did in the past."


Unions Must Study German Auto Lesson
To the Editor:
"Luxuries They Can't Afford" (Business Day, Sept. 13), on the globalization of the German auto industry, helps explain why even the strongest national unions are at a disadvantage in the struggle to protect and advance wages and working conditions.


Equity Offerings Scheduled for the Week Ahead
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Alkermes Inc., Cambridge, Mass., two million shares. Robertson, Stephens &amp; Co.
American Standard Cos., Piscataway, N.J., 17.5 million shares, including 12.25 million shares in the United States and Canada.
Goldman, Sachs.
Inc., San Diego, 2.55 million shares. Hambrecht &amp; Quist.
Ariely Advertising Ltd., Tel Aviv, an initial public offering of one million ordinary shares.
Hampshire Securities.
Bio Vascular Inc., St. Paul, 1.5 million shares. Piper Jaffray.
Black Box Corp., Pittsburgh, 3.5 million shares. Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.
Burr-Brown Corp., Tucson, Ariz., 1.75 million shares. Hambrecht &amp; Quist.
Cannondale Inc., Georgetown, Conn., 2.55 milion shares. Hambrecht &amp; Quist.
Citation Corp., Birmingham, Ala., four million shares. Stephens Inc.
Core Laboratories N.V., Amsterdam, an initial public offering of 2.5 million shares.
Jefferies &amp; Co.
Cyberoptics, Minneapolis, 1.25 million shares. Alex Brown.
Energy Ventures Inc., Houston, 2.6 million shares. Lehman Brothers.
Enserch Exploration Inc., Dallas, 20 million shares, including 16.4 million in the United States and Canada.
Morgan Stanley.
General Scanning Inc., Watertown, Mass., an initial public offering of 2.9 million shares.
Hambrecht &amp; Quist.
Genzyme Corp., Cambridge, Mass., three million shares. CS First Boston.
HFS Inc., Parsippany, N.J., 2.786 million shares. Morgan Stanley.
Hemasure Inc., Marlborough, Mass., 2.5 million shares. Smith Barney.
Idexx Laboratories Inc., Westbrook, Me., four million shares, including 3.2 million in the United States and Canada.
Cowen &amp; Co.
Information Storage Devices Inc., San Jose, Calif., 4.4 million shares. Alex Brown.
Just for Feet Inc., Pelham, Ala., 2.68 milion shares. Montgomery Securities.
Kaneb Pipe Line Partners L.P., Richardson, Tex., an initial public offering of 3.5 million units, each representing preferred limited partnership interests.
Smith Barney.
Kent Electronics Corp., Houston, two million shares. Smith Barney.
Lear Seating, Southfield, Mich., 15 million shares, including 12 million in the United States and Canada.
Lehman Brothers.
Mail-Well Inc., Englewood, Calif., an initial public offering of five million shares.
Merrill Lynch.
Metrocall Inc., Alexandria, Va., four million shares, including 3.2 million shares in the United States and Canada.
Lehman Brothers.
Also, $110 million of senior subordinated notes due in 2007.
Mylex Corp., Fremont, Calif., two million shares. Needham &amp; Co.
Netstar Inc., Minneapolis, an initial public offering of 3.8 million shares.
R.
J.
Steichen &amp; Co.
Nuevo Energy Co., 1.465 million shares. Morgan Keegan.
Panamsat Corp., Greenwich, Conn., an initial public offering of 18.92 million shares.
Morgan Stanley.
Pediatrix Medical Group Inc., Fort Lauderdale, Fla., an initial public offering of 4.4 million shares.
Dean Witter Reynolds.
Pepsi-Cola Puerto Rico Bottling Co., an initial public offering of seven million class B shares.
Oppenheimer &amp; Co.
Premenos Technology Corp., Concord, Mass., an initial public offering of 3.6 million shares.
Volpe Welty &amp; Co.
Scana Corp., Columbia, S.C., 4.5 million shares. Paine Webber.
Smith Micro Software Inc., Aliso Viejo, Calif., an initial public offering of 3.4 million shares.
Hambrecht &amp; Quist.
Tel-Save Holdings Inc., New Hope, Pa., an initial public offering of three million shares.
Gerard Klauer.
Trend-Lines Inc., Revere, Mass., 2.5 million class A shares.
The offering reflects a recent 3-for-2 stock split.
Prudential Securities.
United Dental Care Inc., Dallas, an initial public offering of 2.2 million shares.
Alex Brown.
Vical Inc., San Diego, 2.5 million shares. Goldman, Sachs.
Warnaco Group Inc., New York, eight million class A shares, including 6.4 million in the United States and Canada.
Merrill Lynch.
Wolverine Tube Inc., Huntsville, Ala., 4.905 million shares, including 4.169 million in the United States and Canada.
CS First Boston.
Source: MCM CorporateWatch.


Smaller but Sweeter Apples
Some Red Delicious apples that are now being harvested in New Jersey may be smaller than usual as a result of the drought, but for people who like their apples sweet, they may be more, well, delicious, agricultural officials said.
An estimated 65 million pounds of apples are anticipated this year -- 10 million less than last year, said Jerry Frecon, Rutgers University Cooperative Agent for Gloucester County.


Blending the Sounds of Long Ago, Far Away and Now
Attending a concert by an ensemble performing folk music from a variety of regions and ethnic groups can be a gamble.
Sometimes the show is too streamlined, with the distinctive characteristics of each type of music removed to create a homogeneous, easy-listening brew.
Other times the show is too heavily narrated, with introductions and explanations that last longer than the pieces of music that follow.
On Friday night at Washington Square Church, when Oruc Guvenc and his ensemble, Tumata, performed a program of folk music from Central Asia and Sufi music from Turkey, those pitfalls were avoided.
With the exception of Mr.
Guvenc's translator, who took part in the Sufi songs with histrionic chanting that seemed more likely to land her a bit part on "Melrose Place" than bring her closer to God, the performances were subdued and understated.
Mr.
Guvenc led the group with a soft, controlled voice, paying more attention to accuracy than entertainment.


Elderly Couple Found Drowned
An 80-year-old woman who was apparently despondent over her husband's worsening health tied herself and her husband to his wheelchair and plunged into their swimming pool, killing them both, the police said.


I.R.A. Backer Says He Gave U.S. New Ulster Peace Terms
Gerry Adams, the political leader of the Irish Republican Army, said today that in talks at the White House last week he had offered proposals to overcome the current impasse in the Northern Ireland peace effort.
Mr.
Adams declined to give details on what he had proposed.
But in an interview with Irish national radio, he said his party, Sinn Fein, the political wing of the I.R.A., had formulated a way out of the standoff between Irish Republicans and Britain on the issue of disarmament of


Account Changes For 3 Marketers
Three marketers -- Color Tile Inc., the National Promoflor Council and the New York Restaurant Group -- are making agency changes.
Color Tile in Fort Worth, which operates the Color Tile and Carpet retail chain, has selected Harris Drury Cohen in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., to handle its account, which had been at Grey Advertising in New York since 1987.
The billings were previously estimated at $40 million but are expected to increase to $60 million; that figure would nearly double the billings of Harris Drury, to an estimated $125 million.


Coors to Introduce Specialty Beers
The Coors Brewing Company unit of the Adolph Coors Company in Golden, Colo., will introduce a line of specialty beers meant to compete against microbrewery products.
They will be sold under the name of the Blue Moon Brewing Company.
This is the first time that the Unibev Ltd. division of Coors Brewing, which markets specialty brands like Zima, will produce such products outside plants owned by Coors.
The Blue Moon beers, in varieties like nut brown and Belgian ales, will be brewed by the F. X. Matt Brewing Company in Utica, N.Y., which also produces beers for microbreweries.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday
Inventory-Sales Ratio July Tuesday
Housing Starts Aug. Wednesday
Balance of Trade July Thursday
Weekly Jobless Claims Friday
Federal Budget Aug.


Time Warner Deal To Acquire Turner Overcomes Hurdles
Time Warner Inc.'s $8 billion purchase of Turner Broadcasting System Inc. seems likely to be approved by the companies' boards this week, ending a tortuous, monthlong courtship that portends a media marriage marked more by tumult than tranquillity.
One major roadblock in the negotiations was apparently overcome in the last several days.
According to individuals close to the talks, Time Warner agreed to modify a provision of its bylaws so that John C. Malone, the cable television entrepreneur whose Liberty Media Corporation owns a large stake in Turner, would have the right to acquire an even more valuable stake in the new corporation.


Accounts
American Sensor, Toronto, to DDB Needham New York, a unit of the Omnicom Group, as the first agency to handle advertising for the maker of products like fire and carbon monoxide detectors.
The billings were estimated at $9 million.
Nissan Motor Company Australia, Melbourne, a unit of Nissan Motor Co., to Whybin TBWA, Melbourne, part of TBWA/Chiat Day, to handle advertising for the Nissan Pathfinder in Australia, previously handled by George Patterson Bates, Melbourne, owned by Cordiant P.L.C.
The billings were estimated at $3 million.
TBWA Chiat/Day, a unit of the Omnicom Group, also handles Nissan in North America and Europe.


General Magic is learning it is a lot harder to deliver a product than a promise.
NEWS of a reorganization and the departures of some crucial employees at General Magic Inc. have refocused attention on the Silicon Valley start-up company, which since its founding in mid-1990 has performed the rare trick of basking in the media spotlight even while hiding its light under a basket.
Marc Porat, a former Apple Computer executive who is General Magic's co-founder, chairman and chief executive, is known for long, poetic descriptions about a Magic-driven future where Everyman would dip in and out of rich data networks of text, image and sound.
The company's stock nearly doubled on its first day of public trading in February.
But on Friday, General Magic closed at $15.325, well off its $32 peak earlier this year.


Douglas Proves Himself in a Rush
Hugh Douglas had the kind of afternoon that makes National Football League player-personnel people look like geniuses and offensive linemen look like fools.
The Jets' rookie defensive end was in the Jaguars' backfield so much yesterday afternoon that Jacksonville could have made him an honorary running back.
Officially, he had three sacks, but it could easily have been more with all the quarterback knockdowns.
One sack was wiped out because of an illegal-use-of-hands penalty.
On another occasion, Douglas sacked Jacksonville quarterback Mark Brunell in the end zone but didn't get a safety because he was penalized for grabbing the quarterback by the face mask on the takedown.


Global Warming Heats Up
The evidence mounted last week that man-made gases are causing deterioration of the earth's atmosphere.
First came news that a United Nations scientific panel believes it has found, for the first time, evidence that human activities are indeed causing a much-debated warming of the globe.
The report, though preliminary, appeared to strengthen the case that governments throughout the world may need to take stronger action to head off potential damage.
Then came an announcement from the World Meteorological Organization that a worrisome hole in the earth's protective ozone shield appears to be getting even larger over Antarctica.
Such enlargement had been expected because it will take a while for corrective actions already taken by many governments to exert their effect.
But the report underscored that the battle to save the ozone layer is not yet safely won.


Time Warner Gets Preview Of CNN's Future
Last Wednesday, in the midst of his protracted negotiations with Ted Turner, Gerald M. Levin took time out for a tour of Cable News Network's sprawling newsroom in Atlanta.
Mr.
Levin, the chairman of Time Warner Inc., greeted some of CNN's senior news producers and lingered at a presentation of the network's fledgling interactive ventures.
With Time Warner seemingly on the verge of clinching a deal to acquire CNN's parent company, Turner Broadcasting System Inc., for about $8 billion, Mr.
Levin's visit to the CNN newsroom was fraught with meaning.


'Bessies' Go to New Artists and Philip Glass
Recipients of the 11th annual New York Dance and Performance Awards, a fixture of the arts downtown, range from the composer Philip Glass to emerging artists.
The awards, known as the Bessies, are named for the dance teacher Bessie Schonberg and were presented last week by Dance Theater Workshop in a ceremony at the 92d Street Y.


Arraignment of Slaying Suspect
A man accused of killing his wife with a crossbow is scheduled to be arraigned today in Union County Superior Court, and prosecutors said that they planned to seek the death penalty against him.
The authorities said that Arthur Wesley Smith fled to California in 1992, shortly after he killed his wife, Martha, and was convicted two years later of raping a television news reporter who had interviewed him about a program for the homeless.


Cold, Wet . . . Wonderful


Next in Line for Cigar: Jockey Club Gold Cup
On the day after he won the Woodward Stakes for his 10th straight victory, Cigar was declared fit and hungry yesterday and likely to run in the Jockey Club Gold Cup in three weeks as his final dress rehearsal for the Breeders' Cup.
There were no notable casualties from Belmont Park's Super Saturday, which puts exceptional horses on the road to the Breeders' Cup.


Male Russian Troupe Tries Drama and Comedy
The St.
Petersburg Male Ballet was founded by Valery Mikhailovsky in 1992.
Not long ago an all-male company would have been unthinkable in the former Soviet Union, where the party line did not encourage esthetic nonconformity.
So the group's productions may astonish Russian dancegoers.
Americans will find them less startling.
Beginning with the pioneering efforts of Ted Shawn in the 1930's, American choreographers have occasionally created serious new works for all-male casts.
Since the 1970's, little troupes have specialized in spoofs of the classics in which men play female as well as male roles.
Both types of productions were featured when the St.
Petersburg dancers made their New York debut on Friday night at Avery Fisher Hall.


Suspension on Casino Panel
An official of the State Casino Control Commission who is accused of exceeding his authority by negotiating "golden parachutes" for three departing employees has been suspended, the A.P. reported yesterday.
A State Commission of Investigation report released on Sept. 7 also criticized Joseph Papp, the regulatory panel's chief of staff, for improper use of telephones, a car and meal allowances.


Mariners Miss Their Chance To Stretch the Wild-Card Lead
The Seattle Mariners, with a chance to open up a two-game lead in the American League wild-card race, came up a run short yesterday, losing, 2-1, to the host Chicago White Sox on a home run by the rookie Lyle Mouton.
Mouton's shot came in the bottom of the seventh, two innings after Seattle had tied the game on a double by Dan Wilson.


Looking for the Reasons After a 2d Heart Attack
HEART A Memoir  By Lance Morrow  323 pages. Warner Books. $22.95.
In 1992, at the age of 53, Lance Morrow, a senior writer at Time magazine, suffered his second heart attack.
"A heart attack feels like this," he writes near the beginning of his affecting new book, "Heart: A Memoir." "A sickness suddenly surrounds the lungs, a sort of toxic interior glow -- fleeting at first, lightly slithering, but returning a moment later, more insistent."


The Surge Continues: Mets Move Into Third
Talk about role reversal.
Nearly three months ago the Phillies were flexing their muscles after sweeping a four-game series against the Mets at Shea Stadium.
While the Phillies stood atop the National League East, it was in many respects the low point of the Mets' season.
They had lost 4 straight games and 14 of 20 and carried an embarrassing 19-34 record to Atlanta, where they risked further humiliation against the talented Braves.


Skyrocketing Star Salaries
Is Sylvester Stallone worth $20 million a movie?
Does Demi Moore sell enough tickets to warrant her current fee of $12.5 million?
Is Charlie Sheen worth $5 million a film?
Charlie Sheen?


After a Dry Summer, Listen to the Rhythm!
It slanted down from the lowering sky like showers of silver javelins.
It lashed dusty windowpanes, beat tattoos on parched leaves and darkened the bone-dry earth.
It dripped from eaves and ran in silken rivulets into arid gardens and iridescent streets.
The gray windy air was fresh again with a sense of life renewed.
After months of deepening drought in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, a soaking, drenching, cooling rain fell for 12 hours yesterday -- 1 to 2 inches in most areas -- bringing nourishment to wilting vegetation, a trickle of hope for sunken reservoirs and welcome relief from a monotonous skein of sunbaked days.


Wake-Up Call in 9th Too Late for Yanks
The Yankees must have thought their road trip ended Saturday night instead of today.
How else to explain why they snoozed through this crucial contest?
Until the ninth inning, they were sleepwalking; seven times they took called third strikes.
Kevin Brown held the Yankees spellbound while fashioning a four-hitter over eight and one-third innings for a 2-0 victory that was meaningless to the Orioles and very meaningful to New York.


Software Making Operating Systems Irrelevant
To the Editor:
"Apple Holds School Market, Despite Decline" (Business Day, Sept. 11) implies that Microsoft's Windows 95 will become the only operating system for computers, replacing Apple Computer's Macintosh.


Cities Told That Odds Aren't Great in Sports Deals
While officials across the country still salivate over the prospect of luring a professional sports franchise to their cities, a panel of economists meeting here last week said the benefits of a being a big league city were vastly overdrawn.
In a two-day session titled "Sports and Entertainment: Economic Development Boon or Boondoggle," municipal officials gathered from across the Southeast were told that the competition among cities to attract sports teams with the promise of new stadiums and tax breaks was misguided.


At Gothic Fantasy Restaurant, Real-Life Bandits and Booty
The crocodiles and skeletons were fake, but at least one gun was real at the Jekyll and Hyde Club in mid-Manhattan yesterday morning when three robbers tied up two employees and dashed away with $25,000 to $30,000 in cash, the police said.
No one was hurt in the 8 A.M. robbery at the five-story restaurant and bar at 1409 Avenue of the Americas, just north of 57th Street, but as the robbers fled on foot, one fired a single shot at a store manager who gave chase, said Officer Debra Kearns, a police spokeswoman.


Patents; Good news and bad news for the maker of a drug for people who are anemic and on dialysis.
AMGEN INC., the pioneer biotechnology company, recently got good news and bad news on the patent front.
First the bad news, which arrived in late August but which Amgen said it did not consider newsworthy enough to tell its stockholders about: the European Patent Office possibly has opened the door for a licensee of Amgen's archrival, Genetics Institute, to sell erythropoietin in Europe.
The drug, better known as EPO, is used to treat anemia in people on dialysis.


Reversing Course on Speed Limit
New Jersey's highways are too congested for a speed limit of 65 miles per hour, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman has decided.
"After considering it for a long while, the Governor has concluded it would not be good for New Jersey," The Associated Press quoted Carl Golden, the Governor's spokesman, as saying yesterday.


Washington's fall season features sharp debate on the future of the broadcast industry.
THIS September means back to school, back to work and -- where the Federal Government and the television industry intersect -- back to the future.
The debate about how television sets will change in the next century and who will foot the bill has been picked up again in Washington, and it's a little like watching the children clean their room: every time you look inside, the contents have been rearranged in new but equally jumbled ways.


Frantic, Bittersweet Reunion For Rwandan Exile Children
Sylvestre Sendakeye, 13, had been sitting patiently for several hours in the office of the International Committee of the Red Cross here.
Suddenly, when a mini-bus pulled into the driveway, he bolted outside and ran next to the vehicle, peering through the windows until he finally spotted his brother, Alexis Nimarambe, 10.


Leaner Port Authority Serves the Public Better
To the Editor:
"Don't Starve the Port Authority" (editorial, Sept. 11) makes some sound points about the agency's reorganization and cost reductions -- for example, that over the years the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey has invested unwisely in some undertakings, that holding the line on tolls and fares makes it easier for commuters to work, shop and pay commuter taxes in New York City, and that vital improvements are being made at Kennedy International Airport.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:  MONDAY
Cincinnati Bell Inc
Stewart Info Svcs
Summit Pptys inc TUESDAY
Allmerica Pptys&amp;Cas
American Stores Co
Citizens Corp
CPC Intl Inc
Curtiss-Wright Corp
Federal Paper Brd
Malan Rlty Invs Inc
Saul Ctrs Inc
Snyder Oil Corp
Southwest Gas Corp CA
Upjohn Co WEDNESDAY
Bangor Hydro Elec Co
Clorox Co
James Riv Corp Va
Keystone Intl Inc
NAC Re Corp
Nat Fuel Gas Co NJ
Nat Svc Inds Inc
Rochester Gas &amp; Elec
Stone &amp; Webster Inc THURSDAY
Air Prods &amp; Chems Inc
General Signal Corp
Marsh &amp; McLennan Cos
Nynex Corp
Smart &amp; Final Inc
State Str Boston Corp
Transamerica Corp FRIDAY
Central Hudson Gas&amp;Elec
Graco Inc
Pacific Telesis Group
Transatlantic Hldgs Inc


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Sutton Shoots a 61 to Win B. C. Open
Hal Sutton shot a course-record 61 yesterday to rally from five strokes back and win the $1 million B. C. Open by a stroke over Jim McGovern.
Sutton, who finished with a 15-under 269 total on the En-Joie golf course in Endicott, N.Y., made 11 birdies and 1 bogey in the final round of his eighth PGA Tour victory and first since the 1986 Memorial.
The 10-under round matched Jim Furyk for the best 18-hole score on the tour this year.
It was the lowest final-round score this year, bettering the seven-unders recorded by Steve Elkington at the PGA Championship and Peter Jacobsen at the Pebble Beach National Pro-Am. (AP)


'Mathis' Attempt at Normalcy
No one ever said it would be easy for the New York City Opera to stage Hindemith's ambitious "Mathis der Maler." Still, who knew it would be this hard?
William Stone, who because of a throat infection had to content himself with walking through the title role on opening night on Sept. 7 while another partly encumbered baritone sang it from the pit, finally strutted his stuff, or most of it, on Friday evening at the New York State Theater.
Meanwhile, Christopher Keene, for whom this project was a particular labor of love, withdrew from the podium after a brief hospitalization for anemia, giving way to Robert Duerr.


Mediating to Keep Taps Flowing
A state official will hold a nonbinding, closed-door mediation session today between Newark officials and New Community Corporation in an attempt to resolve their dispute over $2.2 million in overdue water bills at two apartment complexes the nonprofit organization operates.
Newark officials shut off the water last week at two apartment complexes, but it was turned back on shortly afterward when a judge intervened.


A Bar Band That's Wry, Elvis-Like And Rueful
Elvis Presley's legacy survives in ways that have nothing to do with jump suits, pompadours or Cadillacs.
It can even devolve on a self-described short, bald guitarist leading a stalwart New York City bar band, Simon and the Bar Sinisters, which performed on Thursday night at the Mercury Lounge to mark the release of an album, "Look at Me I'm Cool!," on Upstart Records.
Simon Chardiet, the trio's guitarist and singer, could be the inverse Elvis.
His songs are not about romance and success, but about sexual deprivation and barely scraping by.
Trying to pick up girls, he becomes the "Strikeout King"; he decides the book of his life would have only one chapter, "Chapter 11." But his voice echoes two sides of Presley, the yelping rockabilly growl and the mild pop tenor, and his songs revive both classic rockabilly forms and tuneful, slightly warped 1960's pop.
The band also plays moody East Coast surf-rock instrumentals, and now and then Mr.
Chardiet drops in a pushy guitar riff or a sneer by way of 1970's hard rock and punk.


Coverage for Kicking the Habit
People who want to kick the nicotine habit may get some help from their insurance company.
Nearly 400,000 employees of small businesses and other New Jerseyans are covered by health-care policies that are expected to add a nicotine-dependency clause to their benefits, starting on Jan. 1.
Under the proposal, policyholders would be able collect up to $300 a year for antismoking programs.


Arafat and Peres in Second Night of Talks on Hebron Deadlock
Foreign Minister Shimon Peres and Yasir Arafat went into a second night of talks today after failing to crack the deadlock over Hebron, the last obstacle to an agreement on Arab self-rule in the West Bank.
Mr.
Peres and Mr.
Arafat were joined in the Egyptian Red Sea resort of Taba by the Palestinian Mayor of Hebron and the heads of the negotiating teams.
Uri Savir, the chief of the Israeli team, told Israeli television that no negotiations ever ended without a final round of tensions and bargaining.


Hong Kong's Last Legislative Election Under British Rule


Essay; The Phony Air War
Do you believe that the bombs being dropped between bombing halts by the NATO forces are forcing the Serbs to negotiate?
All those high-tech pictures on television, followed by stern warnings to Serbs of terrible destruction yet to come by President Clinton and NATO commanders, contribute to the pretense that air power is at last being used to level the killing field -- to lift permanently the siege of Sarajevo and drive back the aggressors.


Sports of The Times; Reeves Isn't Thinking About Maddox, Yet
ON the Giants' sideline Tommy Maddox was flipping a football, holding it, cuddling it under his left arm.
But he never warmed up.
Although the Giants have now generated only one touchdown on offense during their 0-3 start, Coach Dan Reeves never even looked at his backup quarterback.
Never even considered inserting him in yesterday's 14-6 loss to the Packers.
"I've never felt a quarterback is like a relief pitcher," the Giants' coach was saying now.
"You have to have enough confidence in him," meaning the starter, "and he has to have enough confidence in himself."


California Refuses to Bail Out Los Angeles
The State Legislature this weekend took action that will help rescue Orange County from its fiscal crisis but will fall short of keeping neighboring Los Angeles County from laying off thousands of workers and shutting dozens of health clinics to close a huge budget gap.
In a contentious session that lasted until dawn on Saturday, the Legislature voted to allow both counties to reallocate hundreds of millions of dollars earmarked for transportation.
But it defeated a package of additional measures that Los Angeles County officials said were crucial to its continued operations.


How Studios Position Video Hits for the Home
September finds the video business in high gear before the holiday season, that halcyon period that stretches clear across the fourth quarter.
It is a time when people buy a lot of tapes, and studios oblige by rolling out myriad titles, new and old, and pricing them to sell at anywhere from $9.98 to about $25.
When it comes to big new movies -- a "Batman Forever," say, or a "Crimson Tide," to be released on videocassette in October and November, respectively -- studios have to grapple with one of their most basic bottom-line issues: Should they be priced low to sell millions of copies to consumers, or should they be priced higher, to sell hundreds of thousands of copies to video dealers, who then rent the movie to consumers?


Hiram Walker Picks Gunnar Jordan
Hiram Walker &amp; Sons in Southfield, Mich., the unit of Allied Domecq that imports and markets alcoholic beverages like Beefeater gin, Canadian Club whiskey and Tuaca liqueur, has selected Gunnar Jordan in New York and Miami to handle its account for promotions and programs aimed at gay and lesbian consumers.
The billings were not disclosed.


Sports of The Times; Tale of Two Rookies Shines More Brightly
FUNNY how drastically things can change.
This time last year, Kyle Brady and Wayne Chrebet were the lords of their respective football worlds.


Creative Chief Named at Ayer
N.
W.
Ayer &amp; Partners in New York is hiring Mark Fenske as its top creative executive and is buying the agency he now heads, the Bomb Factory in Venice, Calif.
Mr.
Fenske, 41, joins Ayer on Oct. 1 as chief creative officer and a managing partner.
He has run the Bomb Factory, a small shop focused on creative work, for five years, working for clients like the Coca-Cola Company and Nike Inc.
The Bomb Factory will continue to operate under that name as part of Ayer; the terms of the acquisition were not disclosed.


Two Are Slain at a Block Party
The block party in Bushwick, Brooklyn, on Saturday was one last end-of-summer bash for the children of Halsey Street.
There were pony rides and potato sack races, a deejay and dancing.
And then, as the party was winding down about 10:10 P.M., there was the flash of guns, a spray of bullets, blood and panic.
When the pandemonium subsided, two men, including a bystander, had been killed and four others, including an off-duty transit police officer, had been wounded.
Yesterday, the police said they did not know why the first shots were fired.
But they said that the off-duty officer, Mark Jones, and his brother-in-law Joseph Shell, an off-duty correction officer, had confronted two or more gunmen and returned fire.


No Headline
"It's been such a long time since I felt that cozy, safe feeling of rain falling on the roof." KATHERINE CHRISTJANER of Trumbull, Conn.  [ B12:1. ]


CHRONICLE
Miss Oklahoma, SHAWNTEL SMITH, got the birthday present on Saturday that many young girls only dream about: she was crowned Miss America.
But she had to share her party.
Swimsuits took center stage as viewers voted overwhelmingly to retain the swimsuit competition, in keeping with 75 years of pageant history.
Detractors, calling the segment sexist and irrelevant, had tried to have it eliminated.
Ms.
Smith, 24, blew kisses to the crowd, mouthed thanks to the judges and blinked back tears after her name was announced.
"I don't believe this," she appeared to say before HEATHER WHITESTONE, the previous Miss America, pinned the crown on her shimmering red hair.
Then she took a victory walk down the runway in a beaded white gown.


Leaner Port Authority Serves the Public Better; Back to Basics
To the Editor:
"Don't Starve the Port Authority" (editorial, Sept. 11), while noble in purpose, fails to come to grips with the failure of the agency to recognize its mission and the most productive way it could fulfill that mission.
The agency's original mission was to provide the economic engines for the development of New York City:


Radio Giant Is Set for a Growth Spurt
Howard Stern, the "shock jock" supreme known for his tasteless comments on his daily radio show, likes to call himself the King of All Media.
But his little-known boss, Mel Karmazin, president and chief executive of the Infinity Broadcasting Corporation, can be all too accurately described as the King of One Medium, and that is radio.
Infinity and Mr.
Karmazin usually attract attention only because of Mr.
Stern.
The company, for example, recently paid the Government $1.7 million to settle indecency charges against Mr.
Stern for his comments on a range of topics like incest, masturbation and the unorthodox use of gerbils.


Fierce Storm Leaves St. Thomas Reeling
Edward Agundez and his family fled to the bathroom when the living room windows in their apartment exploded at 11 P.M. on Friday.
They spent the next six hours in darkness, with his wife and two sons huddling in the bathtub while he pressed his body against the bathroom door as Hurricane Marilyn raged through St.
Thomas.
When the family emerged at 6:30 A.M., they could see into their neighbor's living room through a downed wall.
The storm had torn down their ceiling and ripped a hallway closet door from its hinges and tossed it into a room several feet away.


Graffiti
Since the appearance of "Taki 183" the first graffiti signature, or "tag," in 1970, New York City has attempted to halt the spread of graffiti.
With the situation under control in the subways - at a cost to the Transit Authority of about $8 million a year - it is now largely an above-ground phenomenon.
The Parks Department painted over or chemically removed more than 7 million square feet of scribblings in 1994, the equivalent of 160 football fields.
As one of its quality-of-life intiatives, the Police Department has cracked down on graffiti vandals.
The number of arrests for graffiti vandalism increased 25 percent from the last six months of 1993 to the last six months of 1994.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9 NEW CONCERNS OVER BOSNIA NATO gave the Bosnian Serbs a second 72-hour extension for removing weapons from around the capital, but a Government offensive raised fears that the steps taken toward peace could unravel.
A1 IN RWANDA, SOME HAPPY ENDINGS The Rwandan massacres and civil war killed an estimated half million people and left 100,000 children separated from parents.
Now a program is working to reunite some of the separated families.
A1 A PERIOD OF CLIMATE CHANGE New assessments of the problem of climatic change indicate that it is likely to cause significant economic and social disruptions in the coming years if emissions of heat-trapping gases are not cut.
A1 HONG KONG VOTERS' MESSAGE Hong Kong held its last legislative elections before China takes over the British colony in 1997, and voters appeared to deliver a blow to Beijing-backed candidates.
A8 CZECH ENVIRONMENTAL EFFORT A model program to reduce gases that are altering the world's climate is being set up in the Czech Republic by American companies, and it could be widely copied in Eastern Europe if it works.
A8 ISRAEL TALKS STILL IN DEADLOCK Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization, under pressure to complete an agreement, continued talks on self-rule, but a sticking point still remained.
A3 CUBA HOLDS RENEGADE U.S.
OFFICER Cuba has arrested a former C.I.A. officer wanted in the United States for 15 years for an array of charges, but it was not clear whether he would be turned over.
A6 A proposal was reported to aid Northern Ireland talks.
A6 Haiti voted in elections seen likely to stabilize its Government.
A5 Johannesburg Journal: A papal mass, and a new day.
A4 National A10-12, B7-8 MOVE AGAINST LOBBYING House Republican leaders have decided to bring anti-lobbying measures to the floor in the next few weeks, abandoning their plan to wait until next year.
A1 IMPLANT CASE'S FAR REACH Never has the rush to doctors' offices in a class-action suit been so startling -- or the financial stakes so high for patients, doctors, lawyers and manufacturers -- as in the case of breast implants.
A1 PERIL IN TUBERCULOSIS The surge in tuberculosis is due less to the limits of medicine than to the profit motives of drug companies, participants at an international meeting said.
A1 TURNER DEAL SEEMS SET Ending a tortuous, monthlong courtship, Time Warner's $8 billion offer for Turner Broadcasting seems likely to be approved by both companies' boards this week after Time Warner apparently struck a deal with a big Turner stockholder.A1 VIRGIN ISLANDS SURVEY DAMAGE Hurricane Marilyn moved on from St.
Thomas, but it left the Caribbean island vastly damaged.
A10 VOTING ON SEATTLE'S FUTURE Seattle voters will go to the polls to decide whether to pay for a large park and a new stadium.
A10 QUEST FOR SPORT TEAMS FAULTED Municipal officials from across the Southeast were told at a gathering in Atlanta that the competition among cities to attract sports teams was misguided.
A10 PREDICTING WELFARE OVERHAUL Newt Gingrich predicted that Congress would complete an overhaul of welfare by Thanksgiving and come up with a measure reducing the rules on how states conduct their welfare programs.
A12 MONEY FOR CALIFORNIA COUNTY The California Legislature acted to rescue Orange County from its fiscal crisis but left Los Angeles County with a huge budget gap.
B7 GRAMM WINS STRAW POLL Senator Phil Gramm of Texas finished first in a straw poll held at a convention of the National Federation of Republican Women.
B7 Metro Digest B1 Sports C1-9 Baseball: Yanks' loss leaves them a game out in wild-card race.
C1 Mets complete a three-game sweep of the Phillies.
C9 Columns: Anderson on the Giants' offense.
C3 Rhoden on two Jet rookies.
C4 Smith on the wild-card race.
C9 Football: Giants fall to 0-3 with loss to Packers.
C1 Jets romp over the expansion Jaguars for first victory.
C1 Golf: For players, the pressure of the Ryder Cup is unmatched.
C2 Arts/Entertainment C11-16 The television networks' scheduling wars.
C11 Bastille Opera opens.
C11 Music: "Don Giovanni." C12 "Mathis der Maler." C12 Folk music from Asia.
C13 Simon and the Bar Sinisters at the Mercury Lounge.
C13 Mamady Keita and Sewa Kan at Symphony Space.
C13 Dance: St.
Petersburg Male Ballet.
C12 Books: "Heart: A Memoir." C16 Television: "Danny Hoch: Some People." C14 Business Digest D1 Obituaries B9 Sir Grahame Clarke, archeologist.
Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15 Editorials Global warming heats up.
Senator D'Amato's chance.
The bar sets an example.
A grinding debate.
Letters Anthony Lewis: The authentic quality.
Bob Herbert: Disgracing the badge.
William Safire: The phony air war.
Gary Milhollin: Fire sale.
Bridge C16 Chronicle A13 Crossword C14


Mayor and Schools: Gaining Influence but Wants More Power
For months now, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has complained that he has no control over New York City's Board of Education -- and the purse strings for a quarter of the city's budget.
But in the tumult of events over the last week, he has showed just how much power the mayoralty has.
Even as the Mayor has wielded more influence than the law gives him, he has made it equally clear that, for him, that power is not enough.


Fire Sale
The Defense Department has found a new mission: to make it easier for Russia and China to improve their nuclear arsenals and to help other countries build advanced weapons.
This will happen if the Pentagon wins a quiet debate over exporting supercomputers, the most powerful instruments used to develop high-tech weapons.
Federal officials who oppose this effort say the Pentagon is urging the White House to adopt greatly reduced controls on exporting supercomputers not only to Russia and China, but also to India, Israel and Pakistan, which have not signed the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty and are widely believed to be building nuclear warheads.


In America; Disgracing the Badge
There are police officers in New Orleans who are upset because Antoinette Frank, an officer who killed three people in a restaurant holdup in March, was indicted, tried, convicted and sentenced to death for her crime.
They are upset because one of her victims was a cop.
In the New Orleans Police Department there is a strong belief that cop killers should be dealt with summarily.
Ms.
Frank, in the view of some officers, should have been lynched.
Allowing her to see a courtroom was, they felt, a sign of weakness.


Nostalgia Is Power In Fight Over Carousel
The 73-year-old man could not fit his feet into the tiny stirrups, and the dangling brass rings he once reached for had been taken down some 20 years ago.
But as he bobbed up and down on the wooden horse with the colored roses carved in its saddle, Bob Cammann's face shone and his eyes grew moist with memory.


Few Changes Atop the Polls
The top four teams -- Florida State, Nebraska, Texas A&amp;M and Florida -- remained in that order in The Associated Press's news media poll and in the USA Today-CNN coaches poll, which were released yesterday.
In the A.P. poll, Southern Cal took over the No. 5 spot from Auburn, which was upset by Louisiana State, 12-6, Saturday night.


Commissioner Is Open To Noneducator in Post
The State Education Commissioner said today that he was open to having a qualified noneducator become Schools Chancellor in New York City, but he declined to say whether Richard Ravitch, the top contender, fit that bill.
The opinion of the Commissioner, Richard P. Mills, is all-important because under state law he has final say on whether someone without an educational background can become the top administrator of a public school system.
"New York City is an extraordinary challenge," Mr.
Mills said in an interview today.
"I think there are many educators up to that challenge. But I think we have to be open to the possibility of someone coming from outside the field."


Williams May Have to Wait
Buck Showalter and Bernie Williams might have a potential controversy brewing over the newly born Bianca Williams.
Williams said he would leave for Bayamon, P.R., Monday to visit his daughter, but Showalter planned to ask the center fielder to wait until next Monday, when the Yankees do not play.


Bastille Opera Takes Safe Road
As the opening production of the Bastille Opera's new season, Verdi's "Nabucco" was not a wildly daring choice.
Yet for Hugues Gall, who has just taken over as head of the ailing Paris Opera, success was clearly more important than experimentation.
And in that sense, the gamble paid off.
The first-night audience, packed with French politicians and key figures in European music, gave a standing ovation to a visually stunning production that was directed by Robert Carsen and included Julia Varady as Abigaille, Jean-Philippe Lafont as Nabucco and Samuel Ramey as Zaccaria.
French newspapers went even further.
They said that, having offered a dismal spectacle of flops, strikes and political in-fighting since it opened five years ago, the Bastille Opera had finally turned a corner.
"Hugues Gall's triumph," Le Figaro gushed.
"The Bastille Opera is at last working properly. Paris is once again an opera capital."


An Island Paradise Lost As Storm Leaves Ruins
Bjorn Anderson, a hotel tennis director, spent today maneuvering his mini-van through roads partly blocked by fallen utility poles and tilted 40-foot yachts to take groups of tourists to the airport and away from the ruins Hurricane Marilyn left on St.
Thomas.
On a hillside once covered with thick foliage, he found new ocean views between bare trees.
He pointed out mounds of debris where $300,000 homes used to be.


Orchestra Contract To End at Concert
On the stage of Avery Fisher Hall this week, Kurt Masur, the soprano Jessye Norman and the musicians of the New York Philharmonic are rehearsing for the "Live From Lincoln Center" broadcast concert that is to open the orchestra's 153d season tomorrow evening.
But a different sort of drama is being played out backstage, or more specifically, in the orchestra's boardroom and at the office of Local 802 of the American Federation of Musicians.
When the concert ends, so does the orchestra's contract with the Philharmonic-Symphony Society.
Negotiations began in the spring and have grown more intense in recent weeks.
But both sides say that they are far apart on the primary issues, which include salaries and pensions.
And no meetings have been scheduled since last Thursday, when talks broke off.


Devils, With Terreri in Goal, Pick Up Where They Left Off
Martin Brodeur, Claude Lemieux and Scott Niedermayer are still having salary disputes, and Devils Coach Jacques Lemaire is particularly concerned about the absence of Brodeur, arguably the best young goaltender in the National Hockey League.
"When there is a problem with a contract for any player," Lemaire said, "the worst is that player is a goaltender. A defenseman has his partner, a forward has his linemates, but nobody helps you stop the puck."


MAYOR'S FAVORITE FOR SCHOOLS CHIEF REJECTS THE JOB
Richard Ravitch, who had emerged as Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's choice to take over New York City's public schools, withdrew his name from consideration yesterday, saying that only fundamental change in the structure of the system, not a new chancellor, would ultimately make the schools thrive.
The withdrawal of Mr.
Ravitch, the former chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, left the Mayor without a candidate from the world of business to support his drive for sweeping changes in the nation's largest school system.


Odd Couple: Comparing 2 Moderns
Sunday's Bartok/Stravinsky Celebration at Merkin Concert Hall offered a music project illogically conceived and four times the normal concert length, yet one that somehow ended up saying important things in compelling ways.
Bartok's six string quartets, played by three young ensembles, took up the afternoon; ballet music by Stravinsky in keyboard form occupied the evening.
A symposium in between promised to explain what these two men had to do with each other.
Its answer by implication: practically nothing.
I think many in attendance -- people who tend to squirm during the last quarter of a two-hour concert -- found themselves tired in mind and body toward 10 P.M. but refreshed in spirit.
For this was not a complete-works marathon or any other ordeal by accountancy.
One felt an immersion, and with it a gradually sharpening awareness.
Could it be that shortness is not the friend of short attention spans it seems to be?


Yanks Toppling Sox? It Can Still Happen
So the Red Sox have foiled the evil forces who said they would fold, stubbornly and impressively holding onto first place with an unbreakable grasp.
Unlike 1978, this time it was the Yankees who stumbled as they tried to perpetrate another nightmare on the Sad Sox.
But the Yankees, with nothing remaining but games against teams with losing records and an aggregate .436 won-lost percentage, are in good position to reach the American League playoffs nevertheless as the wild-card team.
And that would set the stage for the Ultimate Scenario.


Patterns
A New Designer-Retailer
Some manufacturers now carry such a big stick that their relationship with retailers has become like a partnership.
The most powerful player in this new game has been Ralph Lauren, but Tommy Hilfiger is about to up the ante.
Mr.
Hilfiger plans to open 50 megashops in stores nationwide in the next six months, beginning with Macy's Herald Square in mid-October, followed by Bloomingdale's.


Pakistan Supports Idea Of Crimes Tribunal
To the Editor:
"Why Does U.S. Stall on World Court?" (letter, Sept. 7) refers to Pakistan as one of those "opponents of the rule of law in human rights" who are "urging a go-slow" approach toward creation of a permanent international criminal court.


CHRONICLE
When it was suggested to the financier JOHN L. LOEB JR. some 25 years ago that he invest in vineyards as a tax shelter, he turned to his friends Tom and Nan Kempner and said, "Are you doing this? Whatever you're doing, I'll do," he recalled yesterday.
By the mid 1970's, vineyards had withered as tax havens, and Mr.
Loeb, a former Ambassador to Denmark, noted: "Everyone except yours truly got out. I ended up with 150 acres in Sonoma." For 20 years, he sold the grape harvest to other vintners.
Then, five years ago, he began making Chardonnay wines that have earned the highest plaudits from wine experts like Robert Parker.


Oil and Gas Finds by Texaco Give It Hope in Gulf of Mexico
In a sign that the Gulf of Mexico continues to hold promise, Texaco Inc. announced yesterday that it had found oil and natural gas in three wildcat wells it drilled off Louisiana, in areas that most major oil companies had considered played out.
While Texaco has yet to decide whether to bring the wells into production and while it remained unclear how big the finds could be, they could help Texaco catch up with rivals such as Shell and Amoco.
Those companies have taken the lead in finding oil and gas in very deep water and below salt layers in the seabed.


CHRONICLE
Who would have thought two weeks ago that CHRIS VALVO, a wide receiver on the Columbia University football team, would be out on a football field at all on Saturday, never mind helping the team to its first victory over Harvard University in 16 years?
Certainly not Dr.
STANLEY CORTELL, the chief of the division of nephrology at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center, who treated Mr.
Valvo for serious kidney failure after the Columbia senior was brought back to New York from training in Pottstown, Pa., and a stay in a hospital there.
He had suffered severe dehydration and a serious allergic reaction to anti-inflammatory drugs, and Dr.
Cortell told him to limit his physical exercise severely.


Payless Cashways Inc.(PCS,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Aug 26


Magazine Plans Appeal To High Court
In a First Amendment case that is drawing wide attention, executives of Business Week magazine said last night that they would go to a justice of the United States Supreme Court today to seek a stay of what they claim is an unconstitutional order that barred them from publishing an article last week.
Lawyers for the magazine argued yesterday to a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit in Cincinnati that the judges should overturn the unusual order issued by a Federal judge in Ohio, John Feikens.


Magna International (MGA,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jul 31


Putting That Handwritten Touch on Your Mail
COLLEGE football season is well under way, which means it is time for thousands of students to write home for money.
So let's raise a glass to the personal computer, a tool that can make the "P.S.: send more $$$ A.S.A.P." process much easier, more efficient, and perhaps even more lucrative.


Cabletron Systems Inc.(CS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Aug 31


William Franklin, 86, Executive Of Caterpillar for Over 34 Years
William H. Franklin, an accountant who joined Caterpillar Inc., the heavy-equipment giant, as a young executive and eventually became its chairman and chief executive, died in his sleep last Thursday at a nursing home in Peoria, Ill., his son Robert said.
He was 86.
Mr.
Franklin joined Caterpillar, based in Peoria, in 1941 as assistant controller after becoming familiar with the company while working on its books for Price Waterhouse &amp; Company.
By the time he retired from operations in 1975, he had been Caterpillar's "financial brain for 30 years", said William Blackie, Mr.
Franklin's mentor and predecessor as chairman.


Bosnian Serbs Vow to Fight for Banja Luka
The Serbian leaders here speak of this nervous city as their Alamo.
With Bosnian Government and Croatian troops closing in on them from three directions, and the region already a chaos of refugees, the Bosnian Serb military vowed today to make a stand -- perhaps its last stand.


WMS Industries Inc.(WMS,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jun 30


China and Hong Kong Victors Square Off After the Election
As jubilant members of Hong Kong's Democratic Party celebrated their sweeping defeat of pro-China parties in legislative elections on Sunday, Beijing greeted the results today with a renewed its promise that the legislature would be disbanded on July 1, 1997, the day the territory is scheduled to revert to Chinese rule.
"The last legislature of the British administration in Hong Kong will end on June 30, 1997," a spokesman for China's Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office was quoted as saying today by the New China News Agency.
"The attitude of the Chinese Government on this issue is consistent and will not change and will not be influenced by the result of the election."


Blount Inc.(BLT.B,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Aug 31


Slain Jogger, A Brazilian, Is Identified
A jogger who was beaten to death over the weekend in Central Park was identified yesterday as a 44-year-old woman from Brazil who lived near Columbus Circle in Manhattan and worked in a Madison Avenue shoe store.
But Police Commissioner William J. Bratton said that despite an intensive investigation, the police had not yet determined who killed the woman, if there was more than one attacker, or if she had been raped before her body was left in a stream in the northeast corner of the park.
The Commissioner said the city was offering a $10,000 reward for information that would help the police solve the murder.


Mark IV Industries Inc.(IV,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Aug 31


Check Cashers Fill a Gap as Banks Close
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 11 news article on how poor and working-class neighborhoods in New York City cope with a dearth of banking services perpetuates the myth that the exodus of banks from the inner city gives rise to check cashers eager to exploit the situation.


Gingrich Investigation
The House ethics committee has effectively concluded that it should hire an independent counsel to investigate Speaker Newt Gingrich's activities.
But mindful of the fall of Speaker Jim Wright after a broad investigation, panel members disagree on the counsel's mandate.
Article, page A16.


Lester Lum Colbert, 90, Chief At Chrysler During the 1950's
Lester Lum Colbert, a retired president and chairman of the Chrysler Corporation, died Friday at his home in Naples, Fla.
He was 90.
Mr.
Colbert, whose nickname was Tex, succeeded K. T. Keller as president of Chrysler in 1950.
He later added the title of chairman of the auto maker.
He resigned as head of the parent company in 1961, after which he was chairman of a subsidiary, the Chrysler Corporation of Canada Ltd., until 1965, when he retired.


Software Security Flaw Puts Shoppers on Internet at Risk
A serious security flaw has been discovered in Netscape, the most popular software used for computer transactions over the Internet's World Wide Web, threatening to cast a chill over the emerging market for electronic commerce.
The flaw, which could enable a knowledgeable criminal to use a computer to break Netscape's security coding system in less than a minute, means that no one using the software can be certain of protecting credit card information, bank account numbers or other types of information that Netscape is supposed to keep private during on-line transactions.


Shanghai Offer That's Hard to Refuse
Foreign bankers here have often joked that the only way the city's leaders could persuade them to move their branches to East Shanghai -- the half-built development zone across the river from the city's downtown area -- would be by saying that a bank had to be there if it wanted to do business in the local currency.
Today, Mayor Xu Kuangdi of Shanghai announced precisely that.
In a series of moves aimed at speeding the advancement of East Shanghai, Mr.
Xu announced that the zone was moving into the second phase of its development.
Because the zone, which opened in 1990, has already established itself as an industrial base, it should now concentrate on becoming a financial center as well, Mr.
Xu said.


Two Housekeepers at Hotel Accuse Supervisors and Colleagues of Sexual Harassment
For months, in the hallways and suites of a hotel in midtown Manhattan, two housekeepers said they were groped and sexually harassed by their superiors.
When they complained to the general manager, nothing was done, they said, and after they took their story to a top hotel executive, they were dismissed.
The housekeepers, Kathy Salgado, 29, and Marina Abdullajeva, 28, who were paid $5 for each room they cleaned, said that two supervisors and two colleagues at the Club Quarters hotel, at 40 West 45th Street, routinely grabbed their breasts and propositioned them.
They also said the executive housekeeper demanded that they bow their heads when speaking to him.


Transactions
Baseball  Major League Baseball
MLB -- Named Randy Levine chief labor negotiator.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
NEW JERSEY NETS -- Named Stan Albeck and Clifford Ray assistant coaches.


Usinor Buying the Rest Of Stainless Steel Unit
Usinor Sacilor, Europe's largest steelmaker, will buy the remaining 41.1 percent of Ugine S.A. for about 3.72 billion French francs, or $744 million, in cash.
Usinor, based in Paris, will pay 400 French francs for each Ugine share.
That represents a premium of 26 percent over Ugine's closing stock price of 317 francs on Friday.
The board of Ugine, which makes stainless steel, recommended that shareholders accept the bid.


COMPANY BRIEFS
WARNER-LAMBERT CO., Morris Plains, N.J., a pharmaceutical and consumer health care products company, sold its PRO toothbrush business to Gillette Co.
Boston, the maker of personal care products, for an undisclosed price.
THERMOTREX CORP., San Diego, a unit of Thermo Electronic Corp., Waltman, Mass., acquired Bennett X-Ray Corp., Copiague, L.I., for about $43 million in cash.
DATA MEASUREMENT CORP., Gaithersburg, Md., a maker of computerized measurement and control systems, agreed to be acquired by Measurex Corp., Cupertino, Calif., which designs computerized manufacturing systems, for $18.625 a share, or about $25 million in cash.
KAYDON CORP., Clearwater, Fla., which designs and makes components for the aerospace and military industries, said it planned to acquire Kevli Corp., Wilmington, Mass., for about $15.8 million in either cash or stock.


The Right to Vote Shall Not Be Denied


Planning Commission Approves Limits on Sex Businesses by Slim Margin
Reflecting deep division over the issue of governmental zoning of sex-related businesses, the City Planning Commission voted narrowly yesterday to approve a broad set of restrictions on where adult entertainment establishments can legally operate.
The matter now goes to the City Council, which is scheduled to vote on it in November, after public hearings next month.
The zoning changes, which were approved on a 7-to-6 vote, would sharply limit the number and concentration of sex businesses and would banish them to designated areas in Manhattan and along the peripheries of other boroughs.


Drug Emporium Inc.(DEMP,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Aug 26


Observer; Death in the Family
Baltimore was a literate blue-collar town when The Evening Sun was in its glory, and now there are no blue-collar towns left, illiterate has become the national style and The Evening Sun is finished.
"Kaput," as F. Millard Foard liked to say when forecasting the future of some wretched dilatory student in his high-school German class.
"Kaput" with last Friday's final edition.
Baltimore was the kind of town whose public high schools offered German in 1939, and many students took it.
There was a strain of sober, old-fashioned German culture from long-ago immigrations, and there was an incoming tide of new German culture being brought by Jewish refugees from Hitler.


Deal on Unpaid Water Bills
Newark officials and the nonprofit New Community Corporation reached a tentative settlement yesterday in their dispute over $2.2 million in unpaid water bills at two apartment complexes for low-income residents, the state official serving as mediator said.


Caldor Files For Chapter 11 Protection
The Caldor Corporation sought protection from its creditors under Chapter 11 of the Federal bankruptcy laws yesterday, the victim of nervousness among suppliers and the factors who buy their receivables, as well as intense competition from bigger discount-store chains.
Rumors that Caldor, which is based in Norwalk, Conn., would file for bankruptcy protection have swirled around the company for weeks.


Texas Industries (TXI,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Aug 31


Q&amp;A
Swimming Sheep
Q.  Do sheep swim? If so, how do they learn?


On My Mind; A Gift From Powell
The major contributions of Western leaders to Bosnia and its people so far have been bombs and lies.
Gen.
Colin Powell now gives Bosnians and Westerners a different gift -- truth.
Long after the West's bombs stopped falling, the craters dug by the lies will still scar the lives and futures of all Bosnians -- Muslims, Serbs, Croats.
The reason is that the lies -- the totality of the distortions, falsehoods and evasions -- helped create the war, helped keep it alive and will threaten peace as long as they go unchallenged.


Australian Bidding War
The Marmon Group of Chicago raised its bid yesterday for Atlas Steels Ltd. of Australia, topping an offer from the Australian appliance and building materials company Email Ltd.
Marmon raised its offer to 1.75 Australian dollars a share from 1.62; Email's latest bid was 1.70.
The latest Marmon bid values Atlas at 126 million Australian dollars, or $95 million.
Atlas Steels advised shareholders to stand pat.
The company produces stainless steel, steel alloy wire and bars and distributes machine tools in Australia and New Zealand.
Marmon, controlled by the Pritzker family of Chicago, is a diversified manufacturing and services company. (Bloomberg Business News)


Stocks Retreat, With Dow Off by 17.16
After a week in which many sectors exhibited strength, the stock market sold off yesterday.
Financial stocks were the biggest decliners as the Dow Jones industrial average fell 17.16 points, to 4,780.41.
"The market was ripe for some profit taking," said Richard Cripps, chief market strategist of Legg Mason in Baltimore.
"Psychologically the market has a lot of negatives, although many people have confidence that it is not in a serious corrective mode."


Japan's Economy Expands For First Time in 3 Quarters
Japan's gross domestic product expanded during the second quarter for the first time in three quarters, the Government said in Tokyo yesterday, but analysts remained cautious in their outlook for the economy.
Gross domestic product rose eight-tenths of 1 percent in the quarter from the first quarter, or at an annual rate of 3.1 percent.
In reporting the latest data, the Government revised its figures for the first quarter to show an economic contraction at an annual rate of one-tenth of 1 percent.
The initial report for the first quarter had shown growth at an annual pace of three-tenths of 1 percent.


New Skin Test Will Help Track Ebola Infection in Remote Areas
AS Dr.
Sherif R. Zaki and a visitor looked through a double-barreled microscope at a slice of skin from a woman from Zaire last week, the tissues reflected a kaleidoscope of red.
Dr.
Zaki, an expert in the pathology of hemorrhagic fevers, quickly said the bright color provided clear-cut evidence that the 27-year-old woman had died of Ebola virus infection.
The skin test is new, developed by Dr.
Zaki's team of Federal scientists at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention here, and it promises to improve the surveillance for the deadly Ebola infection that occurs in remote areas of Africa.
In using it, Dr.
Zaki detected a case of Ebola infection that scientists here said would otherwise have gone undiagnosed.
The diagnosis came after the World Health Organization declared an end to an epidemic that struck in Zaire earlier this year.


Scott's Hospitality reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 31


Simpson Trial, Near Its End, Stands on the Brink of Chaos
Prosecutors may have called their last witness in the O. J. Simpson case today.
But then again, maybe not.
As the trial nears completion, it is also approaching procedural chaos, for while People v.
Simpson is often soporific, it is a case in which both sides are reluctant to rest.
When Judge Lance A. Ito read a stipulation to jurors -- that the moon on June 12, 1994, was a waxing crescent with 12 percent of its surface illuminated -- prosecutors completed their rebuttal case, but only conditionally.
Judge Ito has yet to decide whether several more defense witnesses may testify, so prosecutors still do not know what more they must rebut.


How G.I.'s and Journalists Saw the Pacific War
Far and away the most emotionally gripping photographic exhibition in town is the International Center of Photography's presentation of Yosuke Yamahata's pictures taken in Nagasaki, Japan, in August 1945, immediately after the atomic bomb was dropped on the city.
Another take on the events leading to that cataclysm is offered by a small show of covers and page spreads from Life magazine describing the course of World War II in the Pacific.
This modest presentation, which continues at the center through Oct. 1, is more than just wall filler, though.
Blown up from the pages themselves, the selections for "Life: The Pacific War" illuminate the magazine's efforts both to report the war and to shape American attitudes toward it.


Marshall Industries (MI,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Aug 31


Chiefs and Raiders: Get the Point?
When the Raiders meet the Chiefs, blood boils.
This is friends versus friends, friends versus enemies and players switching sides and colors and allegiances.
Hey, this is even brother versus brother.
Tight end Keith Cash plays for the Chiefs. Tight end Kerry Cash plays for the Raiders.


2 Very Loud Voices For 5 Million Riders; Leaders of Straphangers Campaign Get Results and Lots of Attention
It is 5:30 P.M. on a Thursday as the E and F trains unload weary riders into the swelter of the Union Turnpike station in Kew Gardens, Queens.
Two men, their shirts dark with sweat, hand out leaflets and call out, "fight the fare hike." Some commuters ignore the pair or flash "don't I know you?" looks.
Most take the fliers, but barely grunt acknowledgment.
So why are these men smiling?


Brady Breaks Jet Trend By Making Early Mark
He has the size that allows him to drive linemen into the ground.
He has the soft hands that snare passes -- high or low.
Tight end Kyle Brady has become the quickest success of any recent first-round offensive player drafted by the Jets.
Brady almost smiled this morning after he watched the film of Jacksonville defensive lineman Jeff Lageman throwing punches in frustration after he had been blocked by Brady during the Jets' 27-10 victory on Sunday.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about Richard Ravitch, then a candidate for New York City Schools Chancellor, misstated his role in the revision of the city charter.
Mr.
Ravitch led the Charter Revision Commission from 1986 to 1988, but he did not supervise the redrawing of the Council district boundaries.
That work was done by the New York City Districting Commission, led by Frank J. Macchiarola.


Labor Chief for Giuliani To Leave for Baseball Job
Randy L. Levine, New York City's Commissioner of Labor Relations and one of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's closest aides, announced yesterday that he would resign next month to become the chief labor negotiator for the team owners of Major League Baseball.
Mr.
Levine, whose announcement had been expected for several weeks, becomes the first member of the Mayor's inner circle to return to the private sector, where most had made larger salaries before entering government service.
A former Federal prosecutor, Mr.
Levine was a private labor lawyer before coming to work for Mr.
Giuliani.


Slain Jogger Is Identified


Chaparral Steel Co. (CSM,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Aug 31


General Mills Inc.(GIS,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Aug 27


German Government Expected to Compensate Holocaust Survivor
A New Jersey man's 41-year battle to win reparations as a victim of the Holocaust ended yesterday with a Federal judge approving settlement of a lawsuit against four German companies and the German Government's agreement to compensate him and 10 other survivors, officials said.
The compensation agreement, to be outlined today at a news conference in Washington, provides for a lump sum to be given to the 11 American concentration camp survivors, according to the officials.
Because they were neither German citizens nor refugees, the 11 Americans were ineligible for the lifetime monthly damages that West Germany began paying in the early 1950's.


Richmond Official Quits After Drug Charges
A black city councilman who was re-elected four times after being convicted of drug possession resigned today after the authorities said he had been videotaped selling heroin in a Richmond suburb.
The councilman, Henry W. (Chuck) Richardson, was a hero to many blacks despite almost annual brushes with the law.
He lent money to constituents and elicited contributions from developers who nonetheless saw him as a disgrace.


Disputed Meeting To Ask if Crime Has Genetic Roots
LIKE the late Richard M. Nixon, the notorious University of Maryland conference on the genetics of criminal behavior has been deplored, defeated, kicked around, thrown to the ground, hounded offstage, and still it lurches back to the ring, fists clenched, eager to fight the fight of its own design.
Three years ago, David Wasserman, a legal scholar at the University of Maryland and his colleagues caused a political Pinatubo when they sought to organize a meeting to discuss, as they put it, "the meaning and significance of research on genetics and criminal behavior."


CHRONICLE
Charges were dropped yesterday against GEORGE STEPHANOPOULOS, the senior adviser to President Clinton, who was charged with leaving the scene of a traffic accident and driving with an expired license earlier this month.
"We took the case, evaluated it and decided not to go forward with it," said Claude Bailey, a spokesman for the Corporation Counsel Office in Washington.


Paychex Inc.(PAYX,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Aug 31


Joggers Rethink Routines
The sky was clear at dusk, and the temperature was 67 degrees.
It was a perfect night for jogging in Central Park, or it should have been.
But while the runners were out as usual last night, giving legs and lungs a workout and burning off calories and the tensions of big-city life, things were not the same at all.
The killing of a female jogger over the weekend was on everyone's mind.


A Billionaire's Missing Brother and Julius Caesar
Time is in splinters, identity is bafflingly relative and death is a fatuous, late-night infomercial host who pops up on television promising, with apologetic yuks, "a lifetime warranty" for his singular product.
Yes, life, familiarly enough, is a running metaphysical joke in "Blink of an Eye," Jeremy Dobrish's giddy detective story of a play at the Ohio Theater, but more an occasion for giggles than despairing laughter.
This goofy, ingeniously structured tale of a gumshoe's Chandleresque hunt for a billionaire's missing brother suggests Pirandello on Prozac, recasting his usual mind games in the cheery terms of a Mad magazine parody.


U.S. Office Products (OFIS,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 31


Car Exudes an Arresting Odor
An Ohio couple learned the hard way on Sunday that it is dangerous to dillydally on the New Jersey Turnpike.
When Trooper Gabriel Rodriguez pulled over Todd and Tanya Lewis of Cincinnati for traveling 35 miles per hour in a 50 m.p.h. zone, he could not help noticing an unmistakable smell, a state police spokesman said.


Provigo reports earnings for 2d qtr to Aug 12


Graf's Father Loses Bid
STEFFI GRAF's father, PETER, accused of tax evasion in his management of her winnings, lost an appeal yesterday for release from investigative custody.
He had offered $10.3 million in bond. (AP)


Possessed by Memories Of One's Ancestors
THE BOOK OF COLOR By Julia Blackburn 175 pages. Pantheon Books. $22.
In her last two books, the British writer Julia Blackburn used her highly tuned imaginative sympathies to recreate the emotional lives of two enigmatic historical figures.
In "Daisy Bates in the Desert" (1994), her subject was a middle-aged Irish matron who spent 30 years in the Australian outback, living with the aborigines of Ooldea.
In "The Emperor's Last Island" (1992), she focused on the last years of Napoleon, exiled after his defeat at Waterloo to the bleak little island of St.
Helena and sentenced to a daily diet of boredom and illusion.


Unican Security Systems Ltd. reports earnings for Year to Jun 30


Bond Prices Fall on Data Of Inventory
Prices of long-term Treasury securities fell yesterday after new inventory data suggested the economy had not slowed as much as expected, dimming the market's hopes for another cut in interest rates.
A recent increase of new corporate debt issuance and a rise in commodity prices also hurt prices, analysts said.
The price of the 30-year bond fell 24/32 , to 10416/32 .
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction from its price, rose to 6.53 percent, from 6.48 percent on Friday.


Such a Long Murder Trial. (No, Not That One.)
Is the nation trial-weary?
Have O. J. Simpson and company worn us to a frazzle?
The producer Steven Bochco ("L.A. Law," "N.Y.P.D. Blue") will soon find out as his new series, "Murder One," sets out to chronicle a single homicide case over the course of an entire season.
Before going head-to-head on Thursdays with NBC's phenomenally successful "E.R.," "Murder One" will be broadcast for three Tuesdays on ABC in the slot normally occupied by "N.Y.P.D. Blue." Tonight's premiere sets the scene with Mr.
Bochco's trademark panache.
The place is, of course, Los Angeles.
Mr.
Bochco is up to his old trick of casting brilliantly against type.
Daniel Benzali, who plays the bald, bullet-headed, very expensive defense lawyer Theodore Hoffman, would be perfectly suited to the kind of villainous turns that became Donald Pleasence's stock in trade.
But Hoffman, Teddy to his friends, is a thoughtful family guy with little or no tolerance for scoundrels.
At the outset, he is telling off a drug-addicted actor client (Jason Gedrick), whose contempt for the courts is bottomless.
The judge to Hoffman: "Don't you sometimes make yourself sick?" Hoffman, embarrassed: "Sometimes, your honor."


Probation Changes Go Beyond New Kiosks
To the Editor:
Re your news article (Sept. 10) on New York City's plan to have low-risk probationers report to electronic kiosks: The kiosks are only one facet of a re-engineering effort at the city's Department of Probation.
We supervise, at any one time, 60,000 adult probationers, of whom 45,000, or 75 percent, are convicted felons.
Of those, 24,000, or 40 percent, have committed violent crimes.


Hong Kong Votes for Democracy
Hong Kong's voters declared overwhelmingly on Sunday their preference for democracy and their doubts about Beijing's plans for the colony's future.
Pro-China candidates lost consistently to members of the Democratic Party, which favors autonomy for Hong Kong after the planned takeover by China in 1997.
Ominously, China quickly threatened to dissolve the newly elected Legislative Council.
Perhaps even more ominously, Gary Cheng Kai-nam, an official of the pro-Chinese Democratic Alliance for the Betterment of Hong Kong, said the colony's six million people would "have to pay for" their choice.
It is not in the interest of either Hong Kong or China for Beijing to crush Hong Kong's vibrant economy and developing democracy in 1997.


Statement on Bomber's Manuscript
Following is the joint statement yesterday by Donald E. Graham, publisher of The Washington Post, and Arthur Sulzberger Jr., publisher of The New York Times, about their decision to publish the manuscript by the terrorist known by the Federal Bureau of Investigation as the Unabomber:
For three months The Washington Post and The New York Times have jointly faced the demand of a person known as the Unabomber that we publish a manuscript of about 35,000 words.
If we failed to do so, the author of this document threatened to send a bomb to an unspecified destination "with intent to kill."


Clapton Bends a Prohibition but Sticks to the Blues
Eric Clapton's sold-out concert on Sunday night at Madison Square Garden (the first of two) began with a note of weary familiarity.
"I know you will understand the kind of music we'll be playing tonight," he said kindly but sternly, like a schoolteacher obligatorily asking the students to behave.
The kind of music Mr.
Clapton was referring to was the blues, the American roots music he has been studying, advocating, perfecting and embellishing from England since the 60's, when he played with the Yardbirds, John Mayall's Bluesbreakers and Cream.
Since his all-blues album "From the Cradle" (Warner Brothers) went to No. 1 on the pop charts last year, Mr.
Clapton has been through New York City three times, always performing two or three concerts that adhere strictly to the type of 12-bar blues on the album: straight-ahead versions of songs by Muddy Waters, Leroy Carr, Lowell Fulson and others.
By now, fans know that no matter how much they scream for "Layla" and "Tears in Heaven," Mr.
Clapton will not play them on this tour.


Blame History, Not the Liberals
It is not my inclination to be critical of my fellow liberals; they are sufficiently under attack these days, and in any case one wants to be constant in the faith.
But on occasion guilt must be confessed: On matters relating to social and economic legislation and larger reform, we liberals have seriously misled conservatives and especially the Republican legislators of our time.
They will suffer from this in the months ahead.
I venture to think they are already doing so.
Specifically, we have allowed conservatives and the public at large to credit us with social action that was not our initiative.
We were merely accommodating to the great thrust of history.


U.S. Agency Warns About Japan Banks
In the first warning by a Government agency on the dangers posed by the troubles of Japan's financial institutions, Federal regulators today instructed certain federally backed banks to limit their loans to them.
The warning to the nation's 12 Federal Home Loan Banks, which have combined assets roughly equal to those of Citicorp, represents the first move by American financial regulators to insulate the United States from the potential effects of a further meltdown of the Japanese financial system.


Sorcerer's Apprenticeship on Disk
PLENTY of computer products help you make dollars disappear.
But a new program may be the first that also helps you shrink playing cards, pound salt shakers through solid tables and even make dollar bills reappear.
Learn the Art of Magic (from Broderbund Software Inc., about $35) stars a master magician, Jay Alexander, in a CD-ROM that teaches 26 magic tricks along with a bit of history and terminology from the world of prestidigitation.
Despite some annoying omissions, it is one of those rare multimedia titles that would not work as well in any other form.


Tektronix Inc.(TEK,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Aug 26


Strange Bird Must Think It's a Cow
A TROPICAL bird with an unusual digestive system can process plant fiber just as efficiently as a cow, an ornithologist has found.
The scientist, Dr.
Alejandro Grajal of the Wildlife Conservation Society, and his colleagues reported six years ago that the species, the hoatzin, was the only bird known to have a digestive system similar to a cow's.
The hoatzin, also known as the stinkbird, has an enlarged crop and esophagus where bacteria break down the cellulose in plant cells into sugars that the bird can digest.


Aristide Reaffirms Pledge to Step Down in '96
In his strongest statement yet on the subject, President Jean-Bertrand Aristide confirmed today that he will step down when his term legally ends on Feb. 7, 1996.
"I don't see any shadow of a doubt," President Aristide said of his intention to leave office after a successor is elected later this year.


Rockefeller Center Tenants Won't Be Homeless
To the Editor:
At first glance the decisions of the Mitsubishi Estate Company to abandon its interest in Rockefeller Center ("Japanese Scrap $2 Billion Stake in Rockefeller," news article, Sept. 12) and of the Half Moon Real Estate company to walk away from 343 St.
Nicholas Ave. in Harlem (news article, Sept. 9) appear worlds apart.
But are they?


Royal Aviation reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 31


Rockefeller Center Tenants Won't Be Homeless; Missing Scandal
To the Editor:
As an owner of a commercial real estate company and corporate trainer, I was fascinated by Steven R. Weisman's Editorial Notebook on Rockefeller Center (Sept. 14).
He proposes a story of financial manipulation and social irresponsibility on the part of the Rockefeller family, particularly David Rockefeller, but this is not the story that emerges.


Gingrich Regrets Remark
Speaker Newt Gingrich telephoned Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani today to apologize for verbal potshots he took at New York City, a place he had said bred "a culture of waste for which they want us to send a check."
On Tuesday, the Speaker will find out firsthand if the city is in a forgiving way: He is scheduled to appear at a meeting in midtown Manhattan on Congress's plans to revamp Medicare.
But the gathering could focus more on anti-New York sentiment in Washington as the Congress seeks deep cuts in major spending programs.


2 Stars of Explicit Cable Shows Plead for Free-Speech Protection
Robin Byrd, a stripper who usually wears next to nothing on her cable television programs, wrapped herself in the First Amendment yesterday at a lengthy hearing in Federal Court in Manhattan about whether Time Warner Inc. can control access to her programs.
"What's indecent for me could be not indecent for other people," explained Ms.
Byrd, wearing her trademark gold rhinestone boots.
"My intent is not to be indecent."


Dart Group Corp.(DARTA,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 31


Nothing but Nothing Is Tying Reeves in Knots
Some people are so direct and honest that their words can sound curious and provocative.
Giants Coach Dan Reeves is one of those people.
Today, still clearly frustrated about losing the first three games of the season, he was asked if he had talked to the team about drawing strength from last season, when it lost seven consecutive games but rebounded to win six straight.
"Nope," Reeves said.
"As I said, we need to get a win. If we lose seven in a row, you probably won't see me. I don't know that I can handle that again. I handled it one time in my life; I don't want to do it again. Three has been bad enough. I'm not looking forward to four."


Both Parties Put Florida In Top Tier Of Key States
Move aside, Iowa and New Hampshire.
Florida is emerging as one of the most consequential early states in Presidential politics for Republicans and Democrats alike.
Senator Bob Dole, who has often traveled to his condominium here to rest and work on his tan, now comes to take part in interminable rounds of meet-and-greets with potential supporters.
Last weekend, he touched down in Miami, Orlando and Clearwater.
The weekend before, it was Tampa, Pompano Beach, Stewart and West Palm Beach.


INSIDE
Fear in Virgin Islands
In the wake of Hurricane Marilyn, there is a fear of a monstrous economic impact for St.
Thomas, which depends on tourism for two thirds of its economy.
Page B7.
Florida's Role in '96 Grows
Florida, with its 25 electoral votes, is emerging as one of the most consequential early states in Presidential politics for Republicans and Democrats alike.
Page A17.
Mine Agency Threatened
Under legislation now in Congress, the Mine Safety and Health Administration would lose its ability to make unannounced inspections.
Page A14.
Mexico's Political Tremor
The greatest legacy of Mexico's brutal earthquake ten years ago, many people believe, was a political shift, but not everyone agrees.
Page A3.


Rest Easy, Edward R. Murrow
My Walkman's volume was on high. My fiancee asked: "Is that a pig?"
In a sense, yes.
The verbal flatulence on the tape could have passed for sty chat, but the voice was that of Scott Ferrall, the syndicated sports squawker who occupies valuable air space on WFAN radio from 10 P.M. to 1 A.M.


Nikon Sets $3.2 Billion For Expansion of Plant
The Nikon Corporation said yesterday that it would invest $3.2 billion to expand a plant in Japan that makes equipment used to manufacture computer memory chips.
The expansion in Kumagaya, Japan, will increase output by 50 percent in 1996, to produce between 900 and 1,000 steppers a year.
Steppers are used in etching circuits onto a silicon wafer to make a computer chip.


Eagle-Picher Industries Inc. reports earnings for 3d qtr to Aug 31


Clinton Begins 4-State Fund-Raising Trip
Pushing to fill his primary season campaign coffers by early next year, President Clinton embarked on a five-day, four-state swing today that will mix raising campaign money with an effort to rally public opinion against major features of the Republican plan to balance the Federal budget in seven years.
Mr.
Clinton plans enough Government-related events to allow taxpayers to pick up some of the expenses of his trip.
Today, for example, he met with a community group to discuss the progress of finding a new use for the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard, which closed last week.


Heineken Names Wells Rich
Heineken USA, a unit of Heineken N.V. of the Netherlands, said yesterday that it had named Wells Rich Greene BDDP in New York to handle its flagship Heineken beer brand, a longtime account of Warwick Baker &amp; Fiore in New York.
Billings were not disclosed, but Adweek estimated them at $20 million to $25 million.
Michael Foley, president of Heineken USA in White Plains, confirmed reports of the change this week in Adweek, adding that it stemmed from a policy of the parent company to assign its largest brands to separate agencies; Warwick Baker continues to handle the Amstel Light brand account in the United States.


Solectron Corp.(SLR,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Aug 25


Bizarre Parasite Invades Trout Streams, Devastating Young Rainbows
RAINBOW trout and the Madison River were made for each other.
Bold and sometimes reckless, stout-hearted and acrobatic when hooked, the pink-striped rainbow is the pre-eminent native American trout, and it has long thrived spectacularly in the powerful currents and chaotic, boulder-strewn riffles of what some people consider the finest wild trout stream in the contiguous 48 states.
"This was the classic rainbow water," Fred Nelson, a state fisheries biologist, said as he and two fishing companions paused to take in the scene: the sun glistening off the rushing river, the cloudless cobalt sky, the sharply etched mountain peaks in the distance.
It almost made up for the fly fishers' total lack of success; no one had caught a trout.
In fishing, that sometimes happens.
But things are sadly different on the Madison these days.
"It's real noticeable that you just don't catch rainbows like you used to," Mr.
Nelson said.


Ethics Panel Wants an Outside Counsel for Gingrich
The House ethics committee, effectively concluding that it must hire an outside counsel for its investigation of Speaker Newt Gingrich, has decided to begin interviewing lawyers for the position.
But this consensus could break down in a dispute over the breadth of the outside counsel's mandate.
Democrats have pressed for broad investigating authority, recalling how former Speaker Jim Wright was brought down in 1989 not on the charges Mr.
Gingrich had leveled against him, but on others turned up by Richard Phelan, the outside counsel.


Evaluating American Universities
America's research universities are the envy of the world.
Still, they will need to thrive -- and continue to improve -- if the country is to keep its scientific and technological edge.
An evaluation of American doctoral programs suggests that the country is making progress but still has work to do.
The study, "Research-Doctorate Programs in the United States," was carried out by the National Research Council, an independent organization chartered by Congress.
The researchers rated 274 universities based on the quality of their Ph.D. programs in 36 departments, from art history to economics to genetics.
Each department was rated on quality of the faculty and teaching effectiveness.


State Friendly to Business
New Jersey is among the eight most business-friendly states in the nation, Corporate Finance magazine has concluded in a survey released yesterday.
The monthly magazine said it looked at the availability of incentives like income tax credits, property and sales tax exemptions, relocation allowances and job training grants.


The Speaker vs. the City
House Speaker Newt Gingrich says he is sorry for his latest fit of New York-bashing.
Mr.
Gingrich, in town to sell the Republican Medicare program, called Mayor Rudolph Giuliani yesterday to make amends for describing New York as "a culture of waste." The Mayor reported that Mr.
Gingrich "did not mean to go as far as he went" in trashing the city before a group of reporters last week.


The Wealth of Nations: A 'Greener' Approach Turns List Upside Down
A NEW system for measuring national wealth that puts a value on natural and mineral resources has been developed by the World Bank.
The system is intended to foster a new perspective of development economics by making explicit the costs of environmental degradation and by debiting the national wealth account as mineral resources are depleted.
Such an accounting system, part of the bank's efforts to broaden the perspective of development economics, offers the first comprehensive estimates of national wealth for 192 countries, with some surprising changes in the usual ranking of the wealth of nations.
Australia, at $835,000 per person, comes out on top, with Canada second ($704,000), Japan fifth ($565,000) and the United States 12th ($421,000).
Ethiopia brings up the rear with a national wealth of $1,400 per capita.


A Colony for Artists
When planners in Peekskill, N.Y., scrambled for ideas to prevent its downtown from becoming a grid of vacant storefronts, they turned to the redemptive power of art.
Article, page B5.


In the Drink


Ex-Officer's Growing Domain
Glenn D. Cunningham, Hudson County's director of public safety, was nominated yesterday by President Clinton to be United States Marshal for New Jersey.
If confirmed by the Senate, Mr.
Glenn will oversee security for the Federal District Court in Camden, Newark and Trenton and supervise the witness protection program in the state.
A former Jersey City Councilman and Hudson County Freeholder, Mr.
Glenn was also a police officer for 17 years.


Serial Killer Is Sentenced In 2 Deaths
Joel Rifkin, the confessed serial killer who is already serving at least 27 years in prison, drew 50 additional years to life today for strangling two women and burying them in makeshift graves in a wooded area of Southampton.
Mr.
Rifkin, 35, is an unemployed landscaper from East Meadow, L.I., who has told authorities he killed at least 17 women.
Last month, he pleaded guilty to the two Suffolk murder charges after unexpectedly abandoning an insanity defense.


Mitsubishi Considering Joint Venture in India
The Mitsubishi Motors Corporation said yesterday that it was conducting a feasibility study with Hindustan Motors of India about a joint effort to manufacture compact cars in India.
A spokesman for Mitsubishi said the company could not disclose further details.


The Quake That Shook Mexico Awake Is Recalled
Like any event that sears the soul of a great city, the brutal earthquake that killed as many as 10,000 people and flattened 400 buildings in this sprawling capital 10 years ago gave rise to many legends.
One is the tale of La Pulga, "the Flea," a man small of stature and great in courage who selflessly wriggled through the rubble in search of victims.
Then there was the baby who was delivered alive after his mother was killed in a collapsing building.
And the rescue workers who carried pliers with them and pulled out the gold teeth of the dead.


N.F.L. Sues Jones to Stop 'Ambush' Deals
Jerry Jones and the National Football League are officially at war.
Fed up with "ambush" deals signed by the Cowboys' maverick owner with Nike and Pepsi over the past month, NFL Properties struck back yesterday with a lawsuit in Federal District Court in New York that seeks $300 million in damages from Jones, his team and Texas Stadium.


Circuit City Stores Inc.(CC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Aug 31


Something Borrowed (Cone) Beats Something Blue
David Cone was pitching like, well, David Cone.
Bernie Williams was playing like the Williams of late.
And it was remarkable that Wade Boggs was even playing.
But with Cone pitching brilliantly at Yankee Stadium in anything but a playoff-like atmosphere -- announced crowd: 15,224 -- and with Boggs and Williams jump-starting a sluggish offense, the Yankees rallied for all of their runs in the seventh and eighth innings last night to beat the struggling Toronto Blue Jays, 9-2.
With the victory, the Yankees kept themselves a game back of Seattle in the American League wild-card race.


A Palm Tree in the Bronx


COLLEGE SOCCER REPORT
Virginia
There is strong talk that the Cavaliers, winners of the national title the last four years and five of the last six, will lose Coach Bruce Arena to the Washington franchise of Major League Soccer, but the speculation has not distracted the Cavaliers.
Virginia's 4-1 victory over Wake Forest on Sunday at Charlottesville was its fourth of the year, and its only blemish thus far has been a 2-2 tie with Maryland in a game in the Atlantic Coast Conference, arguably the strongest league in the country.


Negotiators Inching Closer On Arab Rule
Israeli and Palestinian officials acknowledged they were creeping closer to a settlement after meeting for a third straight night to attack an obstacle to the expansion of Arab self-rule in the occupied West Bank.
Foreign Minister Shimon Peres of Israel and Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, plunged into the latest round of talks in Taba, the Egyptian resort on the Red Sea, evidently determined to break the deadlock over the West Bank town of Hebron.


Some Tickets Left For Summer Games
After selling 2.7 million tickets through its mail-order lottery, the Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games said today that tickets still remain for some events, including several sessions of track and field, men's basketball, volleyball and boxing.
But, as expected, Americans have gotten all available tickets for the opening and closing ceremonies, gymnastics, swimming and diving, cycling, tennis, table tennis and wrestling.


Jordan Cools Its Welcome to Iraqi Leader's Son-in-Law
Only weeks after his defection to Jordan, a son-in-law of President Saddam Hussein of Iraq who has vowed to bring down the Baghdad Government has become something of a pariah here.
The estimated 40,000 Iraqi refugees in Jordan and the Iraqi opposition in other countries have responded coolly to the call to revolt by Lieut.
Gen.
Hussein Kamel al-Majid, who defected with his brother, also a son-in-law of Mr.
Hussein, last month.
Most Jordanians and the media have expressed outright hostility, openly calling General Kamel a traitor.


A new shop shows how the big agencies keep getting . . . smaller.
AN old site in Manhattan is home to a new experiment in advertising.
Amster Yard, a landmark enclave of brick buildings around an L-shaped garden in the East Side neighborhood of Turtle Bay, has lent its name to the first creatively focused offshoot of the huge McCann-Erickson Worldwide agency.
McCann Amster Yard, as the satellite shop is called, is intended to offer clients an entrepreneurial resource separate from the traditional trappings of its enormous parent, which has billings of $7.1 billion from clients like AT&amp;T, Coca-Cola, General Motors and Nestle.


Who Rates an Apology For Police Misconduct?
To the Editor:
Joyce Purnick's eloquent Metro Matters columns Sept. 11 and 14 on the unfortunate case of an African-American Wall Street Journal executive, Brian Moody, and his 68year-old mother, Mary Moody, who were arrested and held for 20 hours on allegations of subway-fare beating raises a curious question on who warrants an apology for police misconduct.


Adobe Posts A 63% Climb In Earnings
Adobe Systems Inc. today reported a 63 percent rise in third-quarter earnings, but the results fell below the average Wall Street estimate and pushed Adobe shares lower in after-hours trading.
The software company reported its quarterly results after the stock market closed.
Shares of Adobe, which had closed at $50.75, up $1.875 in Nasdaq trading, fell $1.75, to $49, in after-hours trading.


Term-Limit Groups Appeal To States, Ignoring Congress
With little hope that Congress will pass a constitutional amendment limiting the terms of its members, several of the groups advocating term limits are starting a drive in the states for a Constitutional Convention, a laborious process that could take a decade to achieve term limits.
But some proponents of term limits say a push for a convention would be a waste of time and money.
Such splintering among the advocates underscores just how difficult it may be to pass term limits anytime soon.


Alpine Group Inc.(AGI,A) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 31


No Added Jail Time for Ex-State Trooper
The special prosecutor in the New York State Police evidence-tampering scandal suffered a setback today when a judge refused to impose additional jail time on a former lieutenant who the prosecutor said had reneged on a promise to cooperate with his investigation.
Appearing in Broome County Court in Binghamton, the special prosecutor, Nelson E. Roth, said the defendant, Craig D. Harvey, was one of just two people in Troop C who could have started a pattern of faking fingerprint evidence that stretched from 1984 to 1992.
Mr.
Harvey has admitted faking evidence in four cases, and he supervised two former troopers who have pleaded guilty in more than two dozen cases.


Edwardsburgh Journal; In Canada, Bridge to the U.S. Opens a Tax Chasm
Dave Dobbie, the Reeve of this township, a haven for British loyalists in the American Revolution, says he wishes he had never seen or even heard of the "damn bridge" over the St.
Lawrence that links his community with New York State.
Mr.
Dobbie, the Mayor -- in these parts still designated by the old English name for the job -- showed pique as he explained the trials of trying to collect taxes from the bridge.


Interstate Bakeries Corp.(IBC,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Aug 26


Times and The Washington Post Grant Mail Bomber's Demand
At the request of Attorney General Janet Reno and the F.B.I., and with the concurrence of The New York Times, The Washington Post is today publishing the unaltered 35,000-word manifesto of the serial killer known as the Unabomber in the hope of ending his 17-year campaign of murder through the mails.
The bomber offered last June to stop the killing, though not necessarily the property damage, if the text of the manifesto, calling for a revolution against the industrial and technological underpinnings of society, was published by one of the two newspapers within three months, and if three annual follow-up messages were also printed.


Mason Wants Quick Deal; Coleman Just Wants Out
In Manhattan, the Knicks took the first step to insure that Anthony Mason would still call Madison Square Garden home.
In East Rutherford, N.J., the Nets still have no clue what to do about Derrick Coleman.
The lockout ended yesterday, and National Basketball Association general managers and players' agents were back in business.


Input/Output Inc.(IO,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Aug 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13 MAJOR SHIFT IN BOSNIA With recent battlefield gains by the Bosnian Government, land holdings are approaching the almost equal split envisioned by the peace negotiators, but the fighting is putting peace talks in danger.
A1 SERB STRONGHOLD AT RISK The Bosnian Serb military vowed to take a stand at a stronghold with Government troops closing in and the area filled with refugees, fearing that a loss would mean the end of their republic in Bosnia.
A10 STRUGGLE FOR LAND IN BRAZIL A bloody confrontation between squatters and troops aided by landowners' hired guns shows the failure of an effort to equalize distribution of Brazil's land.
A1 NO NEW TERM FOR HAITI LEADER The President of Haiti confirmed that he will step down when his term ends next year, consistent with a pledge made to the United States, despite pressure from his followers to stay in office.
A5 AN EARTHQUAKE'S LEGACY Many stories are still told of the earthquake that hit Mexico city 10 years ago, but the major one is that the inability of the Government to cope weakened the stranglehold that it had on the people.
A3 DELAY IN PALESTINIAN PACT Negotiators were not able to complete the agreement for expanding Palestinian self-rule in the West Bank, postponing a signing ceremony, but talks continued to try to remove a last obstacle.
A13 A preliminary settlement to aid Philippine dictator's victims.
A6 With a democratic victory in Hong Kong, a threat from China.
A8 An Iraqi defector has become an albatross to Jordan.
A13 Edwardsburgh Journal: In Ontario, a bridge too dear.A4 National A14-19, B7 BOMBER'S WORDS ARE PUBLISHED At the request of the Federal authorities, and with the concurrence of The New York Times, The Washington Post is publishing the manifesto of the serial killer known as the Unabomber in the hope of ending his campaign of killing.
A14 RICHMOND OFFICIAL RESIGNS A Richmond councilman resigned after officials said he had been videotaped selling heroin.
A14 CHAOS AT SIMPSON TRIAL As the Simpson case nears completion, prosecutors completed their rebuttal -- conditionally.
A15 GINGRICH ETHICS CASE PROGRESSES The House ethics committee has decided to begin interviewing lawyers to be the outside counsel for its inquiry of Newt Gingrich.
A16 NEW DRIVE FOR TERM LIMITS Several groups advocating term limits are starting a drive in the states for a constitutional convention, a laborious process that could last a decade.
A17 FLORIDA'S NEW ROLE IN CAMPAIGN Florida is emerging as one of the most consequential early states in Presidential politics for Republicans and Democrats alike.
A17 CLINTON BEGINS TOUR The President embarked on a five-day trip that will mix raising campaign money with an effort to rally public opinion against the Republican budget-balancing plan.
A19 TOURISM IMPERILED IN ST.
THOMAS In the wake of Hurricane Marilyn, there is a fear of a monstrous economic impact for St.
Thomas, which depends on tourism for two-thirds of its economy.
B7 Metro Digest B1 RAVITCH WITHDRAWS AS CANDIDATE Richard Ravitch, Mayor Giuliani's top choice to lead New York City's public schools, withdrew his name from consideration as Chancellor, saying that the school system needed fundamental change.
A1 SECURITY TIGHT FOR FALL VISITS The Secret Service is assembling the largest protective task force of Federal agents in history to respond to security needs in New York City this fall, like the visit of the Pope and of 140 world leaders attending United Nations meetings.A1 Science Times C1-12 Rainbow trout threatened by bizarre parasitic invasion.
C1 A delicate balance for a conference on genes and violence.
C1 A 'green' approach to the wealth of nations.
C1 An easier way to zero in on the Ebola virus.
C3 Endangered turtles get a head start at Cornell University C4 Q&amp;A C7 Personal Computers C8, C10 Arts/Entertainment C13-18 Philharmonic opening and contract ending coincide.
C13 Paul Bowles in New York.
C13 "Jewish Short Stories." C13 Television: "Murder One." C13 Theater: "Blink of an Eye." C14 Music: Clapton in concert.
C14 Comparing Bartok and Stravinsky.
C18 Dance: Talley Beatty tribute.
C14 Coyote Dancers.
C18 Photography: How Life covered the Pacific War.
C18 Books: "The Book of Color," by Julia Blackburn.
C17 Sports B10-15 Baseball: Yanks win.
B11 Is it a new field of dreams?
B11 Mets fall to Braves.
B13 Basketball: Mason wants in, Coleman out.
B13 Column: Araton on the Giants.
B11 On Pro Football B14 On Baseball B13 Football: Reeves tied in knots.
B11 Jets' Brady is making his mark.
B14 Fashion Page B9 Flip-flop: The street leads the runway.
Patterns Business Digest D1 Obituaries B8 Helen K. Nearing, author.
William Franklin, executive.
Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21 Editorials The Speaker vs. the city.
Hong Kong votes for democracy.
Evaluating universities.
An uncharitable act.
Letters Russell Baker: Death in the family.
A.
M.
Rosenthal: A gift from Powell.
John Kenneth Galbraith: Blame history, not the liberals.
Joe Queenan: More Powell maxims.
Chronicle B2 Chess B6 Crossword C18


Making Illegal Phones Go Dead
About 50 illegal telephones will be removed from the streets of Hoboken beginning today, city officials said.
The phones are being eliminated because they attract drug dealers and other loiterers, users are charged exhorbitant rates and the city gets no revenue from them, said David Cogswell, a spokesman for Mayor Anthony Russo.


Recognition Intl.(REC,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 31


Mariners Are Closing In On the A.L. West Lead
Mariners 8, Rangers 1  Randy Johnson allowed three hits over eight innings as the Mariners maintained a one-game lead over the Yankees in the American League wild-card race and closed in on first place in the West Division by beating Texas, 8-1, last night in Seattle.
Mike Blowers hit a three-run homer and Edgar Martinez, the league's leading hitter, added a two-run homer.


Pacific Physician Services Inc.(PPSI,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jul 31


Redskins Lose Lachey
Washington Redskins offensive tackle JIM LACHEY, a three-time Pro Bowl selection, is out for the season and possibly for good.
Lachey tore his right rotator cuff on the Redskins' first offensive series in their 38-21 loss to Denver on Sunday.
In addition to reconstructive knee surgery in 1993, Lachey has torn his right rotator cuff three times. (AP)


Jewish Stories, Celebrity Voices
Fyvush Finkel sat in a recording studio in Santa Monica reading "Matzoh for the Rich," a short story by Abraham Reisen.
An alumnus of the Yiddish theater, Mr.
Finkel declaimed it theatrically -- too theatrically, it turned out, for the director Joan Micklin Silver, who emerged from the engineering booth to kibitz.
"She said, 'Can you tone it down a bit for the radio?' " recalled Mr.
Finkel, who starred onstage in "Cafe Crown" and "Little Shop of Horrors" before joining the cast of television's "Picket Fences." "She said, 'Tell me the story like you're telling it to me over a cup of coffee. Nothing more, nothing less.' "


CLINTON DEFENDS INCOME TAX CREDIT AGAINST G.O.P. CUT
Casting himself as a defender of the working class and the American work ethic, President Clinton today sharply attacked Republican proposals to curb tax breaks for low-income families, warning that he might veto any such plan as "inconsistent with those basic, bedrock values this country should be standing for."
At the same time, Mr.
Clinton praised the welfare overhaul efforts of Senate Republicans and said he believed Congress and the Administration would eventually compromise on an overall budget agreement, though probably not before the start of the next fiscal year on Oct. 1.


Market Place; Mexico Makes a Pitch, but Wall St. Is Wary
Guillermo Ortiz, Mexico's Finance Minister, is visiting New York this week to try to bolster investors' uncertain confidence in his country.
This time he can at least leave his handkerchief in his pocket.
During Mexico's financial crisis around the turn of the year, Mr.
Ortiz was famous for pulling out his hanky to mop his brow when the pressures, the arc lights and the questions grew intense.
That was frequently the case, and not least when Mr.
Ortiz visited New York in January and March to soothe frazzled financiers who had lost millions of dollars on their Mexican investments after the peso collapsed in December.


Murky Messages and Cryptic Fidgets
Looks aren't everything.
As far as looks are concerned, there's nothing wrong with Coyote Dancers, who appeared on Saturday night at the Kaye Playhouse.
The 36 members of this ambitious modern-dance troupe include talented young people and experienced performers like Stuart Hodes, who was Martha Graham's partner in the 1950's, and Ted Dalbotten, who at 73 is the company's oldest member.
Everyone danced harmoniously together under Maher Benham's direction.
The company can also please the ears.
Its accompaniments -- some recorded, others live -- ranged from Purcell and Beethoven to Scottish bagpipe music and new scores by Quentin Chiappetta, William Catanzaro and Geoffry Armes.


FINANCE BRIEFS
*
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $14.8 million of bonds due in 1997 through J. P. Morgan Securities.
The noncallable bonds carry an interest rate of 5.78 percent and are priced at par.
*
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp., known as Freddie Mac, is selling $75 million of debentures due in 2000 through First Tennessee Bank.
The debentures, which are callable in two years, carry an interest rate of 6.53 percent and are priced at par.


Toro Co. (TTC,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jul 31


U.S. Ryder Cup Team Thinks It Has Right Man for the Matches
At first glance, and even upon second and third glances, the list of the 12 men who will represent the United States this week in the Ryder Cup matches seems to be lacking something.
There is plenty of experience, plenty of youthful enthusiasm, plenty of heart and plenty of guts.
The question, though, is this: Is there an intimidator?
Is there a single American player who will be a daunting and unnerving force when the matches get under way Friday at the Oak Hill Country Club here.


Kasparov Gets Pressure, but No Victory
Maneuvering delicately with the black pieces, Gary Kasparov managed to steal the initiative from Viswanathan Anand yesterday in Game 5 of the world chess championship.
But Anand's solid defense would not let the champion do anything of value with his advantage.
The result, after 27 moves at the World Trade Center, was a draw, the fifth in a row.
Anand, a 25-year-old Indian grandmaster known mainly for his attacking skill, is displaying excellent defense in this series.
Maybe it is part of his strategy.
Before the match, some grandmasters said that if Anand could withstand an early steamrollering of the type that Kasparov brought off against his previous challenger, Nigel Short, he had reasonable chances to win.
Anand is getting into position to test that theory.


Secret Service Extravaganza For Pope and World Leaders
The Secret Service is assembling the largest protective task force of Federal agents in history to respond to a multifaceted security problem in New York City this fall.
For several weeks, visitors to the city will include the Pope as well as 140 world leaders attending meetings at the United Nations.
For Secret Service and F.B.I. agents in New York, that means canceled vacations and the prospect of numerous 18-hour days.
For regular New Yorkers, it means traffic jams and long lines at airports, bus terminals and train stations as officials scrutinize baggage and query travelers about their plans.


Demonstrators Urge Boycott


Sports of The Times; Brown Is Running Out of Time
A MORE supportive coach might have assured Dave Brown that he absolutely isn't running out of time.
Dan Reeves yesterday sounded as if he were fighting the urge to set his stopwatch, turn over his hourglass or count to 10.
"You've got to give people an opportunity if there are guys not getting the job done," Reeves said when asked about a possible quarterback switch.
"You've got to evaluate everything, but it's got to be over a period of time."


Steelers Get To Marino But Still Can't Win
Last week, as the Steelers prepared to play the Dolphins, Pittsburgh's All-Pro linebacker, Greg Lloyd, warned that he would knock Miami quarterback Dan Marino "into next week."
Late in the third quarter tonight, Lloyd got his chance.
He rushed Marino from the blind side and knocked the quarterback hard to the infield dirt.
Marino angrily grabbed Lloyd by the jersey as the quarterback lay in pain on the ground.
He bruised his sternum and did not return to the game, although he tossed passes on the sideline after making a brief visit to the locker room.


There's a There There, But It's Not Greenwich
WHAT makes a steadfast New Yorker bolt to the suburbs?
The usual.
For Brian DeLaurentis, it was rent.
When his climbed to $1,600 a month -- for a one-bedroom near Times Square -- that was that.
He traded city life for the fuzzy comfort of a white colonial with a 30-year mortgage and a front lawn.
Nothing odd there.
Only now, Mr.
DeLaurentis could be in a Twilight Zone episode: he isn't where he thought he was.
He thought he had moved to Greenwich.
Actually, he had moved to Cos Cob.
And while Cos Cob is definitely in Greenwich, it is not the same thing at all.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
4.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.75
5.80
4.71
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.25
5.27
4.61
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.22
5.25
5.05
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.17
6.12
7.48
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.53
6.48
7.75
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.44
7.47
8.47
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.03
6.00
6.50
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


No Headline
"On balance, the governance of the system badly needs fixing. I urge the political leadership of the city and state to fix that problem. Hopefully, the tumult of the last few weeks will focus attention on the fact that the fundamental problem is not the who, but the what." RICHARD RAVITCH, explaining why he does not want the job of running New York City's public schools.  [ B6:1. ]


Mets Stop Rolling As Braves Rock Jones
It seemed as if the Braves didn't really care whether they beat the Mets tonight in the opener of a four-game series.
Having clinched the National League East championship, the Braves appeared to be treating the game more like a formal audition for several of their prospects from Class AAA Richmond.
They fielded a lineup that included just three regular starters: third baseman Chipper Jones, second baseman Jeff Blauser and first baseman Fred McGriff.
The rest was a patched-together group of little-knowns except for Luis Polonia, the former Yankee outfielder, who got a rare start.


Continental Homes Holding Corp.(CON,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Aug 31


An Uncharitable Act
In late July, the House of Representatives hurriedly approved legislation that would severely restrict lobbying activity and all other attempts to influence public policy at the national, state or local level by recipients of Federal grants.
Fortunately, the Senate so far is refusing to go along with a measure that needlessly cripples the ability of charities and other nonprofit groups to operate effectively.
The three Republican freshman behind the sweeping measure -- Ernest Jim Istook Jr. of Oklahoma, David McIntosh of Indiana and Robert Ehrlich Jr. of Maryland -- argue that these steps are necessary to rein in the Federal budget and to prevent the abusive use of tax dollars to lobby Congress.
But there are already adequate Federal laws prohibiting the use of money from Federal grants for lobbying purposes.
Existing law also limits how much of their own money charities may spend on lobbying if their donors are to be allowed tax deductions for charitable contributions.


Nissan's British Plans
The Nissan Motor Company, the Japanese car maker, said yesterday that it would invest $:250 million, or $387 million, at its plant in Sunderland, in northeast England.
The spending is to support Nissan's new midsize model, Primera, to be introduced in the summer of 1996.
Nissan will build a plant for robot welding of rear axles and assembly of diesel engines.
The engines will be made starting in 1997.
Nissan employs about 5,500 people in Britain. (Bloomberg Business News)


Rohr Inc.(RHR,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jul 31


Rutgers Backs Its President
Rutgers University's Board of Trustees issued a statement yesterday expressing its "complete and unqualified support" of Francis L. Lawrence, the university's embattled president.
The statement came in response to a petition being circulated by senior professors who are seeking the ouster of Dr.
Lawrence on grounds that he makes too many decisions without consulting the faculty.


Toward Electronic Toll System
Private companies will be asked by the end of the year to submit bids for an electronic toll system for the state's three major toll roads, the State Transportation Commissioner, Frank J. Wilson, said yesterday.


Shorewood Packaging Corp.(SHOR,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 29


Flip-Flop: The Runway Leads the Street
Like a professional virgin, street style has always claimed to resent the attention of designer suitors.
Punks in London fought against having their attire appropriated and charged to have their photographs taken.
Grunge rockers satirized the designers who borrowed their thrift-shop look and gave it four-digit prices.


Extent of Croat-Bosnia Advance Threatens U.S.-Brokered Peace
Croatian and Bosnian Government troops, pushing toward the Serbian stronghold of Banja Luka, have now achieved on the battlefield the roughly equal division of Bosnia that is envisioned in a peace plan sponsored by the United States.
But further gains on the battlefield could cause the peace initiative to disintegrate, United Nations officials and Western diplomats said today.
The Serbian President, Slobodan Milosevic, the chief peace negotiator for the reeling Bosnian Serbs, echoed the concern and urged the international community today to exert its influence to bring about an immediate end to hostilities in Bosnia.


A New Field of Dreams or Just a Dream?
While George Steinbrenner generates competition between New York City and the state of New Jersey for the honor of building the Yankees a new home, two less-endowed baseball teams face critical stadium developments this week and a third may learn if it's staying put or moving after 109 years.
Voters will go to the polls in Seattle today to decide if they want to approve funding for a $241 million stadium to replace the Kingdome.
The prevailing view in the city is if the stadium bid fails, the Mariners will be sold and moved.


By Design; Singular Coats
For some women, a key consideration in choosing a winter coat is that the style not be seen all over town.
That's one reason to check out the designs of Liliana Ordas, whose Morgane Le Fay shops have sold distinctive fashion since she opened the first one, at 151 Spring Street (Wooster Street), 13 years ago.
Ms.
Ordas's simple romantic approach is reflected in her coats done in mohair and wool.
"I'm always in search of obscure beauty," she said.
Her Paris coat in ink blue with a Peter Pan collar has an Empire waist and box pleats ($840).
A small-shouldered knee-length coat in white is slit from waist to hem down the back and on each side ($850).
A matching overpiece with white satin suspenders covers the slits and ties in the front ($180).
An ankle-length style with a wide sweep comes with two detachable collars ($920).


Lawsuit Is Filed Accusing State Of Overuse of Bilingual Classes
A Brooklyn parents organization filed suit yesterday against the State Commissioner of Education, charging that tens of thousands of immigrant children in New York City had been permitted to "languish" for up to six years in bilingual classes, learning neither English nor other subjects particularly well.
The suit, by the Bushwick Parents Organization, which represents 150 Brooklyn families, faults the State Education Department for routinely granting waivers that permit school officials to keep children in classes taught in their native language -- usually Spanish -- beyond the three-year limit allowed by state law.


Schneider Corp. reports earnings for 3d qtr to Aug 5


A Tribute to Talley Beatty, With His Work and Ideas
Dance lovers crowded Symphony Space late Sunday afternoon for a three-hour tribute to the choreographer and dancer Talley Beatty.
The program, produced by the actress and dancer Glory Van Scott, honored Mr.
Beatty, a choreographer who often blended modern-dance technique with virtuosic jazz steps.
Mr.
Beatty, who died in May at the age of 76, was one of the first black American modern-dance choreographers to become well known.
Several pieces by Mr.
Beatty received powerful interpretations.
The way Marilyn Banks of the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater climbed a stepladder in a scene from "Come and Get the Beauty of It Hot" poignantly symbolized her increasing heartache.


Parker Saga Continues
ROB STANDIFER, the Mesa Community College basketball coach, resigned over his role in the recruitment of Richie Parker of New York City.
Standifer said he stands by his decision to offer Parker an opportunity to play, though the offer was rejected by the school's administration.
Parker was allowed to enroll at Mesa in late August, but was told he couldn't play basketball.
He has been attending classes and is expected to try to transfer to a four-year college at the end of the school year.


Helen K. Nearing, Maine Writer, Dies at 91
Helen K. Nearing, who with her husband, Scott Nearing, wrote about leaving the congested streets of Manhattan to find peace and happiness through hard work and self-sufficiency on a New England farm, died on Sunday in an automobile accident near her home in Harborside, Me.
She was 91.
Mrs.
Nearing, whose husband died at 100 in 1983, had continued to live alone in the farmhouse they built 40 years ago overlooking Penobscot Bay.
She was killed when a car she was driving struck a tree, said Eliot Coleman, a friend who lives on a neighboring farm.


Rite Aid Corp.(RAD,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Sept 2


Delay in New League
The United Baseball League, faced with stadium problems on Long Island and in Los Angeles, said yesterday it was delaying its inaugural season from 1996 to 1997.
BOB MRAZEK, one of the league's co-founders, said the league had encountered "significant and only recently erected roadblocks" to stadium agreements at those sites, two of six the league had established.


Music, His Music, Lures Bowles Back
"I live in the present," said Paul Bowles.
"There's no such thing as the future." And the past?
"I remember it as one remembers a landscape, an unchanging landscape." That is, a Bowlesian landscape, distant but precise and seen in the clearest light.
Mr.
Bowles, author, composer and an icon of individuality, at 84 remains against nostalgia, living as ever for the moment.
A festival of his music this week has brought him back briefly to his native New York for the first time in 26 years.
Though he is looking forward to the music, some of which he has never heard performed, he was unhappy about the disruption in his life, and the long, hard journey from his home in Tangier.


Netscape Deal Reported Near With I.B.M.
International Business Machines was expected to sign a major licensing agreement with the Internet software maker Netscape Communications, perhaps as soon as this week, executives familiar with the negotiations said yesterday.
The agreement would initially involve more than a million copies of Netscape's Navigator browser software for use on the Prodigy on-line information service, owned jointly by I.B.M. and Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company.
Netscape software would also become the basis for I.B.M.'s own expanding on-line efforts, analysts said.


Topps Co. (TOPP,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Aug 26


Cornhuskers' Phillips Could Return Soon
The suspended Nebraska running back LAWRENCE PHILLIPS could be reinstated within a month if he takes steps to control his anger, Coach TOM OSBORNE said yesterday.
Phillips, a junior who rushed for 359 yards and seven touchdowns in the second-ranked Huskers' first two games, was suspended Sept. 10 after being charged with hitting his former girlfriend.


Northwestern Steel &amp; Wire Co.(NWSW,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to July 31


Card Player, 16, Is Shot to Death
Karrie Fleming, 16, was playing cards outdoors with three friends late into the night when she was killed for reasons no one can yet explain.
Just after midnight yesterday, two men walked past the card players, and when they attempted to flee, Miss Fleming, whose cousin said she had hoped to become a nurse, was shot to death, the police said.
They gave no motive for the killing.


Trying to Avoid Being Caught In the Middle; Mutual Funds Seek Mergers To Grow And Capitalize On 401(k) Retirement Plans
The Contractors Supply Company of Kansas City, Mo., knows about building for the long term.
It sells everything from hammers to backhoes in Kansas, Missouri and Arkansas.
But until recently, Contractors Supply lacked a basic building block in the retirement plan it offered its 160 employees: bond mutual funds.
With Twentieth Century Investors handling their 401(k) and profit-sharing plans, employees had few investment choices beyond the high-growth stock funds for which that fund company is best known.
Last month they got that choice, though, a few months after Twentieth Century took over the Benham Group of mutual funds, a bond specialist.


Inmac Corp.(INMC,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Jul 29


Brazilian Squatters Fall in Deadly Police Raid
On a day so bright it seemed to hide no secrets, the 500 or so landless men, women and children of Santa Elina thought they had won in their occupation of a virgin forest belonging to an estate more vast than Manhattan and the Bronx combined.
Faces painted with coal, brandishing sticks, slingshots, sickles and chain saws, they had faced down the military police sent to evict them, and drawn hope from a hint that they might win the soil of their common dreams.
Euphoric after 24 days together, the homesteaders hugged, lit firecrackers and raised their hunting rifles to the sky.
But the scene just a mile away would have stopped their celebration cold.
Soldiers were pitching tents and unloading cartons of ammunition and tear gas.
Some strolled with machine guns on their shoulders.


Saving Money or Saving Lives?
These Appalachian hills can churn like the seas.
A seam of bituminous coal, 40 inches thick on average, courses through them, and as men and voracious mining machines bore deep into their flanks to grind out the coal, trees shake and the earth rumbles.
The hills of this pocket of East Tennessee have claimed the lives of about 300 miners in this century.
On Aug. 24, they took another.
The victim, James E. Jenkins, 50, the father of four and a miner for 20 years, was buried in a collapse of the roof at the Tennessee Coal Company's Mine No. 7.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Security Flaw Discovered In Netscape Software Netscape, maker of the most popular software for computer transactions over the Internet's World Wide Web, said it would replace its software after a serious security flaw was discovered that could enable a knowledgeable criminal to break Netscape's security coding system.


Worthington Industries Inc.(WTHG,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Aug 31


NIKE INC. (NKE,N)
Profits at Nike Inc. climbed 56.2 percent in its first fiscal quarter, reflecting improved sales of sports footwear and apparel, the company said yesterday.
Net income for the quarter that ended on Aug. 31 was $164.8 million, or $2.26 a share, compared with $106 million, or $1.43 a share, in the corresponding quarter last year.


Global Warming Remains Unproved
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 10 front-page article on how the scientific experts who advise countries on changes in the climate now say human activity is causing global warming fails to address the basic question:


METRO DIGEST
MAYOR'S CHOICE FOR SCHOOLS WITHDRAWS  Richard Ravitch, who had emerged as Mayor Giuliani's choice to take over New York City's public schools, withdrew his name from consideration, saying that only fundamental change in the structure of the system would ultimately make the schools thrive.  [ Page A1. ] VISITORS PRESENT SECURITY CHALLENGE The Secret Service is assembling the largest protective task force of Federal agents in history to respond to a multifaceted security problem in New York City this fall.


Breast Cancer Race
To the Editor:
Re "Race for the Cure" (letter, Sept. 14): As a breast cancer survivor, I was delighted to be back in New York from Boulder, Colo., and to participate in the New York Race for the Cure, which raises money and awareness about breast cancer.


Becker Milk reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 31


Do Plans to Cut Heart Risk Work? In Study, PET Scans Keep Track
IF you are one of the millions of Americans trying to stop or reverse serious clogging of your coronary arteries, how do you know whether the changes you have made in your daily habits or the drugs you are taking to lower cholesterol are having the desired effect?
A new study, being published today in The Journal of the American Medical Association, has shown that a scanning technique now used mainly to assess problems in the brain can effectively measure blood flow to the heart and show whether behavioral changes or drug therapy or both have reduced a person's chances of suffering a heart attack.


International Briefs; British Sears Says Profits Fell by 44%
Sears P.L.C., the British retailer, surprised investors yesterday by reporting a 44 percent decline in first-half profit and warned of continued "dull trading." Profit fell to $:29.9 million ($51.5 million), from a restated profit a year earlier of $:53.8 million despite a one-time gain of $:2.9 million.
Last year, Sears had a one-time gain of $:14.7 million.


Ex-Inmate Is an Ex-Candidate
The name of a Conservative candidate for State Assembly was taken off the ballot yesterday, at his request, after he was exposed as a parolee who served three years in Federal prison for defrauding investors of $613,000, The Associated Press reported.


Accounts
Chyron Corp., Melville, L.I., to J. Richard Smith Advertising, Melville, as agency of record for the developer of digital electronic equipment, previously handled in-house.
The billings were estimated at $2 million.
South Florida BMW Dealer Association, Miami, to Williams Whittle Associates, Alexandria, Va., as the first agency for the account.
The billings were estimated at $1.75 million.


Principal Punished for Vulgarity
The principal of Glen Rock High School was quoted in a published article over the weekend as referring to his opponents on the faculty as "some nasty bastards." One day later, the principal, David Schein, was suspended with pay.
Dario Valcarcel, superintendent of the Glen Rock schools, said he took disciplinary action against Mr.
Schein to calm public outrage arising from the quotation in The Sunday Record of Hackensack.


A Tipping Point in Bosnia
The Bosnian and Croatian Governments yesterday wisely averted a new crisis in the Balkans that could have jeopardized the fragile peace negotiations and even ignited a wider war.
The two Governments promised not to attack the Serb stronghold of Banja Luka, which could have disrupted the delicate equilibrium between battlefield gains and negotiating leverage that has brought recent progress toward ending the war.


U S West Seen as Newest Barrier to Time Warner-Turner Plan
The cable division of Time Warner Inc. has become an important bargaining chip as the company nears a deal to acquire Turner Broadcasting System Inc.
But the people haggling over it are not Ted Turner or even John C. Malone, the cable executive who has so far been holding up the Turner deal.
Instead, U S West, the regional Bell telephone company that owns 5.5 percent of three Time Warner units -- the cable division, the Warner Brothers studio and Home Box Office -- has told Time Warner that no Turner deal can be concluded without its approval.


Foreign Affairs; No Guts, No Glory
The lion in "The Wizard of Oz" didn't have it, but at least he knew where to get it.
Nelson Mandela had it, and so did F. W. de Klerk, and they used it to good effect.
Yitzhak Rabin has it and so does Yasir Arafat, although occasionally they lose it and need help finding it again.
It's called "courage," and unfortunately none of the key players in the Northern Ireland conflict have it right now.
Gerry Adams of Sinn Fein doesn't have it, the British Prime Minister, John Major, certainly doesn't have it and the Protestant leader David Trimble wouldn't know it if it were pinned to his chest.
And that's why 13 months after the cease-fire took effect in Northern Ireland, the parties still have not begun peace talks to bring a permanent end to the fighting.


Arrival of Serb Warlord Raises Faltering Spirits
Here on the desperate front lines, where the Bosnian Serbs hope to stave off the Muslim and Croatian forces who threaten their prize city of Banja Luka, spirits were lifted today as word spread of the arrival of a swaggering Serbian warlord.
The man is Zeljko Raznatovic, widely known by his nickname, Arkan.
He is known for running criminal enterprises from his base in a Serbian-occupied zone of eastern Croatia, for his high political connections and for gravitating to where the trouble is.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Traditional Asian Instruments And an Untraditional Program  Rokkasen Alice Tully Hall


Yesterday in Washington
WELFARE -- With an overwhelmingly bipartisan vote of 87 to 12, the Senate approved a bill that would restructure anti-poverty programs that date back decades.
The measure, which supporters said was a recognition that the current welfare system had utterly failed, included enough concessions to moderates that it set the stage for a struggle in a conference committee over differences with the far more conservative House version.
MEDICAID -- House Republicans proposed a transformation of Medicaid, the Federal health program for poor people, that would slow the its growth, eliminate most Federal standards and requirements and give the states vast new power to decide who gets what health benefits.
Democrats immediately denounced the legislation as an assault on children and the elderly, and demanded public hearings.


Cortines Takes Post at Stanford
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines, who will leave his post as head of the New York City school system next month, has no plans to take another full-time position, his spokesman said yesterday.
Mr.
Cortines will be a visiting professor at Stanford University, said John C. Beckman, the spokesman, but it will not be a job that will keep him tied to Palo Alto, Calif., where the university is situated.


Inquiry Finds Boy Was Delivered to School Dead
A wheelchair-bound 8-year-old boy was delivered dead to a Brooklyn school by an escort who did not believe it was her duty to look at or touch her charges aboard the bus, an investigation found yesterday.
A special investigator for the Board of Education also said that when he died in January, the boy, Quentin Magee, weighed only 27 pounds and had been absent for 37 consecutive days without the schools' taking action.


Clinton Enters F.C.C. Debate
President Clinton weighed in yesterday in favor of requiring television stations to show at least three hours a week of educational programming for children by sending a letter to the chairman of the Federal Communications Commission and copies to the other four F.C.C. commissioners.
The F.C.C. has a proposed rule under consideration to require such a minimum as a condition for broadcasters' licenses.
Its chairman, Reed E. Hundt, strongly favors the proposal.
Most network executives, and at least two F.C.C. commissioners, oppose setting a specific quota for such programming.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14  ARISTIDE, ONE YEAR LATER
One year after he was restored to office, President Jean-Bertrand Aristide of Haiti remains surrounded by American security guards, but has retained his almost mystical bond with the poor.
A1  OUTCRY IN JAPAN
The alleged rape of a schoolgirl by American soldiers has outraged Japan and prompted apologies from United States officials.
A3  CALL FOR ETHNIC PEACE IN AFRICA
In Kenya, Pope John Paul II said forgiveness and reconciliation were the only solution to ethnic conflicts in Rwanda and Burundi.
A6  PLEDGE OF RESTRAINT IN BOSNIA
Leaders of the Bosnian and Croatian Governments said they would not press their new military advantage by attacking the Bosnian Serb stronghold of Banja Luka.
A14  A SERBIAN SAVIOR?
On western Bosnia's desperate front lines, Bosnian Serb spirits were lifted by the arrival of a swaggering Serbian warlord whom many saw as their savior.
A14  Argentina and Britain moved toward easing Falklands dispute.
A5  Algeria's President said he will run for a second term.
A10  Havana Journal: Life is hard for women whose men have fled.
A4  National A16-18, B8-10  WELFARE OVERHAUL PASSES
The Senate approved a bill that would restructure 60 years of anti-poverty programs in what supporters said was a recognition that the welfare system had failed.
A1  CLINTON VETO UNLIKELY
News analysis: Unless the Senate conferees cave in to their counterparts from the House, the odds are that the President will sign the welfare legislation.
A1  HOPE IN NEEDLE EXCHANGE
Programs that encourage drug addicts to exchange used needles for new ones greatly reduce the spread of the virus that causes AIDS while not encouraging more illicit drug use, a national panel said.
A1  An anthropologist's work led to a finding on why addicts share.
B10  THE TROUBLE WITH DOWNSIZING
Republicans are discovering that the Commerce Department, which has been a mainstay of the Government since it was created by Theodore Roosevelt, is not as easy to rip down as it first appeared.
A1  MOB FIGURES AT SIMPSON TRIAL
The judge in the O. J. Simpson case banished photographers and sketch artists from his courtroom as two reformed organized crime figures took issue with a police officer's testimony about the case.
A16  F.B.I.
BIAS TALKS BOG DOWN
Negotiations have bogged down between the Federal Bureau of Investigation and a group of female agents who say the agency has not given them the status or opportunities accorded to men.
A18  LOS ANGELES POLICE CHIEF SUES
Chief Willie Williams of the Los Angeles Police Department has filed a $10 million claim against the city and police commission.
A18  VAST MEDICAID CHANGE PROPOSED
House Republicans proposed a transformation of Medicaid that would control costs, eliminate most Federal standards and give the states new power to decide who gets what health benefits.
B9  HOUSE BACKS ALASKA DRILLING
Congressional Roundup: A House panel voted to allow oil and gas drilling in parts of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge.
B8  Education B11  A new Dallas school is being hailed as the model of high-tech security.
Metro Digest B1  CONTENDERS FOR CHANCELLOR
Three educators from outside New York City emerged as leading contenders for the post of Schools Chancellor, officials said as the Board of Education concluded a week of interviews with nine prospects.
A1  OF CRIMES AND MISDEMEANORS
At the urging of the Mayor, who was seeking an enforcement tool for his quality-of-life crusade, the City Council voted to elevate seven minor offenses to misdemeanors.
A1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C13-18  Study of television violence.
C13  Case of the Carnegie concrete, continued.
C13  Whitney Museum expansion.
C14  Theater: The new season in Washington.
C13  Music: East and West.
C14  Merging Latin and jazz.
C18  Books: A novel of China under Japanese rule.
C17  Book Notes.
C18 The Living Section C1-8  In the studio with Tony Brown.
C1  Health Page C11  Personal Health: What weight really means for your health.
Sports B12-18  Baseball: Yanks beat Blue Jays.
B13  Mets defeat Braves.
B15  Column: Vecsey on baseball.
B13  Football: Jones yields no ground to N.F.L. owners.
B13  Central Florida has freshman sensation.
B13  Hockey: Rangers' Kovalev is determined.
B12  Soccer: Fight for free-agent rights in Europe.
B18  Obituaries D20  Orville Redenbacher, leader of the American popcorn industry.
Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21  Editorials  The stampede to harsh welfare.
A tipping point in Bosnia.
Nancy Johnson moves, a little.
Terra-cotta testimonials.
Letters  Thomas L. Friedmank: No guts, no glory.
Frank Rich: There she is.
Laura Ingraham and Stephen P. Vaughn: Powell is bad for the G.O.P.
Sam Schuchat: Unfit stewards.
Chronicle B2  Crossword C18


Hispanic Heritage in New Jersey: A Beat Goes With It


Martin Gordon, Print Dealer, 56
Martin Gordon, a former Manhattan dealer in prints and drawings, died on Friday at the Lee Memorial Hospital in Fort Myers, Fla.
He was 56 and lived in Naples, Fla.
The cause was prostate cancer, said Judith Goldberg, a friend.


Schools Search Is Said to Focus On 3 Educators
Three educators from outside New York City emerged yesterday as the leading contenders to become the next chancellor of the city's public schools, officials involved in the search said, as the Board of Education concluded a week of interviews with nine prospects.
No clear front-runner surfaced, however, and the officials said it was possible that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani could still rally a majority of the board's seven members -- two of them his appointees -- to support another candidate.


Chinatown, Meet Vietnam
AT the Pho Bang restaurant at 117 Mott Street in Chinatown, Vu Bang, the chief cook, has a way with a knife.
He can slice a cucumber so it unfolds like a fan, sliver carrots into threads and cut chicken so thin that light shines through the pale pink flesh.
After wrapping grilled pork in a ruffled green lettuce leaf and garnishing it with carrot, cucumber and a mint leaf, he offers it to a visitor as an edible gift.


Giuliani at the U.N.


For Professors, Phonathon Spells Raise
An experiment in tying professors' salaries to their ability to attract and retain students has paid off for Mercy College and for the professors, who were notified last week that they had exceeded their enrollment goals and would receive 7 percent raises.
"It was phenomenally successful," said Jay Sexter, the college's president "We went way over our quota. Our goal was a 6 percent increase in enrollment. We now have about a 20 percent increase."


L.I. Student Charged In Threat by E-Mail
A Herricks High School student was charged today with sending a bomb threat to the assistant principal of Herricks Middle School via E-mail.
The Nassau County police said it took only seconds for America Online -- the service used to send the message -- to trace the transmission to the personal computer of Michael Singh, 16, of Albertson.


Food Notes
Mighty Matsutakes
Matsutake mushrooms satisfy many tastes.
The Japanese prize these wild mushrooms when they are very small, long before their caps begin to open, and have been known to spend $200 or so a pound for them in Japan.
John Gottfried, an owner of Gourmet Garage and American Agribusiness, which sells produce retail and wholesale, says they are important in Japanese culture, especially as a fertility symbol.


METRO DIGEST
THREE EDUCATORS LEAD SCHOOLS SEARCH
Three educators from outside New York City emerged as the leading contenders to become the next chancellor of the city's public schools, officials said as the Board of Education concluded a week of interviews with nine prospects.
No front-runner surfaced, however, and the officials said it was still possible that Mayor Giuliani could build a consensus among a majority of the board's seven members to support another candidate.  [ Page A1. ] QUALITY-OF-LIFE CAMPAIGN IS HINDERED
Tucked away in the state budget last June was a little-noticed provision that would strip the city's Criminal Court of jurisdiction over a number of minor violations like urinating in public and failure to remove snow from sidewalks.
But the measure, scheduled to take effect Oct. 1, has created a major headache for Mayor Giuliani.
By taking about 40 offenses out of the hands of the criminal courts, it removed the enforcement tool for the Mayor's crusade against quality-of-life crimes.  [ A1. ] NEW YORK CITY  AT U.N., GIULIANI ATTACKS ISOLATIONISM
A wheelchair-bound 8-year-old boy was delivered dead to a Brooklyn school by an escort who did not believe it was her duty to look at or touch her charges aboard the bus, an investigation found.
A special investigator for the Board of Education also said that when he died in January, the boy, Quentin Magee, weighed only 27 pounds and had been absent for 37 consecutive days without the schools' taking action.  [ B3. ] REGION  RISKING LIFE TO GIVE BIRTH
Bianca Maria Ramos owes her life to her mother in a far more profound way than most infants.
Doctors had repeatedly urged her mother to end her pregnancy after a routine blood test found leukemia.
Not to do so, they argued, would almost certainly lead to the mother's death.
Even Bianca's grandmother, a Roman Catholic, saw no other choice.
But Bianca's mother ignored them all.  [ B5. ] EX-DETECTIVE CHARGED IN MEDICAID FRAUD
A retired New York City police detective and his East Rockaway ambulance company were charged in Nassau County Court in a scheme to bilk Medicaid by billing for 9,000 fake ambulance rides, some of them for patients who were dead and buried.  [ B5. ] MAN TO SHARE HOLOCAUST SETTLEMENT
Hugo Princz's 41-year battle to win compensation from the German Government for his suffering in the Nazi death camps came to an end as he shared in a $2.1 million settlement with 10 other Holocaust survivors.  [ B5. ] ANOTHER CHESS GAME, ANOTHER DRAW
Right in the middle of a complex, gripping battle, Game 6 of the world chess championship abruptly ended.
Gary Kasparov held out his hand, offering a draw, and Viswanathan Anand shook it in acceptance.
No one understood, apparently not even the players.  [ B5. ]


REPORT ENDORSES NEEDLE EXCHANGES AS AIDS STRATEGY
Programs that encourage drug addicts to exchange used needles for new ones greatly reduce the spread of the virus that causes AIDS while not encouraging more illicit drug use, a National Academy of Sciences panel said today.
The findings open the way for the Clinton Administration to lift a legal ban on Federal financing of such programs if it wishes.
The panel of experts recommended that it do so and also said states should rescind laws restricting the sale and possession of needles and syringes.


Kovalev, Tried and True at 22, Ready to Make Most of Skills
If Aleksei Kovalev were a college athlete and not a professional hockey player, this would be his senior season, his fourth and final year on the varsity.
For three seasons with the Rangers, he has displayed bursts of brilliance among aggravating slumps of sophomoric self-centeredness.
Now that he is 22 years old and a young veteran, Kovalev and his Ranger bosses expect more than sporadic flashes of skill and occasional controversies with referees and with coaches.
They expect consistent production and even leadership.


Waiting for the Light


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Activated Reggie Jefferson, designated hitter, from the 15-day disabled list.
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Sent Kimera Bartee, outfielder, to the Minnesota Twins to complete the trade for Scott Erickson, pitcher.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  LOS ANGELES CLIPPERS -- Acquired Brian Williams, forward, from the Denver Nuggets for Elmore Spencer, center.
Renounced their rights to Harold Ellis, guard, and Michael Smith, forward.
MIAMI HEAT -- Named Randy Pfund executive vice president of player personnel.
Football  National Football League  NEW YORK JETS -- Waived Glenn Cadrez, linebacker, and Alfred Oglesby, defensive tackle.
Signed Chad Cascadden, linebacker, off the practice squad.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Agreed to terms with Darren Perry, safety, on a four-year contract.
WASHINGTON REDSKINS -- Promoted Ron Lewis, guard, from the practice squad.
Released Sebastian Savage, cornerback.
Olympics
USA SWIMMING -- Named Mike Unger marketing director and Tom Avischious coaching development director.


A Czar's Diary
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 13 Book Notes states that publishers are hastening after all things Romanov.
They should publish Czar Nicholas II's diary, and it will convince readers, if they need any convincing, that the Czar was an extraordinarily inane head of state.
The diary shows that he was completely oblivious to explosive events going on around him.
He writes, day in and out, about waking up, his meals and going out for a walk in the garden.
RALPH SLOVENKO  Professor of Law and Psychiatry Wayne State University Detroit, Sept. 14, 1995


Magazine Files Appeal to Supreme Court
Business Week is preparing to go to press tonight for the second week in succession under a Federal court order restraining it from publishing information contained in sealed court records.
In the rapidly developing First Amendment case, the magazine yesterday appealed to the Supreme Court.
Also yesterday, a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit, in Cincinnati, dismissed an appeal by the McGraw-Hill Companies, parent of Business Week, saying the order was a temporary restraining order over which the court had no jurisdiction.
The appeals court sent the matter back to the judge who issued the order, John Feikens of Federal District Court in Cincinnati.


Charlotte Morris, Television Producer, 75
Charlotte Morris, an Emmy Award-winning television producer and director for WNYW-TV, died on Sunday at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
She was 75 and lived in Manhattan.
She died after multiple medical problems, her family said.


Just Give the Chunnel Train a Try and See
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 15 Business Day article on the Chunnel's money crisis distressed me.


Researcher Kills a Myth of Syringe Sharing
Steven Koester's big break came the day the police stopped him on a dingy Denver street frequented by heroin users and demanded to know what he was doing there.
As it happens, Dr.
Koester had been trying to win the trust of heroin users so he could study their drug habits.
"When they saw the cops stop me and check my I.D., it changed their attitude toward me," said Dr.
Koester, an anthropologist at the University of Colorado Health Sciences Center in Denver.
"After that they let me in. I could watch them buy, shoot up, everything."


Senator Proposes to Charge Colleges for Student Loans
Senator Nancy Landon Kassebaum, chairwoman of the Committee on Labor and Human Resources, today called for cutting spending on Federal student loans by $10.1 billion, in large part by adding a 2 percent charge to colleges and universities on all Federal loans their students receive.
Thus New York University, for example, whose students received about $150 million in new student loans in the 1994-95 academic year, would have to pay a charge of about $3 million.


Nancy Johnson Moves, a Little
The House ethics committee, doing what it should have done months ago, began interviewing lawyers yesterday to serve as an outside counsel for its investigation of Speaker Newt Gingrich.
Had Representative Nancy Johnson of Connecticut, the committee's chairwoman, not buckled at the outset to Mr.
Gingrich's resistance to a special counsel, the thorny case might well be resolved by now.
It is good that Representative Johnson is at last turning to her duty, but there may still be quibbling ahead over the scope of the outside counsel's mandate.
Clearly, the counsel must be given authority to conduct a thorough independent probe.
Mrs.
Johnson can improve her reputation by rebuffing efforts by her fellow Republicans to restrict the inquiry.


Family in Brazil Grieves Over Central Park Death
The jogger found dead in Central Park on Sunday morning loved samba and shiatsu massage, landscapes and the sand between her toes.
As a girl, she wore her hair down to her hips, and her smile, in family photos, was the kind to make you wonder how one body could contain so much light.
Her name was Maria Isabel Pinto Monteiro Alves.
At her brother's home in the middle-class neighborhood of Laranjeiras, Ms.
Alves's family gathered yesterday, the photos strewn on a coffee table in the living room.
In the next room, her mother, Lidia, sobbed at the death of her only daughter, and the family, grief-stricken and exhausted, seemed overwhelmed.


International Briefs; Nissan Expecting Return to Profitability
The Nissan Motor Company forecast yesterday that it would achieve profitability in its current fiscal year as its new passenger models achieved steady sales.
The company suffered a record loss of 61 billion yen in the year ended March 31.


Ryun and Clarke to Run Dream Mile
In 1966 and 1967, when he was 19 and 20 years old, JIM RYUN lowered the world record for the mile to 3 minutes 51.3 seconds and then 3:51.1.
From 1963 to 1970, RON CLARKE broke 18 world records from 2 miles to 20,000 meters.
In their long careers, these track and field greats have never raced against each other.


Regla Journal; Helpless Cuban Wives, Marooned by U.S. Policy
In a dark, Spartan room that resembles more a jail cell than a living room, Sonia Fonseca brought out a stack of 53 letters from a husband in a prison of his own.
"You suffer but I suffer twice as much because my hands are tied," he wrote.
"We must continue resisting so that we can fulfill our dreams."


N.B.A. Dissidents End Fight
The National Basketball Association cleared its last hurdle yesterday toward a season free of labor trouble.
One day after the league lifted its 79-day-old lockout of players and resumed all operations, the players who initiated the movement to decertify the union decided not to file an objection to the election in which players overwhelmingly voted (226-134) to retain the union.


Miller Joins Turner Sports Team
CHERYL MILLER joined Turner Sports as a reporter and studio analyst for TNT and TBS yesterday, four days after resigning as women's basketball coach at Southern California.
Miller served as a color commentator with ABC and ESPN before returning to U.S.C. in 1993.
She coached the Trojans to a 44-14 record.


Turnpike Delays Are Predicted
Drivers can expect long delays on the New Jersey Turnpike over the next six weeks because of repair work.
Rush-hour traffic backed up for nine miles yesterday morning when only one eastbound lane was left open between interchanges 14 and 14A.
On Friday, additional resurfacing work is to begin between interchange 14C and 12th Street in Jersey City.


A Fight for Free-Agent Rights in Europe
One may be excused if the name Jean-Marc Bosman fails to strike a note of familiarity.
The Belgian soccer player has languished in the fourth division of his nation's professional league for five years, hardly grounds for comparisons to Pele, Maradona or Roberto Baggio.
But for professional soccer players in Europe -- including more than 30 Americans -- Bosman may single-handedly change the face of the game.


World News Briefs; A Political Pulse-Taking In News of China Leader
With Chinese politics still hinging on the leadership of a frail old man, Deng Xiaoping, the paramount leader, every piece of news about him is eagerly consumed and carefully digested by millions of Chinese officials looking for clues about the political mood in Beijing.
Today, Chinese newspapers reported that Prime Minister Li Peng told a visitor that Mr.
Deng is still spry, considering his age.


Japan Sets Big Package Of Spending
In its biggest attempt yet to jump-start the stalled Japanese economy -- or at least to keep it from rolling backward -- the Government announced today a package of more than $140 billion in new spending and loan programs aimed at stimulating business.
The new package is considerably bigger than most experts had been expecting in recent days, and it is also bigger than many conservative officials in the Ministry of Finance had originally wanted.
But bankers and corporate executives had lobbied heavily for a big jolt to the economy, and the Government officials were apparently unnerved when the stock market dropped on Monday after reports of a more modest package were printed in the local press.


Wine Talk
A FRIEND about to leave for a canal trip in the Alsace region of France recently showed me the wine list for his particular barge.
It was a short list -- canal barges are not known for their extensive cellars -- but it was made up entirely of Burgundies, with one forlorn Bordeaux at the end.
It offered not a single Alsatian wine.
I thought: does Hubert Trimbach know about this?
Or Johnny Hugel or Lionel Humbrecht or Colette Faller or any of the other producers of great Alsatian wines?
Regional pride, not to mention commercial realities, would seem to demand some sort of protest on their part.


Pope Calls for End to Killings in Rwanda
Addressing about 300,000 people at a Mass in Nairobi's largest park, Pope John Paul II appealed today for an end to the bloodshed in Rwanda and Burundi and said that forgiveness and reconciliation were the only solution to their ethnic conflicts.
His message had a particular resonance here because the massacres in Rwanda and Burundi have deeply affected the Roman Catholic Church in East Africa and have raised fears that similar ethnic clashes could occur in Kenya.


Combining the Rich West With a Leaner East Asia
To compose works that draw from cultural traditions as vastly different as opulent Western orchestral music and spare East Asian traditional music would seem to be asking for trouble.
However, a Sunday evening concert at Avery Fisher Hall, sponsored by the Committee for Admission of Taiwan to the United Nations, presented five such works by contemporary Taiwanese composers (all but one living) in the most advantageous circumstances possible.
The Brooklyn Philharmonic Orchestra was hired; an accomplished young American conductor, Paul Polivnick, making his New York debut, was engaged, and two skillful soloists were presented.
The committed performances made all of these unorthodox works at least interesting to hear, and two of them were memorable.


CHRONICLE
DAVID HAYS has navigated a sailboat around Cape Horn, and he has steered a theater company through the shoals of ruin.
The two efforts, he said yesterday, are remarkably similar.
Mr.
Hays is the founder and artistic director of the National Theater of the Deaf in Chester, Conn., which almost collapsed when an audit disclosed last year that the theater was out of money and $425,000 in Federal funds had apparently been misused.
A Government investigation was begun and, he said, "It is crawling toward resolution."


Woman With Cancer Risked Life to Give Birth
Bianca Maria Ramos owes her life to her mother in a far more profound way than most infants.
Doctors had repeatedly urged her mother to end her pregnancy after a routine blood test found leukemia.
Not to do so, they argued, would almost certainly lead to the mother's death.
Even Bianca's grandmother, a Roman Catholic, saw no other choice.
"I didn't want my daughter to die," said Brunilda Saldana, who lives with her daughter in Queens.
"I told her she should have the abortion, if that's what she needed."


No Headline
"We walk freely. We sleep quietly. There are no men who come for us in the night." -- AMSON JEAN-PIERRE, hailing the Aristide era in Haiti.  [ A12:1. ]


Market Rally Seen as Intact Despite Decline in the Dow
Despite a decline in the Dow Jones industrial average, advances elsewhere yesterday appeared to keep the longtime market rally intact.
"If you look at the broader indices, it was a strong market, with lower interest rates raising the relative attractiveness of stocks," said Richard C. Pell, chief investment officer of Bank Julius Baer.
"And if you look at the Dow, one stock accounted for the decline."


Erich Kunz, 86, Opera Singer
Erich Kunz, an Austrian bass-baritone who sang with the Vienna State Opera, the Salzburg Festival and the Vienna Volksoper for more than three decades, died on Sept. 8 in Vienna.
He was 86.
A consummate character actor, Mr.
Kunz had a broad repertory that ran the gamut from Beckmesser in Wagner's "Meistersinger" and Leporello in Mozart's "Don Giovanni" to frothier roles in operettas by Lehar, Strauss and Lortzing.
His career was mainly in Europe, but he sang at the Metropolitan Opera for several seasons in the 1950's, and he made many recordings.


Britain and Argentina Reach an Accord on Falkland Oil Rights
Argentina and Britain took a major step forward today in resolving a 162-year-old dispute over the Falkland Islands when the two countries announced a tentative agreement governing the extraction of oil in the waters around the archipelago.
The accord is significant because it settles claims by both countries, which fought a war over the South Atlantic islands in 1982, to what many energy experts believe are vast natural gas and petroleum resources in the islands' waters.


Possible Witnesses and Tips Are Focus of Jogger Murder Investigation
A woman clad in an aqua blue jogging suit on in-line skates zoomed around the bend where a mobile police trailer sat yesterday in Central Park, a stone's throw away from where a jogger was found beaten to death Sunday morning.
"Any new leads?" she asked detectives, slowing down.
"No," one detective replied.
"We're counting on people like you."





Garden Ushers In Its New Ring Prize
He kept referring to the building as "Madison Square Gardens," but seemed enamored by its historical connection to his sport.
"I have always dreamed of fighting here," Oscar De La Hoya said.
"What fighter would not?"


In the 'I Love New York' campaign, a new kind of Broadway revival.
NEW YORK STATE  [ loves ]  Broadway. Again.
For the first time in more than a decade, the state's tourism promotion, "I Love New York," with its high-recognition "I [ love ] NY" icon, will focus on Broadway theater as a tourist asset in a $1 million television and radio campaign that begins tomorrow.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Debut With Roots Early in the Century
Marat Bisengalyev, violinist  Weill Recital Hall


Yashin Is Prepared to Sit For Years
ALEKSEI YASHIN, Ottawa's leading scorer last season and a 30-goal scorer as a rookie the season before, said yesterday that he is prepared to sit out "five or six years" rather than play for General Manager RANDY SEXTON and Coach RICK BOWNESS.
Yashin, who was suspended Sept. 11 after refusing to report to training camp, is attempting to renegotiate his five-year, $4.2 million contract that runs through the 1997-98 season.
The contract contains a provision that allows him to renegotiate next spring.


Civil Rights Director Appointed
The State Attorney General, Deborah T. Poritz, yesterday announced the appointment of a new director of the Division of Civil Rights, Rolando Torres Jr.
He joined the division in 1990 as an assistant director for the Bureau of Enforcement.
The division handles complaints involving such matters as housing or employment discrimination.


Yanks Fire 3 Top Minor League Officials
In one fell swoop, the Yankees have fired the top three executives in their minor league operation.
The three men learned of their dismissals on Monday in Mesa, Ariz., at the annual meetings of farm system and scouting directors.
The Yankees had planned to make no announcement of the action until they had replacements set, but they acknowledged it yesterday when word began leaking out.
Word of the dismissals spread among colleagues from other clubs when the three became conspicuous by their absences from meetings Monday.


Insurers Face Downgrading
Moody's Investors Service said yesterday that life insurance companies faced a downward trend in their ratings because of their high costs, growing competition from outside the industry and misdeeds by their sales agents.
Over all, Moody's said, the average rating for life companies would fall in the next three to five years to a "good" rating of between A-1 or A-2 from the current excellent to good rating of Aa-3 or A-1.


International Briefs; German Decision On Phone Cable
A joint federal-state German regulatory panel has decided to allow the nation's three mobile phone operators to lay their own cables to connect their transmission sites across Germany.
The decision frees them from having to rent lines from the state-run Deutsche Telekom.
The decision was made by a group headed by the German Telecommunications Minister, Wolfgang Boetsch.


Mortgage Aid for Home Buyers
A plan to help first-time home buyers in New Jersey with low or moderate incomes is scheduled to be unveiled today as First Fidelity Bank signs an agreement to make $75 million available to such customers in mortgages below market rates.


After '94 Crash, Irvan Drives Again
Ernie Irvan, who nearly died in a crash 13 months ago, will begin his comeback to competitive stock-car racing this Saturday in a Nascar Super Truck race in Martinsville, Va.
The following weekend, Irvan, who was one of the dominant drivers in the Nascar Winston Cup series before his accident at Michigan International Speedway in August 1994, will attempt to return to that series -- the top echelon of the sport -- in North Wilkesboro, N.C.
He will also drive in a Super Truck race at North Wilkesboro that weekend.
Irvan, 36, will drive with a patch over his left eye, a result of the lingering double vision he suffers after the Michigan crash in which he sustained severe head and lung injuries.
He was cleared last week by Nascar officials, who based their decision on reports from Irvan's own team members after a series of test sessions over the last several weeks.


POP
An Older Latin Generation With an Infusion of Youth  Latin Legends Band S.O.B.'s


Corrections
A picture caption with the Evening Hours column on Sunday about a dinner at the Hilton Hotel to benefit leukemia, cancer and AIDS research omitted the name of the event's organizer.
It was the T. J. Martell Foundation.


Huskers' Phillips Pleads No Contest
Nebraska's star tailback, LAWRENCE PHILLIPS, pleaded no contest yesterday to two misdemeanor charges and a third charge was dropped during an unscheduled appearance in Lancaster County Court.
He is scheduled to be sentenced Dec. 1 on misdemeanor counts of assault and trespassing.
Each charge carries a maximum penalty of six months in jail and a $500 fine, but Lancaster County Attorney GARY LACEY said his office would recommend that Phillips be given probation.
Phillips has been suspended from the No. 2 Cornhuskers since his arrest Sept. 10.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a jogger who was beaten to death in Central Park gave an incorrect surname and, in some copies, misidentified her home country.
The jogger was Maria Alves, not Maria Isabel Montero; she was from Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, not Buenos Aires, Argentina.


Jets' Baxter Finally Captures a Moment in the Spotlight
For his first two pro seasons and the first two games of this season, life was essentially the same for Fred Baxter.
During the week, 95 percent of his action came on the scout team.
On game day, he played on every special team and, on rare occasions, lined up on offense.
That all changed last Sunday, the most memorable day of his career.
Johnny Mitchell was sidelined by back spasms, so Baxter and the rookie Kyle Brady were the Jets' only tight ends.


Omnicom Promotes Two Top Executives
The Omnicom Group in New York said yesterday that it had promoted two top executives.
The promotions create a line of succession at the agency company, which operates shops including BBDO Worldwide, DDB Needham Worldwide and TBWA International.
Bruce Crawford, 66, president and chief executive of Omnicom for the last six years, was named to the new position of chairman while continuing as chief executive.
He relinquishes his duties as president to John Wren, 42, who will continue as chairman and chief executive of the Diversified Agency Services division of Omnicom, which operates Ross Roy Communications and other units.


Algerian Leader to Run Again, Hinting Move Against Militants
President Liamine Zeroual of Algeria announced today that he would seek a second term, a move that suggests the army is intent on pursuing its offensive to eradicate Muslim fundamentalist forces.
President Zeroual, 54, a former Defense Minister and retired army general, was appointed as a transitional leader by top military officials in 1994.


Spy Satellite's Cost
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 12 Science Times article on the impressive accomplishments of the Corona photographic reconnaissance satellites neglects to mention that the overall cost of the program continues to be classified by the Central Intelligence Agency.


Giuliani, at U.N. Opening Ceremony, Assails New Isolationist Mood in Congress
In a strongly-worded attack on the isolationist mood swelling in a Congress dominated by his fellow Republicans, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani helped kick off the 50th session of the United Nations General Assembly today, criticizing the "potent strain of isolationism that once again is infecting our political discourse."
The Mayor did not mention the Republican Party by name and said in an interview later that he was not singling out his party or fellow politicians.
Still, his defense of the United Nations' achievements and of immigrants' contribution to the nation marked the latest in a series of attempts by Mr.
Giuliani to set himself apart from the newly dominant conservative wing of the Republican majority.
Many of those Republicans want to end or cut back financing to the U.N. and favor severe immigration restrictions.


Terra-Cotta Testimonials
Edna St.
Vincent Millay's house on Bedford Street in Greenwich Village is so narrow (7 feet 6 inches) that one wonders that she could breathe, let alone burn her candle at both ends.
On Sept. 28, it gets a terra-cotta plaque akin to those blue plaques that tell Londoners which luminary lived where.
The home of George and Ira Gershwin is getting a marker, as is a school designed by the man -- Alfred M. Butts he was -- who created Scrabble. (The Historic Landmarks Preservation Center, which dreamed up these plaques, appears to have catholic tastes.)


Mariners Maintain Lead
Mariners 5, Rangers 4
Seattle got a game-tying homer from Doug Strange in the ninth last night and beat Texas, 5-4, in the 11th on Ken Griffey Jr.'s run-scoring single.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ABS INDUSTRIES, Willoughby, Ohio, a metal and automotive parts maker, said it had signed letters of intent to acquire Mercer Forge Corp., Mercer, Pa., and A &amp; M Machining, Wheatville, Pa., for about $16.8 million.


Goldman Reworks Rockefeller Center Bid
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company offered yesterday to return a $33 million loan payment to Rockefeller Center Properties Inc., the real estate investment trust that is poised to take control of Rockefeller Center.
The offer appeared to be an effort to sweeten Goldman's bid to buy a controlling interest in the property.
But Sam Zell, the Chicago financier who is leading an investor group competing for control of the center, called Goldman's offer an attempt to paper over a loophole in loans it made to the real estate investment trust, or REIT, last December -- loans that could weaken the investment bank's hand in the fight over Rockefeller Center.


Jordanian Restaurant Isn't Certified Kosher
To the Editor:
There seems to be a misunderstanding in your Sept. 14 Amman Journal and in the minds of the unfortunate proprietors of the kosher restaurant as well.


Holocaust Survivor Will Share $2.1 Million in Reparations
Hugo Princz's 41-year battle to win compensation from the German Government for his suffering in the Nazi death camps came officially to an end yesterday with the announcement that he would share in a $2.1 million settlement with 10 other Holocaust survivors.
"It's a big day, a big victory," he said in a telephone interview from Washington, where details of the settlement agreement, which was reached on Monday, were outlined.
"It's something I've been waiting for for 40 years."


Business Travel; Audio tapes give advice for Americans doing business overseas.
FOUR years ago Francis M. Brunetto put together an audio cassette tape titled "Made In Germany," an hourlong overview for American business executives unsure of what to do and what not to do when conducting business in Germany.
Since then Mr.
Brunetto, a former CBS News writer and advertising executive, has done similar tapes on Japan, Mexico and China through his Peregrine Media Group.
While the tapes have caught on with individual executives hoping to bridge the cultural and business divide, many corporations are also using them.
Corporate clients include Johnson &amp; Johnson, Prudential Insurance, Dun &amp; Bradstreet Information Services, Bristol-Myers Squibb and the American Management Association.


Energy Industry Has Friends in Congress
To the Editor:
"Global Warming Heats Up" (editorial, Sept. 18) points out the absurdity of House and Senate committees slashing global change research budgets at the same time that scientists are concluding that human beings are in fact changing the world's climate.


Air-Bag Ruling in Fatal Crash Could Influence Other Cases
Nineteen-year-old Rebecca Tebbetts was wearing a shoulder belt and a seat belt when her car struck a tree in Holderness, N.H., on May 15, 1991, but they did not save the woman's life.
Her mother's lawyers say an air bag might have, and the New Hampshire Supreme Court ruled yesterday that she was entitled to a trial in civil court.
What makes the case interesting, and possibly of far-reaching effect, is that Federal safety standards did not require the car to have an air bag.
The Government required air bags beginning with the 1990 cars, and Miss Tebbetts was driving a 1988 Ford Escort.


New Law Hampers Giuliani Campaign On Quality of Life
It was intended as a means of saving $1 million a year and helping unclog New York City's congested court system.
Tucked away in the state budget last June was a little-noticed provision that would strip the city's Criminal Court of jurisdiction over a host of minor violations, like urinating in public and failing to remove snow from sidewalks.
But the measure, scheduled to take effect on Oct. 1, has created a major headache for Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
By ending criminal courts' jurisdiction over some 40 offenses, it removed the enforcement tool for the Mayor's crusade against quality-of-life offenses.
The city has moved three of the offenses to the jurisdiction of administrative panels.
Unlike criminal court judges, the panels may levy fines but do not have the authority to impose jail sentences.


Arbitration Hearing Scheduled to Resume
The Claude Lemieux arbitration hearing is scheduled to resume today at 1:30 P.M, with no decision expected to be announced until later this week.
Lemieux, a Devils forward, is disputing the legality of a four-year, $5.2 million contract.
Although Lemieux and the Devils agreed to terms last spring, Lemieux contended the deal wasn't binding because the proper documents weren't signed and filed correctly.
After agreeing to terms, Lemieux won the Conn Smythe trophy as most valuable player in the Stanley Cup playoffs.
His market value could be higher now than it was before the playoffs.


Orville Redenbacher, Famous For His Popcorn, Is Dead at 88
Orville Redenbacher, the agricultural visionary who all but single-handedly revolutionized the American popcorn industry, was found dead yesterday at his home in Coronado, Calif.
He was 88.
Mr.
Redenbacher was found in a bathtub with a whirlpool in his condominium, where he drowned after a heart attack, the medical examiner's office said.


Detective Is Challenged on Statement About Simpson
Judge Lance A. Ito banished all photographers and sketch artists from his courtroom and turned off the courtroom camera as a pair of former organized crime figures now cooperating with the F.B.I. took issue with pivotal testimony from the lead detective in the O. J. Simpson case.
With the outside world cut off from the proceedings, Larry and Craig Fiato, brothers who are under the F.B.I.'s protection, testified that in two casual conversations earlier this year, Detective Philip Vannatter suggested that the police went to Mr.
Simpson's house because he was a suspect -- and not, as the detective has said under oath, to tell him that his former wife was dead and that his children needed him.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Monday about the growth of the Infinity Broadcasting Corporation included an erroneous reference to Rush Limbaugh.
Mr.
Limbaugh's program is syndicated by EFM Media Management; he is not employed by Infinity.


Cab Fleet Coalition Seeks Increase of 27% in Fares
A coalition of yellow cab fleets petitioned City Hall yesterday for an average 27 percent increase in taxi fares, the first increase in almost six years, and the group's leader said the city should require that some of the increase go to drivers.
Officials in the industry and at the city's Taxi and Limousine Commission, whose approval is needed for any increase, suggested that the success of the proposal could turn on drivers' income, which the commission says has remained almost unchanged for a decade.


Corrections
An entry in the Addenda listing in Business Day on Monday about the selection of an agency by Hiram Walker &amp; Sons to handle promotions and programs aimed at gay and lesbian consumers misstated the name of the agency.
It is Jordan Hamilton &amp; Company; Gunnar Jordan is the agency's president.


For the Ultimate Safe School, Eyes Turn to Dallas
The sprawling new brick building next to the Dallas County Probation Department has 37 surveillance cameras, six metal detectors, five full-time police officers and a security-conscious configuration based on the principles of crime prevention through environmental design.
It is not the Big House.
It is a schoolhouse: Dallas's $41 million state-of-the-art Townview Magnet Center, which has been touted as a model for high-tech school security since it opened for the new school year.


Journal; There She Is
The most successful TV ad campaign of the fall fashion season has been Calvin Klein's foray into child porn, which pushed jeans sales through the roof even as it allowed Mr.
Klein to promote himself as a misunderstood artiste in a new round of glossy magazine profiles.
The F.B.I. swooped in last week to arrest subscribers to America Online, our user-friendly Internet service, who turned out to be pedophiles.


Yankees Discover a New Ace in Wild-Card Chase
After last month's disastrous West Coast road trip, everybody knew that the Yankees would have to rely on the arms of Jack McDowell and David Cone if they were going to make a serious run at the American League wild-card playoff berth.
But Andy Pettitte?


House Panel Votes to Allow Oil Drilling in Arctic Refuge
The House Committee on Resources voted today to allow oil and gas drilling in parts of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, a pristine and complex ecosystem that provides a breeding ground for caribou.
The vote, which is expected to be echoed by a Senate committee, would put the oil-drilling provision into an omnibus budget bill.
Under Congressional rules, such a tactic would limit further debate on a hotly contested proposal and complicate the Clinton Administration's efforts to forestall the move.


Perot Goes to Capitol Hill


The Heir to McNair?
He is the prototypical quarterback, an 18-year-old who can throw a football 85 yards and run a 4.6 in the 40.
For the University of Central Florida, a distant fourth to the state's three national powers, he is a big-time player who fuels the school's big-time aspirations.
Just two games into his college football career for Division I-AA Central Florida, Daunte Culpepper has people talking as if he could be the second coming -- and more -- of Steve McNair, the Alcorn State quarterback who was the third pick over all in the National Football League draft last spring.


Russian Companies Plan Entry Into U.S. Markets
The Russians aren't here yet, but there is little doubt that they're coming.
As many as a dozen Russian companies could list their American depository receipts by the end of the year, thanks to a Securities and Exchange Commission decision last week to take applications from corporations there.


Brown's Corner Man Truly Knows the Ropes
The Giants hired Steve DeBerg during the off season to be their quarterbacks coach.
He was charged with teaching Dave Brown.
With the team reeling and Brown, the trigger man of a stalled offense caught in a riptide, DeBerg is about to start earning his money.
Questions persist about Brown's confidence, his ability to run the offense (one touchdown) and whether he could lose his starting job to Tommy Maddox.


AT&amp;T Starts On-Line Service Aimed at Small Businesses
AT&amp;T announced a new division yesterday to develop on-line services aimed at specific groups of customers.
The first service, which will be called the AT&amp;T Business Network and is to begin this fall, is intended to appeal to small or home-based businesses.
At least four additional services and perhaps as many as 10 will be announced over the next year, said John C. Petrillo, president of the company's business communications services division.
The announcement rounds out AT&amp;T's overall plan to use the rapidly expanding Internet.
For the last year the company endured heavy criticism from industry analysts for not articulating a strategy while competitors like MCI forged ahead.


Choosing Trinkets for a Papal Visit; No Soap or Visors, but Phone Cards Have Church's Blessing
Viewed through the eyes of a merchandiser, no one on earth has the power to draw more faithful fans than Pope John Paul II.
"A bona fide superstar," said Robert Villani, the official souvenir seller for the Pope's visit next month to New York City and New Jersey.
"He is bigger than the Rolling Stones and the Grateful Dead combined."


Drought Found New York City Well Prepared
To the Editor:
New York City residents who read "Belated Response to the Drought" (editorial, Sept. 14) might be misled.
While New York and New Jersey are both more than 20 percent below normal capacity levels, this comparison creates the erroneous impression that the city's drought condition is on a par with those of other water supplies in the metropolitan area.


Times Co. to Invest in Arts Cable Network
The New York Times Company said yesterday that it would acquire a minority stake in Ovation -- the Arts Network, a new cable television network devoted to the visual and performing arts.
In addition, the Times Company will develop programming for the network.
The announcement was made by J. Carter Brown, the chairman of Ovation, and Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, the chairman and chief executive of the Times Company.


Age of Aristide: Haiti Calmed After a Year
President Jean-Bertrand Aristide has many chauffeurs at his disposal, but during the elections on Sunday he chose to drive himself to the polls.
He used his car, a heavily bulletproofed blue Chevrolet sedan provided by the United States, to teach a civics lesson to Haitian voters.
"Just as I held the wheel of my car to take me here, these elections are the wheel of the machine of democracy that will take Haitians where they want to go," he said in the Creole tongue of Haiti's poorest people.
His statement was quickly broadcast across the country by radio.


Memorial Service Planned For Niuta Slesin Titus
A memorial service for the philanthropist Niuta Slesin Titus is to be held tomorrow at 10:30 A.M. at the Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street.
Speakers at the service, which is open to the public, are to include Agnes Gund, president of the Museum of Modern Art; Mrs.
Titus's daughter, Suzanne Slesin Steinberg, an assistant editor in the Home Section of The New York Times; her son, Louis Slesin; her stepdaughter Shifra Ross, and Rabbi Arthur Schneier, senior rabbi of the Park East Synagogue.


G.O.P. Seeks Cuts to Repair Care Program
House Republicans today proposed a transformation of Medicaid, the Federal health program for poor people, that would control costs, eliminate most Federal standards and requirements and give states vast new power to decide who got which health benefits.
The proposal would give each state a fixed amount of Federal money and would repeal the 30-year-old law under which certain categories of people are automatically entitled to health care and health insurance.
This guarantee has helped protect poor people in recessions, but has contributed to a quadrupling of Medicaid costs in the last decade.


In Mid-Battle, Chess Players Declare Peace
Right in the middle of a complex, gripping battle, Game 6 of the world chess championship abruptly ended.
Gary Kasparov held out his hand, offering a draw, and Viswanathan Anand shook it in acceptance.
No one understood, apparently not even the players.


F.B.I. Leader At Idaho Siege Says Inquiry Was Tainted
Four F.B.I. agents invoked their Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination today, refusing to testify before a Senate panel about a deadly 1992 standoff in Idaho after the field commander of the operation testified that the bureau's investigation of the incident amounted to a cover-up.
The commander, Special Agent Eugene F. Glenn, testified that he had been made a scapegoat for the events at Ruby Ridge, Idaho, where the Federal Bureau of Investigation's special Hostage Rescue Team had been dispatched to arrest Randy Weaver, a white separatist wanted on a weapons charge.


Eating Well
A SIGN of how far chefs have come in creating healthful dishes: For the third annual Evian Healthy Menu Awards, three of the six final recipes were for meat, one of the meats being rabbit, the other two being fowl.
In the past, the contest was overwhelmed by fish.
Last year, four of the final recipes were for salmon.
"It got repetitive," said Sara Moulton, the executive chef at Gourmet magazine, which sponsors the awards with Evian.
But this year, she found the recipes exciting.


Study Of TV's Violence Points To Films
Television networks are showing "positive signs" of reducing violence in their own prime-time series and in made-for-television movies, but serious problems persist in the theatrical movies they broadcast, in some children's shows and in promotional spots, according to a study of the 1994-95 television season released yesterday.
The study, by the Center for Communication Policy at the University of California at Los Angeles, was commissioned by the four major broadcast networks in June 1994 in response to public pressure, the threat of legislative restrictions and the networks' own complaint that no study had sought to analyze television violence in context and from a neutral perspective.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Housing Starts Rise 0.6% As Rates Attract Buyers  Housing starts rose a modest six-tenths of 1 percent in August, bringing the annual rate of new construction to 1.398 million new homes -- the highest annual rate this year as low mortgage rates attracted buyers.
"These numbers indicate a continuing recovery in housing and probably in the economy as a whole during the second half," one economist said.
New-home building has been rising since April, and the August rate was the highest since December.  [ Page D2. ] U S West Weighs In on Turner Deal  U S West, which owns 25.5 percent of Time Warner's cable systems and Warner Brothers studio, has told Time Warner that no deal for Turner Broadcasting can be concluded without its approval.
Some executives suggested that U S West wanted a controlling stake in the cable division.
Time Warner plans to announce a Turner deal later this week, several executives said.  [ D5. ] Rockefeller Center Bid Sweetened  Goldman, Sachs offered to return a $33 million loan payment to Rockefeller Center Properties, apparently to sweeten its bid to buy a controlling interest in the center.  [ D2. ] Novell Said to Plan Unit Sale  Novell Inc. plans to announce today that it will sell its Unixware division to the Santa Cruz Operation, executives said.
Hewlett-Packard, which licenses Unix software from Novell, will also be involved, they added.  [ C8. ] House Plan Would Open Pensions  House Republicans moved to let companies take $40 billion out of pension plans for other uses.
Republicans estimated the move would bring in $10.5 billion in new tax revenue.  [ D3. ] Caterpillar's Warning Trips Stock  Caterpillar's shares plunged $6.50, to $58.875, in heavy trading after the company's warning Monday evening that it had cut production and that third-quarter earnings would be down from a year ago.
But sales are continuing to set records, and the earnings decline may be largely a result of an accounting hiccup.
The four-note 'I Love New York' musical refrain is back.
Advertising.  [ D5. ] Court Rejects McGraw-Hill Appeal  A Federal appeals court dismissed an appeal by McGraw-Hill, parent of Business Week, saying a court order restraining it from publishing information contained in sealed court records was a temporary restraining order over which the appeals court had no jurisdiction.  [ A18. ]


Vietnamese Cuisine, All Around Town
VIETNAMESE cuisine is whetting appetites in New York, and not just in Asian enclaves.
In the last couple of years, Vietnamese restaurants have opened in midtown, the Upper East and Upper West Sides, SoHo, Brooklyn Heights and Park Slope.
At least six new establishments have crowds of eager customers willing to stand in line for tables.
More places are on the way.


3 Men Held In Slaying Of Immigrant
Three men were arrested yesterday in the kidnapping, torture and slaying early this month of a Chinese immigrant in Brooklyn after New York City police detectives tracked the suspects across the country to a cheap motel room near San Jose, Calif., the police said.
Following a trail that led them from Borough Park, where the immigrant, a Chinese woman, was slain, to Monterey Park, Calif., to Milpitas, a town just north of San Jose, the detectives found the men early yesterday morning watching television in a Super 8 motel, and the local police arrested them.


Rape Case in Japan Turns Harsh Light on U.S. Military
The reported rape this month of a Japanese elementary school girl by three American servicemen in Okinawa has provoked an uproar in Japan.
It has brought calls both to revise rules that critics say make it easy for American soldiers to get away with crimes and to remove American military bases.
Seeking to quell the outcry, Ambassador Walter F. Mondale and Lieut.
General Richard B. Myers, the commander of United States military forces in Japan, apologized to the Okinawa Governor, Masahide Ota, at a meeting today in the American Embassy here.


Book Notes
The Scoop
With only a proposal in hand, publishers were crawling all over each other last week, hoping to snatch up what is expected to be an unusually scrappy behind-the-scenes political book by Ed Rollins, the outspoken Republican campaign consultant.
Seven publishing houses, including Simon &amp; Schuster, St.
Martin's Press and Avon Books, entered the auction on Thursday to bid for "Bare Knuckles and Back Rooms." And by the end of the day, Broadway Books, a new division of Bantam Doubleday Dell, had agreed to pay more than $1 million for the book, which will be published in the fall of 1996.


New York Hears Hint Of Apology By Gingrich
He's not that sorry.
Two days after he offered private apologies for calling New York "a culture of waste," House Speaker Newt Gingrich traveled to the city's heart yesterday and was asked at every turn if he was indeed sorry.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
To be filed under "O," as in Obnoxious New Yorker.


Bosnia Vows Not to Attack Serb Town
Leaders of the Bosnian and Croatian Governments pledged today that they would not press their new military advantage by attacking the Bosnian Serb stronghold of Banja Luka, the chief American envoy in the Balkans said today.
That commitment, provided both Governments honor it, could encourage peace efforts in Bosnia, which seem to have gained momentum in recent weeks.
But a rift between the Bosnian and Croatian allies cast a cloud over the talks here.


New Police Horses Named


Case of the Carnegie Concrete, Chapter II
Carnegie Hall's discovery last month of a concrete slab under its stage has sent architects, engineers and contractors back to their records in the hope of discovering why the concrete was put there and who knew about it.
And now there is a new twist: John L. Tishman, the chairman of Tishman Realty and Construction, the contractor for the 1986 renovation during which the concrete may have been poured, met yesterday with Carnegie Hall officials and asserted that there was already a layer of concrete under the stage when it was taken apart in 1986.
Mr.
Tishman is also a member of the hall's board of trustees.


Former Detective Charged In Medicaid Fraud Scheme
A retired New York City police detective and his East Rockaway ambulance company were charged today in a scheme to bilk Medicaid by billing for 9,000 fake ambulance rides, some of them for patients who were dead and buried.
William Eisenhauer, 51, of Baldwin, who retired from the New York City police force in 1982 on a three-quarter disability pension, was arraigned with two associates today in Nassau County Court on charges of grand larceny, conspiracy and 10 counts of filing false documents.


Water Tensions, North vs. South
Daily water demand has dropped about 15 percent since mandatory water restrictions were imposed in seven northeastern New Jersey counties, environmental officials said yesterday.
Since the drought emergency was declared last Wednesday, water consumption has dropped from 321 gallons a day to 274 million gallons a day.
Concerns about the drought led two Democratic Assembly members from South Jersey to introduce a bill yesterday to prevent Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman from diverting ground or surface water from the Pinelands to North Jersey.


The Stampede to Harsh Welfare
Overwhelming bipartisan support for historic reform is ordinarily cause for celebration.
But not in the case of the welfare "reform" approved by the Senate yesterday.
With 35 Democrats joining 52 Republicans, the Senate passed an extreme welfare bill that will inevitably harm poor children.
The bipartisan vote reflects the G.O.P.'s ideological blinders and the Democrats' weakness.
The Democrats, including the President, preferred to swallow a bill they know is wrong rather than lose on principle.
Last year, before the Republicans took control, the President proposed a serious reform designed to put welfare enrollees to work within two years.
But he, unlike the Republicans who made similar pledges, acknowledged the cost -- about $9 billion over five years for training, administration, child care and cash assistance.
In contrast, the Republican bill just approved by the Senate pretends that the states can supervise a massive flight from welfare to work -- for a group that is uneducated, unskilled and saddled with miserable employment records -- for $8 billion less than the Government now spends on the welfare programs.


G.O.P. Moves to Ease Pension-Plan Rule
House Republicans moved today to let companies take an estimated total of $40 billion out of pension plans to use for other purposes, an idea that Republican tax writers said would generate $10.5 billion in tax revenue, but that Democrats warned could lead to corporate raids on workers' pensions.
The proposal would do away with penalties Congress imposed in 1990 on what it called excess pension withdrawals that had been used to help finance a wave of takeovers and leveraged buyouts.
Under current law, companies can withdraw excess money from pension plans without penalty only if it is used to pay for health benefits for retirees.


Mason and Knicks Edging Closer to Deal
With no breakdown in negotiations and both parties expected to meet again today, the chances of Anthony Mason remaining a Knick are looking very good.
Knicks General Manager Ernie Grunfeld and Don Cronson, the agent for Mason, spoke on the telephone yesterday after their face-to-face negotiating session on Monday that lasted four and a half hours.


Publication of Unabomber's Tract Draws Mixed Response
The publishers of The New York Times and The Washington Post drew sharp criticism from some quarters yesterday for their unusual joint decision to print the manifesto of the serial killer known as the Unabomber.
Some critics said the publications had abdicated journalistic responsibility by giving in to a terrorist and had subjected news organizations to the danger of future demands by other people who want to get a message to the public.
But many journalists and terrorism experts were divided on whether the papers could morally refuse to do whatever they felt they had to do to try to put an end to the Unabomber's 17-year series of 16 bombing attacks, which killed 3 people and injured 23 others.


CHRONICLE
BESS MYERSON, who, to her dismay, will always be known as "a former Miss America," did not join 41 other title holders in Atlantic City last weekend for the 75th anniversary celebration of the Miss America pageant.
"People asked me, 'Are you going to the pageant?' " said Ms.
Myerson, who won the title in 1945.
"And I said, 'Are you kidding?' It's totally irrelevant."


Hijacked Iranians Wind Up in Israel


International Briefs; German-Russian Debt
Germany has agreed to reschedule 4.8 billion marks ($3.2 billion) in former Soviet Union debt.
The German Finance Ministry emphasized Russia's improved creditworthiness and that the German loan accord would allow it to service its new debt better.
Germany is Russia's largest creditor.
In 1993 it rescheduled 8.2 billion marks in Government-backed loans and last year rescheduled a further 4.2 billion marks. (Bloomberg Business News)


International Briefs; BTR Buys Two Units
The British-based conglomerate BTR said yesterday that it had bought the industrial battery business of Varta A.G. of Germany for about $:56 million ($86 million).
It said the new addition would roughly double sales from its European industrial batteries division.
It also announced the acquisition of a Brazilian car components maker, OSA, for $90 million.
BTR said OSA had sales of $147 million in 1994. (Reuters)


Anti-Crime Funds
A battle is looming in the Senate over cuts in the President's 1994 anti-crime legislation and a Republican plan to eliminate the money promised by Mr.
Clinton to help communities put 100,000 new police officers on the streets.
So far, 25,000 officers have been hired under the bill, which passed last year but is on the chopping block now that Republicans are in control of Congress.


THEATER
Two Characters Search For a Relationship  'Rhoda and the Floating Glue Man' Here, 145 Avenue of the Americas, near Spring Street, SoHo


SENATE APPROVES WELFARE PLAN THAT WOULD END AID GUARANTEE
On an overwhelmingly bipartisan vote, the Senate today approved a bill that would fundamentally restructure Federal antipoverty policy and end the Government's longstanding guarantee of assistance to families that need it.
The vote, which the bill's supporters called a recognition that the current welfare system had utterly failed, was 87 to 12, with only 11 Democrats and 1 Republican in opposition.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
4.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.75
5.76
4.70
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.18
5.25
4.60
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.20
5.22
5.07
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.13
6.17
7.51
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.48
6.53
7.77
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.46
7.44
8.59
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.02
6.03
6.52
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Market Place; Caterpillar disappoints, and everyone nearby is punished.
CATERPILLAR INC.'S brief warning Monday evening that it had cut production and that third-quarter earnings would be down from a year ago could be a harbinger of a coming recession.
On the other hand, sales are continuing to set records and the earnings decline may be largely a result of an accounting hiccup based on swings in the tax rates paid by the giant manufacturer of heavy equipment.
With scant guidance from Caterpillar, which is based in Peoria, Ill., Wall Street pondered a variety of possible explanations for the earnings disappointment yesterday while handing out the usual punishment for unwelcomed mysteries.
Caterpillar's shares plunged more than $6 in heavy early trading on the Big Board and finished with a loss of $6.50 at $58.875.


F.B.I. Hitting Snag in Talks About Bias
After nine months, negotiations have bogged down between the Federal Bureau of Investigation and a group of female agents who say the bureau has given them guns and badges but not the status or opportunities accorded men, lawyers for the women said today.
The bureau has agreed only to peripheral concessions over minor issues, lawyers for the women say, like allowing women who are in agent training to wear cycling shorts under the revealing men's gym shorts customarily worn during physical training.


INSIDE
Bosnians and Croats Promise to Use Restraint
Bosnian and Croatian leaders pledged not to press their new military advantage by attacking the Bosnian Serb stronghold of Banja Luka.
If honored, this promise could encourage peace efforts, which have gained momentum of late.
Page A14.
Outrage in Japan
The reported rape of an elementary school girl by three American servicemen in Okinawa has provoked an uproar.
Page A3.
Changes for Nasdaq Market
The management structure of the Nasdaq stock market will be overhauled, increasing the influence of investors and companies.
Page D1.
F.B.I.
Bias Talks Stall
Negotiations have bogged down between the F.B.I. and a group of female agents who say they have suffered discrimination.
Page A18.  3 Held in Kidnap-Slaying
After a cross-country search, three suspects were arrested in the abduction and murder of a Chinese immigrant in Brooklyn.
Page B1.


Libraries Shouldn't Sell Jewels of the Collection
To the Editor:
We are angered that a host of branches of the New York Public Library are selling off standard, classic works at a pittance.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Sept 15
Sept 8
Sept 16
1995
1995
1994
Gasoline production, daily
7.8
7.6
7.4
Distillate production, daily
3.3
3.3
3.3
Gasoline stocks
194.7
195.9
211.1
Distillate stocks
133.5
129.0
142.5
Crude imports, daily
8.0
8.7
8.4
Product imports, daily
1.4
1.6
1.7
Crude stocks
307.5
308.8
321.4
Crude production, daily
6.5
6.5
6.5
Refinery utilization (%)
95.7
96.9
93.3
Source: American Petroleum Institute


An American In Moscow
Growing up on Long Island, the grandson of Russian immigrants, Boris Jordan was fascinated by his family's native land and dreamed of returning to it, perhaps as an American diplomat.
He never imagined becoming one of Russia's most powerful financiers and one of the most influential players in its economic transformation.
Sent to Moscow three and a half years ago by the CS First Boston Corporation, Mr.
Jordan and a small group of colleagues built the securities firm into the dominant investment bank in Russia and played a big role in the development of the country's financial markets.


Mets' Rookie Outfield Makes Major Strides
For the first time in who knows when, the Mets started an all-rookie outfield -- Damon Buford in left, Carl Everett in center and Alex Ochoa.
Such a young group playing against a talented team like the National League East champion Braves might be unnerved.
Yet the combination proved magical, at least for one night, as the trio combined for five hits and scored seven runs to spark the Mets to an easy 10-3 victory to end the Braves' five-game winning streak.


Time Out for a Little Fun-Raising


Why Colin Powell Must Run as an Independent
To the Editor:
Forty-three years ago, my grandfather helped encourage Dwight D. Eisenhower to run for the Presidency on the Republican ticket.


Cab Fares May Rise
A coalition of yellow cab fleets petitioned City Hall yesterday for an average 27 percent increase in taxi fares, the first rise in almost six years.
Officials in the industry and at the city's Taxi and Limousine Commission, whose approval is needed for any increase, suggested that the success of the proposal could turn on drivers' income, which the commission says has remained almost unchanged for a decade.
Article, page B4.


Real Estate; The World Trade Center increases business from medium-sized companies, not from mega-deals.
THE SCOR U.S.
Corporation, the American subsidiary of the French reinsurance company SCOR S.A., has leased 60,000 square feet of office space at 2 World Trade Center.
The lease, for the 23d and part of the 24th floor, has a total value of more than $30 million, said Charles J. Maikish, the trade center's director.


Sports of The Times; Both Sides Created This Void
IN mid-September, Yankee Stadium resembles a summer resort, deserted after Labor Day.
The weather is hauntingly soft, the shadows are romantic but nostalgic, the people have gone back to their real lives.
The season is over.
There is a baseball race, but the great majority of New Yorkers do not care.
This can only be seen as the legacy of the ghastly labor stoppage of 1994, when the wonderful owners and the wonderful players managed to kill not one season but two.


Dorothy Kidder, 78; Helped the Homeless
Dorothy Robinson Kidder, a philanthropist who founded a program to feed the homeless while continuing her family tradition of support for the arts, died of cancer on Monday at her home in Washington, her family said.
She was 78.
Mrs.
Kidder was a great-granddaughter of Eben D. Jordan, the founder of the Jordan Marsh department store company and The Boston Globe.


Corrections
The Market Place column in Business Day yesterday, about efforts by Mexico to restore investors' confidence, misstated the Standard &amp; Poor's rating for Mexican foreign-exchange debt.
It is BB with a "negative outlook"; DD, is not a rating used by S.&amp; P.


Corrections
A brief article by The Associated Press in Business Day yesterday, about an agreement reached with the Federal Trade Commission to complete the merger of Hoechst A.G. and Marion Merrill Dow Inc., misstated provisions covering the heart drug Cardizem CD.
The combined company, Hoechst Marion Roussel Inc., must help the Biovail Corporation complete research on a drug that wil compete with Cardizem CD; it will not sell off its Cardizem line.


International Briefs; North West Water Buys Norweb Shares
North West Water P.L.C., which is waging a hostile takeover battle for its fellow British utility Norweb P.L.C., bought 15.5 million Norweb shares yesterday, or nearly 10 percent of its stock.
Norweb, a regional electricity distribution company based in Manchester, England, had rejected as inadequate a takeover offer by North West Water of $:1.58 billion, or $2.46 billion.


Los Angeles Police Chief Sues City for Libel
Three years after being brought in to straighten out the troubled Los Angeles Police Department, Chief Willie L. Williams has himself become embroiled in a broadening ethics inquiry.
And now, in a move that has baffled even some of his staunchest supporters, he has filed a $10 million claim against the city and Police Commission, accusing them of libel, defamation and invasion of privacy.
The lawsuit follows allegations published last week, citing confidential Police Commission records, that Mr.
Williams received more than $1,500 worth of free accommodations at a hotel and casino in Las Vegas, Nev.
The Chief has repeatedly denied that he ever accepted any free lodging, denials that were also made to department investigators, according to Police Commission records.


Personal Health; Just how perilous can 25 extra pounds be?
A REPORT last week linking moderate overweight and modest weight gain to an increased risk of death in midlife threw millions of American women into a tizzy.
Even those who have accepted their ample bodies or middle-age spread and who scoff at fashion-model thinness were alarmed to learn that those 25 pounds they put on since high school or the extra weight they had carried all their lives might kill them.
While there is no debate about the risks to health and life associated with frank obesity, defined as weighing at least 30 percent more than is desirable for one's height and frame, moderately overweight people have long assumed that their main concern was a cosmetic one.
Now, it seems, they should be more worried about their health and life expectancy than about how they look.


Sierra Out of Picture Lineup
Ruben Sierra, who complained last week about his lack of playing time, arrived late and missed yesterday's team photo with the Yankees.
The photo was scheduled for 4:15 P.M. at Yankee Stadium, but was taken 10 to 15 minutes later.
Sierra said he did not know about the shoot.
When asked whether his absence was a statement of some sort, the outfielder-designated hitter replied: "No, it's not that. It's just that I didn't know."


Long-Term Treasuries Rise Despite Gains in Housing
Prices of Treasury securities gained for the first time in three sessions yesterday, despite an increase in housing starts.
Talk of a Japanese economic-stimulus package helped the dollar overnight and, in turn, lifted bonds at the opening.
Investor demand for corporate and global issues also worked favorably for bonds.
Also helping the market was the expectation among some participants of more foreign buyers.


Panel Cuts Tax Credit Plan
The House Ways and Means Committee tonight handily turned back efforts by the Democratic minority to prevent the erosion of tax breaks for low-income families.
In a party-line vote, Republicans chose to confine the benefits of the earned-income tax credit to families with children and to reduce the amount of income a family can make and remain eligible for the credit, which is collected by about 15 million American families.


Street Smoking Ban Is Planned
Public high school students opposed to a proposed ordinance that would impose civil penalties on minors caught smoking within 1,000 feet of primary or secondary schools have been given three weeks to come up with an alternative means of discouraging young people from lighting up between classes.
Smoking on school grounds is already illegal in Princeton, but the borough is believed to be the first community in New Jersey to try to ban smoking on public streets.


Cowboys' Jones Is Yielding No Ground
In the face of a Federal lawsuit and a National Football League hearing today into his rogue deal making, Jerry Jones, the owner of the Dallas Cowboys, remained defiant, contending that he had violated no rule, abrogated no bylaw and is not, if left unchecked, responsible for the death of the N.F.L. as we know it.
Although Jones's lone-wolf deals with Nike, Pepsi and Dr Pepper rocked and roiled the league into suing him Monday for $300 million in damages, he provided the N.F.L. with a victory today: he announced no new deals.


Automation Drives a Surge In Currency Trade Volume
Not only does money make the world go round, it is moving faster, major central banks reported yesterday.
The banks reported that currency trading had risen sharply in the last three years, as high-speed electronic trading made more transactions possible.
In the last three years, a period of turmoil in the global currency market, daily turnover is estimated to have grown to the point that it now exceeds $1 trillion, or the value of the gross domestic product of Britain.
Three years ago, daily turnover was an estimated $880 billion.


A Tough Bill To Say No To
In a television interview last weekend, Leon E. Panetta, the White House chief of staff, suggested that President Clinton would veto the Senate's welfare bill "if in the conference this bill moves in any way towards the original House position."
Don't bet on it.


Joanne Cummings, Art Patron, Collector and Philanthropist, 66
Joanne Toor Cummings, a philanthropist and patron of the arts, died yesterday at her Manhattan apartment.
She was 66.
The cause was cancer, according to the family.


Bonds of Love and Need Amid War and Captivity
TREE OF HEAVEN
By R. C. Binstock
212 pages. Soho Press. $22.
The year is 1938 or thereabouts in China.
Japanese soldiers have engaged in the bestial orgy that later came to be called the rape of Nanking.
A Japanese captain named Kuroda, who was a professor of botany back home before the war, is put in charge of a small garrison in the province of Anhui, just north of the Yangtze River.
A rare good man in the Emperor's army of conquest, Kuroda one day rescues a Chinese woman from rape and murder by a roving band of Japanese soldiers, and takes her into his quarters to be his servant.
That is the situation in "Tree of Heaven," R. C. Binstock's stark and intelligent first novel, set in a wartime landscape of terror and duress.
It is easy enough to guess what this situation will produce: Kuroda and the Chinese woman, whose name is Li, enter into a relationship of love and need, the one blending so inextricably into the other that it is difficult to tell where one lets off and the other begins.
But what is impressive about Mr.
Binstock's story is the depth and complexity of his psychological exploration, the ways in which love and power, guilt and captivity, safety and risk echo together in the grim chamber of war.


Munroe Pofcher, 69, Publishing Adviser
Munroe F. Pofcher, an adviser to American and European publishing companies on mergers and acquisitions, died on Monday at Greenwich Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 69.
Mr.
Pofcher, who lived in Greenwich, died of a heart attack, said Kit van Tulleken, managing director of the Pofcher Company.


Investors to Get Bigger Role in Running Nasdaq Market
The National Association of Securities Dealers said today that it would radically overhaul its management structure and that of the Nasdaq stock market, giving investors and companies traded on Nasdaq much greater influence on an operation now largely dominated by Wall Street firms.
"This is a sea change," said Warren B. Rudman, the former Republican Senator from New Hampshire who headed the committee that recommended the changes.
"We are totally restructuring the governance, which is, I think, the fundamental problem."


IN THE STUDIO WITH: Tony Brown; Empowerment On the Air
FORTY-ONE stories above midtown Manhattan, bathed in a radio studio's low-lighted, high-tech glow, an elegantly dressed man with a strong chin and weak eyes bellies up to a microphone.
After a moment of concentration, he clears his throat, watches for a cue from his engineer and hurls himself like a cliff diver into the foamy churn of public opinion below.
"This is Tony Brown on W-L-I-B," he proclaims, his practiced, trademark baritone becoming charged with 10,000 watts and reverberating from the studio monitors overhead.
He teases out the day's topic.
His switchboard flickers with callers eager to wade in.
And aided by a legal pad, a few newspaper clippings and a head bubbling with hard-boiled ideas, Mr.
Brown goes to work.


Kerkorian's Point Man Has Chrysler Guessing
Jerome B. York, the new point man in Kirk Kerkorian's effort to coax the Chrysler Corporation's shares higher, met with three Chrysler executives for two hours today.
But the meeting, somewhere in Westchester County outside New York, amounted to little more than a ritual, polite dance performed against a backdrop of rising tension between the two skirmishing sides.
"We didn't tell Tracinda anything we didn't tell any of our other large investors," said Arthur C. Liebler, Chrysler's vice president for marketing and communications, referring to Mr.
Kerkorian's investment company.
"We listened to whatever Mr. York and Tracinda had to say, and didn't hear anything new there either."


In Washington, A Season Begins With a New 'Macbeth'
The nation's capital doesn't have a theatrical season that compares to New York's in terms of numbers.
Yet this year it started earlier, and in the case of the Shakespeare Theater's new staging of "Macbeth" with Stacy Keach, it's as ambitious and maybe as giddy.
But "Macbeth" is not alone.
Terrence McNally's new play, the Broadway-bound "Master Class" starring Zoe Caldwell, is at the Eisenhower Theater at the Kennedy Center, and Carol Channing's revival of "Hello, Dolly!," also headed for New York, is at the Kennedy Center Opera House.


THEATER
Men Making a Living, And Not Always Enjoying It
'Working Class'  Mint Theater Company


In Stores, Big Is Beautiful
AS she flipped through a rack of skirts at Saks Fifth Avenue the other day, Jozie Emmerich reflected on how much life has improved for the size 20 woman.
"The selection is 10 times what it was 10 years ago," said Ms.
Emmerich, a television producer, as she surveyed the offerings at Salon Z, the store's department for women who wear sizes 16 and up.
"And it just gets better and better every year."


G.O.P. Finds Commerce Dept. Is Hard to Uproot
Just a few months ago the Commerce Department was in danger of becoming road kill along Pennsylvania Avenue in the Republican drive to dismantle, consolidate and privatize a bloated Washington bureaucracy.
The Senate majority leader and other Republican Presidential aspirants declared that Commerce was an example of everything wrong with Washington: a bottomless barrel of pork for cities seeking economic development money; a shameless source of corporate welfare for companies looking for Federal money to pursue risky technologies, and a redundant morass of 100 separate trade programs.


Novell Is Said To Be Selling Unix Division
Novell Inc. plans to announce Wednesday that it will sell its Unixware division to the Santa Cruz Operation Inc., as part of its strategy to concentrate on its core business in networking software, executives close to Novell said.
The Hewlett-Packard Company, which licenses Unix software from Novell, will also participate in the announcement at Unix Expo, a trade show in New York, the executives said, but it was unclear what role Hewlett would play.
Hewlett-Packard is a leading seller of the Unix operating system in the work station market, while Santa Cruz competes with Novell by selling a version of Unix for personal computers that use the Intel Corporation's microprocessors.


Brothers Who Embrace Latin and Jazz Styles
If brilliance and esthetics were simply the product of a place, then plenty of New York bands would sound like Jerry Gonzalez and the Fort Apache Band.
And they'd be good, too.
When the group takes the stage tonight at the Iridium, where it will be through Sunday, it will bring together jazz and Afro-Cuban music with an understanding rarely equaled in either world.
While New York provides the atmosphere to make this possible, the music is the product of a disciplined bilingual inquisitiveness -- and plenty of hard work.
"What we do wouldn't exist outside of the city," Mr.
Gonzalez, who plays congas and the trumpet, said in a recent telephone interview.
"This is New York music. We play music influenced by everything we've experienced here. We play Mongo Santamaria, John Coltrane and James Brown all at the same time. That's what New York facilitated for us. We had a chance to see Trane and Machito."


Furniture Ideas That Are Clearly In the Ball Park
SHUSAKU MORI is a perfectionist carpenter who builds Shaker-style cabinetry, paneled libraries and deluxe kitchens for clients largely on Park Avenue.
He is also obsessed with baseball.
At night, in his wood shop near the Brooklyn Bridge, Mr.
Mori, who grew up in Hokkaido, Japan, and moved to New York in 1977, builds meticulously crafted furniture inspired by his passion.


MCI to Spend $1 Billion for Data Company
The MCI Communications Corporation announced an agreement yesterday to buy SHL Systemhouse, a major data services provider, in a $1 billion deal that marries telephone and computer services.
The announcement came at virtually the same moment that MCI's major rival, AT&amp;T, was announcing the breakup of its own long-distance and computer businesses.
MCI officials said that the new combination of businesses would meet their customers' demands for seamless telephone and computer service from a single company.
MCI, the nation's second-largest long-distance company, had been struggling to gain expertise in computer services.
SHL specializes in setting up and managing computer networks for businesses and in linking their customers' computer and telephone networks.


Penalties Are Reduced for Tarango
JEFF TARANGO, suspended for three weeks and fined $20,000 for accusing a Wimbledon official of favoritism, had both penalties reduced yesterday after an appeal to the ATP Tour.
His suspension was reduced to two weeks and will begin Monday.
The ATP head, MARK MILES, also said the tour has upheld the fine but will hold it in abeyance and rescind it in six months if Tarango's conduct is "professional and he refrains from being involved in any further incidents during that time."


Rockefellers Tried in Good Faith to Save Rockefeller Center
To the Editor:
Steven R. Weisman's "Mr. Rockefeller Regrets" (Editorial Notebook, Sept. 14) is distressing to me and my family, for its tone and blatant inaccuracies.
As the family member most closely connected to the recent activity surrounding Rockefeller Center, I would like to correct Mr.
Weisman's more serious errors.


WELFARE IN TRANSITION States Are Already Providing a Glimpse at Welfare's Future; Alabama: One Motivator: The Catfish Plant
In Alabama, where the current maximum A.F.D.C. benefit for a family of three is $164 a month -- the second-lowest in the nation, after Mississippi's -- "most jobs are going to result in an increased living standard for welfare recipients," said Claire Ealy, director of the state's job-training program.
And so, even though a fundamental welfare overhaul package failed to come to a vote in the recent legislative session in Montgomery, the state has already embarked on a program that it says amounts to the same thing.
The basic point is to push as many welfare recipients as possible into jobs.


Hybrid Design For a Coffeepot
SOME of the most interesting, lively new designs are hybrids.
For example, an English designer, Nik Munro, who is 32, married French and Turkish styles in his new polished-pewter coffeepot, whose shape he likened to "a fat old British bicycle pump." It is a modern plunger-style pot with a traditional Turkish-style teak handle on the side for pouring brew with dramatic flair.
It costs $180, at Felissimo, (212) 247-5656.


Right-to-Die Safeguards
To the Editor:
Re "Depressed? Don't Go See Dr. Kevorkian" (Op-Ed, Sept. 16): Wesley J. Smith hoists high the anti-euthanasia folks' favorite straw man.


WELFARE IN TRANSITION:  States Are Already Providing a Glimpse at Welfare's Future; Texas: A Big Overhaul All Set to Go
Last spring the Texas Legislature approved a major welfare revision that Gov.
George W. Bush and other state leaders said was intended to increase the "personal responsibility" of welfare recipients and move them toward the workplace.
None of the provisions have actually been made effective, in large part because the state is still awaiting waivers of at least 27 different provisions of Federal welfare requirements.
But most of the waivers are expected soon, and in any case will be moot if the welfare legislation moving ahead in Congress becomes law.


Court Hearing on Hindu Festival
The East Indian Hindu fall festival of Idnai Navratri, or Nine Nights, had its day in court yesterday.
At issue is whether Edison Township can impose special regulations on the celebration, which attracts thousands of Indians over nine weekends of Hindu worship, music and feasting.
The festival, where the fare is vegetarian and no alcohol is served, is to begin this weekend under a tent in the Raritan Arsenal industrial park.
LAWRENCE VAN GELDER


A Bad Morning at Terminal C
It was a tense morning yesterday at Terminal C at Newark International Airport.
First a man from Hawaii tried to kill himself by jumping off a roadway, the authorities said.
Later the bomb squad was called in to inspect unattended bags spotted in the terminal; they turned out to belong to the man who jumped, critically injuring himself.


More Children's Shows, Westinghouse Pledges
The Westinghouse Electric Corporation announced yesterday that if it succeeds in purchasing the CBS television network as planned, CBS will increase the amount of children's educational programming on its schedule to a minimum of three hours a week, all to be shown after 7 A.M.
The Federal Communications Commission chairman, Reed E. Hundt, has proposed a rule imposing the same minimum, but the idea is opposed by the major networks and other F.C.C. commissioners.
Immediately after the announcement, a coalition of public-interest groups that had filed a petition with the F.C.C. to block approval of Westinghouse's acquisition of CBS withdrew that petition.


Second Place? The Mets? It Is Actually Possible
It was the All-Star break and the Mets were a woeful 25-44 and buried in last place in the National League East.
Dallas Green was a lame-duck manager and the season looked as if it would take forever.
Now there are 11 days left in the season and guess who's making a serious run at finishing second behind the Atlanta Braves in the N.L.
East?
The Mets brought that possibility closer to reality tonight with an 8-4 victory over the Braves.


Congress Moves Closer to Merging Banks and S.&amp; L.'s
The Senate Banking Committee passed budget legislation today that moves Congress closer to eliminating the last differences separating the nation's savings institutions and banks.
The Senate committee's action follows a similar vote by the House Banking Committee on Tuesday night to combine on Jan. 1, 1998, the two industries' separate deposit insurance funds.
The committees also voted to require savings institutions to make one-time payments totaling $6 billion early next year to top up their badly depleted fund and prepare it for the merger.


U.S. Trade Deficit Widens, But It Narrows With Japan
The nation's trade gap widened further in July, to $11.5 billion, even as the deficit with Japan narrowed for the fourth straight month, the Commerce Department reported today.
The report, which disappointed analysts, implied a drag on economic growth in early summer and aroused fresh criticism of the Clinton Administration's coordinated effort last month to raise the value of the dollar in world currency markets.


White House Counsel Says He Will Leave Post Soon to Retire
The White House counsel, Abner J. Mikva, said today that he would soon resign his post and retire after nearly 40 years in Government.
Mr.
Mikva, for many years a liberal Democratic member of Congress from Chicago and then one of the nation's most influential Federal judges, is the third counsel to leave the Clinton White House in as many years.
White House officials said the new White House counsel would be Jack Quinn, now the chief of staff for Vice President Al Gore.


Another Wilson Aide Quits
In a further sign of turmoil in Gov.
Pete Wilson's politically and financially troubled campaign for the Republican Presidential nomination, George Gorton, his chief political strategist for 25 years, resigned today.
Mr.
Gorton's resignation as campaign manager, the No. 2 job in the operation, came less than 24 hours after the campaign's finance director, Anne LeGassick, resigned.


AMONG THE FOUNTAINS WITH: Tadao Ando; Concrete Dreams In the Sun King's Court
Tadao Ando at Versailles?
What a silly picture.
It's hard to imagine a more howling mismatch between East and West.
Mr.
Ando, the winner of this year's Pritzker Architecture Prize, is a Japanese architect celebrated for his austere, spiritually ennobling buildings fashioned from smoothly finished raw concrete.
Versailles, by contrast so extreme as to seem like a prankster's setup, is the world capital of froufrou, a building synonymous with the ornate excesses of rococo style.
Yet, here is Mr.
Ando, placidly strolling in the stately gardens of the Grand Trianon, posing serenely against the gilt-encrusted balustrade of a pink marble staircase.
In the distance, fountains play.
They will gush for only half an hour or so, for the plumbing that operates them is ancient.
Originally, in the mid-1600's, the fountains provided a fleeting visual divertissement only when Louis XIV passed by.
Imagine living in a house that erupts with joy at the mere sight of one.


Pataki Hinting He May Push Back Deadline for Electric Cars
Amid a strenuous lobbying campaign by the oil and auto industries, Gov.
George E. Pataki is hinting that he may push back the state's deadline for auto makers to begin selling electric cars in New York State, now just over two years away.
His decision could have an important effect on whether the auto industry will sell electric cars or other fuel-efficient vehicles across the rest of the nation.
And the auto makers are pressing for a decision in the next few weeks so they can have time to prepare.


Board Adds Mayor's Choice To Finalists for School Post
After a day of back-room politicking, New York City's Board of Education narrowed its search for a new chancellor of the public schools to three candidates yesterday, including a college president from Brooklyn who emerged as Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's latest candidate.
That candidate, Leon M. Goldstein, president of Kingsborough Community College since 1971, became one of the three finalists only a day after it seemed that the board had passed him by in favor of three other educators from outside the city -- none of whom appeared to have the Mayor's support.


Capitol Hill's Cost-Cutting Auction
In the nation's capital, where the smallest event can be turned into an opportunity for political gain, politicians will soon have a chance to show they are cutting costs, with an auction of furniture from offices of current and former members of the House of Representatives.
At 10 A.M. on Saturday at a warehouse on Canal Street SE, the House will sell mahogany and walnut desks, brass lamps, leather chairs and other items to save the $235,000 a year that it costs to store the stuff.


Egypt Says Israelis Killed P.O.W.'s in '67 War
Egypt said today that it had discovered two mass graves in the Sinai containing the remains of Egyptian prisoners of war and unarmed civilians shot by Israeli soldiers during the 1967 war.
The discovery, near El Arish, is likely to generate further pressure on President Hosni Mubarak and feed public opinion against Israel.
The Egyptian Government has been accused by opposition groups of not pushing for a serious investigation after initial revelations last month because of Egypt's eagerness to please Israel and the United States.


Going Against the Grain
By splitting itself into three companies and dropping out of the personal computer business, AT&amp;T abandoned yesterday its once-grand vision of combining communications and computers into a single corporate empire.
In the end, that vision proved to be a costly illusion.
So much for "synergy" -- the ungainly term used for decades to justify all manner of mergers, and most recently to explain the wave of big media-industry deals.
AT&amp;T's retreat, analysts warn, may hold lessons for companies pursuing such visions of synergy.


Choosing the Joys of a Simplified Life
ELAINE ST.
JAMES slides back her closet door to reveal a spectacle shocking to most American eyes: one pair of black loafers and one pair of boots, two skirts, two pullovers, eight T-shirts and six turtlenecks.
And that's all.
As a 52-year-old author and former businesswoman, she could afford more.
But she doesn't need it.
So she doesn't buy it.
That sparse sartorial tableau has its financial parallel in the personal budgets of Joe Dominguez, a former Wall Street analyst, and his partner, Vicki Robin: they live quite comfortably, thank you, in a middle-class neighborhood of Seattle on about $6,000 a year each, interest on their nest eggs of $100,000 each.
They could easily earn more.
They choose not to.


Giuliani Sees G.O.P. Benefits In a Powell Run
In an apparent swipe at fellow New York Republicans, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that if Gen.
Colin L. Powell decides to run for President, he should do so as a Republican and compete in the party's primary in New York.
"I think he can be of great help to those people in the Republican Party who view themselves as moderates," Mr.
Giuliani said, speaking to reporters at a groundbreaking on Staten Island.
"His presence in a Republican primary would be very, very useful to expanding the viewpoint of the party."


Investigators Believe Jogger Was Victim of Sex Assault
Investigators said yesterday that they believed that the jogger found beaten to death in Central Park on Sunday had been sexually attacked and that a stranger probably carried out the assault.
But the investigators said they doubted that they would find semen to conduct a DNA test.
Detectives who have interviewed friends and neighbors of the victim, Maria Isabel Pinto Monteiro Alves, have said that no one had a motive to harm her, including her former husband, who lives in Sweden.
At 44, Ms.
Alves, who was known here as Ms.
Monteiro, was considered by acquaintances as a happy-go-lucky, even spiritual, woman who loved to dance and to jog.
They said Ms.
Monteiro, who worked as a shoe saleswoman, lived a life free of enemies.


In Belgrade, View Is Still 'Hands Off'
President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia is so determined to end the Balkan war and remove economic sanctions that he is extremely unlikely to intervene on behalf of Bosnian Serbs who are retreating before the forces of the Bosnian Government and Croatia, Western diplomats and senior Serbian officials say.
Mr.
Milosevic sees the end of the United Nations sanctions as giving something to a public that has grown weary of nationalist oratory and bloodshed.
Serbia's economy is nearly moribund, so short of crucial spare parts that whole industries have shut down.


Students at CUNY Complain Work Rule Limits Education
The Giuliani administration's requirement that welfare recipients work for the city a minimum of 26 hours a week is forcing thousands of students at the City University of New York to choose between education and workfare assignments, administrators and students told a City Council committee yesterday.
The workfare program, which requires that all able-bodied, childless adults on Home Relief work before receiving public money, has started to affect more than 10,000 CUNY students, officials said, requiring them to work at jobs like cleaning parks and maintenance work in city buildings.


AT&amp;T Dominates as Dow Climbs 25.65
AT&amp;T, the nation's most widely held corporation, dominated the stock market yesterday after announcing that it would split into three separate companies.
The giant communications concern soared 6 1/8, or 10.6 percent, to 63 3/4, and accounted for more than 18 points of the gain in the Dow Jones industrial average.
It was the most active stock on the New York Stock Exchange, with a huge 27.98 million shares traded.


Car Dealers' Association Settles U.S. Antitrust Lawsuit on Prices
The Government today accused the association that represents nearly all of the nation's car dealers of violating Federal antitrust laws over the last six years by illegally urging the dealers to take steps to limit price competition in sales to consumers.
Justice Department officials said they had filed, and settled, a lawsuit against the National Automobile Dealers Association, whose 25,000 members account for $375 billion in annual sales of cars and auto products.
The association represents 84 percent of the dealers of American cars around the country.


Resurgent Racism
To the Editor:
Reading Anthony Lewis's Sept. 15 column convulsed my being to extremes of anger and hope.
The anger resulted from white people's pretending to be shocked, and even some blacks, at hearing the words of Mark Fuhrman, the former detective, at the O. J. Simpson trial.


'Please, Modern World, May I Havwe Some Less?'
A poll shows voluntary downshifting is a trend.
How one couple stopped spending and gained freedom.
Great cheapskates in history.


States Are Already Providing Glimpse at Welfare's Future
In Massachusetts, there is no Department of Public Welfare anymore.
It is now the Department of Transitional Assistance.
In Utah, welfare programs have names like SPED -- the state's Single Parent Employment Demonstration Project.
There are also the Virginia Independence Program, Wisconsin's Work Not Welfare Program, Colorado's Personal Responsibility and Employment Program, New Jersey's Family Development Program.
But state officials say they are doing a lot more than just changing the names.
These state programs, and dozens of acronyms and abbreviations to come in other states, are the future of welfare in this country.


Coca-Cola Expands Agency Roles
The Coca-Cola Company has expanded its relationship with three agencies on its roster for assignments including its interactive account.
Martin Interactive, a division of the Martin Agency in Richmond, was named as the Coca-Cola worldwide interactive agency of record.
The billings were not disclosed.
Kerry Traubert, a spokeswoman for Coca-Cola in Atlanta, confirmed a report of the assignment this week in Adweek.
Martin Interactive is working with David Wheldon, vice president and advertising director for Coca-Cola, on plans including promotion of the company's heritage on the Internet, she said.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LAPORTE P.L.C., London, plans to sell Vinings Industries Inc., Atlanta, a maker of chemicals for the paper, water treatment and general chemical industries, to Chase Manhattan Capital Group, a unit of Chase Manhattan Corp., New York, for $33.1 million.
MCMORAN OIL AND GAS CO., New Orleans, announced that it had agreed with MCN Corp., Detroit, a distributor of natural gas, to jointly operate a $65 million oil and gas exploration and development program in the Gulf of Mexico.


Ina Bradley, 85, a Supporter of the Theater
Ina Bradley, a lifelong supporter of theater arts in Connecticut, died on Sunday at Norwalk Hospital.
She was 85 and lived in Westport, Conn.
Mrs.
Bradley, who was born in Bridgeport, Conn., served on the board of directors of the Westport Country Playhouse and fought to save the American Shakespeare Theater in Stratford, Conn.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about "Jewish Short Stories," a 13-week series being broadcast on National Public Radio, misstated the date and time it is to be rebroadcast on WFUV-FM in the Bronx.
The broadcasts will be on Thursdays at 7 P.M., beginning Oct. 12.


Board Meetings Set on Turner Acquisition
The boards of Time Warner, Turner Broadcasting System and Tele-Communications Inc. are expected to meet today to discuss and probably vote on Time Warner's proposed acquisition of Turner Broadcasting, several people close to the talks said yesterday.
One person close to Time Warner said its board meeting could last all day and that it was not certain that a vote would be taken because there were so many complex issues to go through.


Visit From Old No. 56 Makes for a Strange Day
This was one of the most bizarre days in recent Giants history.
It began when Lawrence Taylor showed up at practice to give the 0-3 team inspiration.
He stretched with the players on the field, gave pass-rushing tips and then met privately with the entire team for at least 30 minutes.


Corrections
A report in the Book Notes column yesterday about publishers' vying for a political memoir by Ed Rollins, the Republican campaign consultant, misstated the year of Christine Todd Whitman's campaign for the governorship in New Jersey.
It was 1993, not 1992.


Choosing a Chancellor Without the Race Issue
NEW YORK CITY, where the phrase ethnic politics is redundant, is on the verge of selecting a new schools chancellor without the usual squabbles over race.
The Board of Education's search for a leader has been going on all summer.
And so far, in stunning contrast to the recent past, there have been no disruptions, few demands that the next chancellor be from a minority group, barely a mention of race -- the issue that, more than once in recent years, nearly tore the city apart.


Bernie Williams: From Bambi to Tiger
In Bernie Williams's initial years in New York, his fellow Yankees had an affectionate -- and seemingly appropriate -- nickname for the restrained, almost shy youngster.
Bambi.
The Yankees, a franchise used to having its center fielders lord over Yankee Stadium, saw in Williams a player who adroitly but gingerly tiptoed around the vaunted bastion made famous by the likes of Joe DiMaggio and Mickey Mantle.


Mexican Attorney General Takes Aim at Graft, but Holds His Fire
After months of mounting concern that Mexico's national law enforcement agency has been infiltrated by drug traffickers, the Attorney General announced today what he described as a sweeping shake-up to root out corruption.
While the Attorney General, Antonio Lozano Gracia, promised a "fundamental purification" of Mexico's police and legal system, the reform package that he outlined was less a shake-up than a program of long-term goals for institutional reform.
Thus the announcement fell short of the expectations that President Ernesto Zedillo and Mr.
Lozano had created for it.


Pinch of Tax Bill To Be Felt by Many, Not Just Businesses
The $52 billion tax bill that the House Ways and Means Committee approved late Tuesday was largely advertised as an effort to shut down unwarranted corporate tax breaks and, as the panel's chairman said, "end business as usual" in the Capitol.
And it would, in fact, knot many loopholes.
But like tax measures passed by the Democratic regime before it, the Republican bill turns out to do a lot of other things, too.


CHRONICLE
No one is plotting any devious schemes against P. D. JAMES, the mystery writer, but some of her colleagues are infuriated over comments she made in a BBC radio interview in June.
As a result, she said, she is considering withdrawing from the prestigious Crime Writers' Association, whose members include Colin Dexter, Dick Francis and Ruth Rendell.
The furor began when Lady James, who was named a baroness in 1991, said on World Service, a BBC radio service, that she drew her characters from the middle class because inner cities were devoid of moral choice.


Liberties; The Rise Of the Fallen
I'd never given much thought to lap dancing before.
Of course, it was never really a feminist issue before.


Potent Vow in '92
Many scholars and politicians agree that President Clinton's campaign promise to "end welfare as we know it" opened the floodgates of change in Washington.
In New York yesterday, advocates for the poor were stunned by the Senate's action.
Articles, page B11.


Agency Missteps Put Illegal Aliens at Mercy of Sweatshops
With the raids on garment sweatshops here last month producing the spectacle of scores of illegal Thai immigrants being kept as virtual slaves, state and Federal investigators have begun pointing fingers at one another while issuing assurances that they are taking action to flush out such operations.
But an examination of past investigations in Southern California, home to the country's largest garment industry, shows that a series of missteps dating at least to 1988 have left the workers at the mercy of groups tied to Asian organized crime rings, with little chance of being rescued.


The Pop Life
Subtle Inroads
Before the Beatles, pop audiences in the United States paid little attention to British rock, writing it off as a second-rate imitation of American music.
Three decades after the British invasion, nearly every compact disk of note released in Britain eventually comes out on a record label in the United States.
Today, Japan is where England was 35 years ago.
Many Americans dismiss Japanese music as a goofy attempt at popular styles like rock and reggae.
But the Japanese, like the English, have been merging an extraordinary array of overseas influences with their own personalities and interests and coming up with a lot of original music.
A few Japanese musicians have picked up an American following in recent years, among them the retro-pop groups Pizzicato Five and Shonen Knife, the experimental dance musicians Ken Ishii and DJ Krush, and the noise-rock band the Boredoms (who performed on the Lollapalooza tour last year).
But the majority of releases by Japanese bands remain unavailable here except as expensive, hard-to-find imports.
Here are 10 recent compact disks by Japanese groups that are worth scouring the imports section of your local record store for:


Five Men Face Charges Of Murder In a Slaying
Five men described by law enforcement officials as members of a ruthless Chinatown gang will be charged with kidnapping and may face murder charges in the abduction, torture and killing of an immigrant woman, the Brooklyn District Attorney said yesterday.
The men were being held yesterday in Los Angeles and San Jose, Calif., where, investigators said, they fled after the strangling of the Chinese immigrant, Gao Liquin, 39.


May Birdbath Be Filled? Water Curbs Raise Queries
Can a birdbath be refilled from a bucket of water?
Can dusty high school football and soccer fields be sprayed from private wells?
Can a car be washed during a rainstorm?
The answers given callers to New Jersey's new drought-emergency telephone line: yes, no and yes, but only with the rainwater.


THE 104TH CONGRESS: CONGRESSIONAL ROUNDUP  House Approves a Repeal Of 55 M.P.H. Speed Limit; An End to Mink Subsidies
The Senate has joined the House in eliminating the Government's annual $2 million subsidy to the mink industry for overseas fashion shows.
The voice vote on Tuesday night to drop the subsidy -- totaling $13.2 million since 1989 -- came just after the Senate voted for deep cuts in the nation's welfare system, a fact that was not lost on Senator John Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, who sponsored the mink measure.


HOUSE PROUD
An inn with country charm in the inner city. (pg. C6)


Market Place; An undervalued RJR Nabisco gets some investor appreciation.
THE barbarians may be back at RJR Nabisco's gate.
Attracted by the food and tobacco giant's lagging stock price, and mindful that a number of big shareholders are eager to see it higher, two big names in leveraged buyouts have expressed interest in RJR in the last few weeks.


House Approves a Repeal Of 55 M.P.H. Speed Limit
The House voted today to repeal the Federal speed limit of 55 miles per hour for all vehicles, turning over to the states the question of how fast motorists should be able to drive.
Ignoring a Democratic protest that the legislation "would turn our nation's highways into killing fields," the chamber voted, 313 to 112, to join the Senate in eliminating a law that was introduced 21 years ago at the height of an energy crisis.


Overcome in Storm's Aftermath


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Campaign by Ford for its 1996 cars and trucks will be hard to avoid.
WHETHER or not there's a Ford in your future, four out of five fortune tellers agree: there's a flood of Ford ads on the way.
The Ford Motor Company is preparing a campaign for its Ford division's 1996 cars and trucks that includes the largest efforts ever behind a single model.
To promote a drastically redesigned version of the Taurus, the nation's best-selling automobile, Ford and its longtime agency, J. Walter Thompson Detroit, will spend an estimated $125 million through the end of 1995 on emotional advertising that echoes the "Laverne and Shirley" theme song by asserting Taurus is "making the dream come true."


Free-Falling Angels Hoping to Find Brakes Before Hitting Bottom
The manager needs sleep, the players need spring training and the owner needs to brace himself.
The California Angels are in free fall, the wild-card race is their only safety net and their constituency predicted it.
"A lot of people, I guarantee it, are gloating now," the manager, Marcel Lachemann, said today.
"They couldn't wait for this to happen. There are people all around Southern California saying, "We knew it, we knew it.' "


Boom Seen in State and Local Tax Aid to Business
State and local tax breaks for big businesses are booming, a survey showed yesterday, the same day legislators in Ohio and Michigan called for an end to such tax breaks and cited a statement by more than 100 economists in support of their stands.
The survey, by KPMG Peat Marwick, covered senior tax or financial officers at 203 manufacturing, distribution and retailing companies with sales of more than $300 million a year.
Of those surveyed, 40 percent said their companies were more likely to be offered incentives today than they were a year ago and 73 percent said such incentives were more likely now than five years ago.


Doubts Over Insurance License
The State Commission of Investigation said it planned to examine the circumstances leading to the resignation of New Jersey's Insurance Commissioner, Drew Karpinski.
The commission said it intended to look into the cancellation of Mr.
Karpinski's insurance license after he became Commissioner.


On the Autonomy of Art and How It is Betrayed
TESTAMENTS BETRAYED An Essay in Nine Parts By Milan Kundera Translated by Linda Asher. 280 pages.
HarperCollins. $24.
One of the points that the Czech novelist Milan Kundera insists on most strenuously in his stimulating new nonfiction work, "Testaments Betrayed: An Essay in Nine Parts," is Nietzsche's injunction that we should neither "corrupt the actual way our thoughts come to us" nor, in Mr.
Kundera's paraphrase, "turn one's ideas into a system."
So instead of summing up what Mr.
Kundera has to say in "Testaments Betrayed," one should begin by emphasizing that it is improvisational criticism.
It treats many of the same subjects the author took up in his earlier work of criticism, "The Art of the Novel" (which was also written in French), that is, the autonomy of art, the importance of modernism and the pre-eminence of such modern artists as Stravinsky, Kafka, Robert Musil, Hermann Broch, Witold Gombrowicz and the Czech composer Leos Janacek ("The Cunning Little Vixen," "From the House of the Dead").
But it plays with them almost musically, in keeping with the author's childhood training as a pianist.


Yes, New Yorkers Pick Up Tab for Other States
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 17 news account of the response to Speaker Newt Gingrich's description of New York as a "culture of waste" includes a statement that I "cited a report from the Kennedy School of Government on state and Federal budgets" showing the huge deficit incurred by New York and the surplus enjoyed by Georgia.


WELFARE IN TRANSITION:  States Are Already Providing a Glimpse at Welfare's Future; California: A Forerunner Of the House Bill
California has made major revisions in its welfare program over the last four years, cutting the total of its payments by more than 15 percent from 1991 to 1994, with an additional 5 percent cut under way this year.
Many of the reductions were achieved by reworking the state's welfare laws very much along the lines proposed in the welfare bill passed in March by the United States House.


Ban Is Sought on Box Cutters
Saying box cutters have become "the weapon of choice for many gangs and violence-prone youths," Assemblyman LeRoy J. Jones Jr., a Democrat of East Orange, introduced legislation to make it a crime to sell box cutters to anyone under 18.
The crime would carry a maximum penalty of 18 months in prison and a $7,000 fine.


Goldman Struggles To Produce Revenue
While other Wall Street firms have reaped the rewards of a marketplace ripe with underwriting activity and huge mergers, a recent document shows that Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company struggled to produce revenue and retain capital during the six months that ended on May 26.
At $1.99 billion, the firm's revenues net of interest expenses were flat compared with the comparable period a year earlier, which was by all accounts one of the worst in Wall Street's history.


THE 104TH CONGRESS: CONGRESSIONAL ROUNDUP  House Approves a Repeal Of 55 M.P.H. Speed Limit; Debate Over Student Loans
Senate Republicans split today over how to cut student loans and twice postponed any votes in the Committee on Labor and Human Resources.
They said they would meet on Friday, hoping to find agreement before then.
At least two Republicans, Senators Mike DeWine of Ohio and James M. Jeffords of Vermont, were unhappy with a proposal by Senator Nancy Landon Kassebaum, the Kansas Republican who is chairwoman of the committee, to raise $4.4 billion over seven years by charging colleges and universities 2 percent of the loans they issued.


Calendar: Festivals And a Tour
September Festival  Staten Island Botanical Garden, 1000 Richmond Terrace, off Snug Harbor Road; (718) 273-8200.
A harvest festival will be held on Saturday, from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M., with gardening demonstrations, children's activities and sales of produce, plants and food.
No charge for admission.


Streamlined Light, 'Industrial' Style
THE Manhattan design firm Shelton, Mindel &amp; Associates is known for photogenic renovations of Hamptons houses and for the paneled, overstuffed headquarters of Polo Ralph Lauren.
Recently, it designed a collection of light fixtures in "soft industrial" style.
The 14-inch-diameter, aluminum pendant fixture seems to have been appropriated from a streamlined 1940's factory.
Around $360 from Nessen Lighting, (914) 698-7799.


Jets Have Esiason Closely Covered
Their record may be a mere 1-2, but the Jets lead the league in one category that will become important as the season wears on: They have allowed the fewest sacks in the National Football League.
Boomer Esiason has been dumped only once.
But as encouraging as that statistic might seem, there are two sides to every story, and the other side to this one will line up on the other side of the ball Sunday when the Jets play the Falcons in Atlanta.
He is Chris Doleman, the Falcons' defensive end, who leads the league in sacks with 5 1/2.


Linebacker Returns to Hurricanes
The University of Miami defense will get an infusion of strength and experience on Saturday thanks to an unusual benefactor: a trial court.
Linebacker JAMES BURGESS, the team's second-leading tackler last year, will start Saturday against Virginia Tech after serving a two-game suspension.
He was acquitted Saturday in Dade Circuit Court of two misdemeanor counts of battery on an officer and resisting arrest. (AP)


Despite Russian Objections, NATO Plans to Add Members
Envoys to NATO approved a blueprint tonight that outlines membership requirements for formerly Communist European countries that want to join the alliance, overriding Russia's continuing strong objections to the very idea of NATO expansion.
NATO did not make its paper public today, but officials said it would be presented next Thursday in Brussels and in the following weeks in more detail in other capitals.


Red Sox Wrap Up the East
Red Sox 3, Brewers 2
The Boston Red Sox clinched their first American League East title since 1990 last night at Fenway Park as Jose Canseco's broken-bat single in the seventh inning drove in the go-ahead run in a 3-2 victory over the Milwaukee Brewers.


Thunder Gulch Warming Up
The racing spotlight, which was trained on Cigar during his 10th straight victory in the Woodward Stakes last Saturday, swung to Kentucky yesterday and fell on his chief rival: Thunder Gulch, the star of the D. Wayne Lukas stable and winner of the Kentucky Derby, who this Saturday at Turfway Park will open his countdown to the Breeders' Cup Classic.
Thunder Gulch, the leading candidate for 3-year-old champion, was spending the week at the Lukas base at Churchill Downs in Louisville, where he breezed half a mile Monday in 502/5 seconds.
He was joined in the workout by Serena's Song, the star filly of the stable, who did a no-nonsense half mile in 48 seconds flat.


At AT&amp;T, Big Changes Bring Cuts
Employees of the AT&amp;T Corporation have learned through the years that when their bosses announce a restructuring, layoffs will follow as predictably as thunder follows lightning.
About 70,000 jobs -- almost one in five positions -- have been cut since the breakup of Ma Bell in 1984.
And in its breakup announcement yesterday, AT&amp;T said it would lay off an additional 8,500 workers in its faltering computer unit, just as it had warned in July.


Three Educators Waiting for One Chancellorship
Over the last several weeks, the Board of Education has winnowed its list of potential candidates to be the city's next schools chancellor.
Yesterday, three remained, with Leon M. Goldstein emerging as the favorite of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
Here are profiles of the candidates.


Indian Premier's Swami Has a Run of Bad Karma
For P. V. Narasimha Rao, the Indian Prime Minister, things have gone inauspiciously of late.
The governing Congress Party is badly split and slumping in opinion polls six months before a general election.
Sonia Gandhi, widow of Rajiv Gandhi, whom Mr.
Rao succeeded as party leader, has joined those suggesting that Mr.
Rao, 74, may lack the vision to lead India into the 21st century.
So Mr.
Rao, who is said to have a strong belief in the supernatural, can hardly have believed his karma when matters took a further turn for the worse last week.
For days, Indian newspapers have concentrated on events surrounding Mr.
Rao's spiritual adviser, Chandraswamy, a 46-year-old faith healer, self-professed psychic and rags-to-riches millionaire, whom Mr.
Rao brought to the capital from obscurity in southern India a quarter of a century ago.


Yesterday in Washington
BUDGET -- Seeking to avoid a budgetary "train wreck," Republican Congressional leaders said that they had devised a temporary spending plan that they intended to offer the White House to keep the Federal Government going for six weeks into the new fiscal year that begins Oct. 1.
But the White House threw cold water on the idea immediately.
"The Administration is not a part of this agreement," said a White House spokeswoman, Ginny Terzano.
MEDICAID -- Regional conflicts over the distribution of Federal Medicaid money flared as members of Congress scrutinized Republican proposals to limit the growth of the program, and Democrats complained that Republicans were trying to ram the changes through Congress.
But the protests seemed unlikely to thwart House Republican leaders in their effort to eliminate the Federal guarantee of health insurance for millions of poor people and let states decide who gets what benefits.
SPEED LIMITS -- The House voted, 313 to 112, to repeal the Federal speed limit of 55 miles per hour for all vehicles, turning the question of what limits, if any, there should be on motorists over to the states.
The law mandating Federal speed limits was passed 21 years ago at the height of an energy crisis.
The Clinton Administration has said it opposes abolishing the 55 m.p.h. limit.
The differences in the House and Senate bill still must be resolved.
STUDENT LOANS -- Senate Republicans split over how to cut student loans and twice postponed any votes in the Committee on Labor and Human Resources.
They said they would meet on Friday.
At least two Republicans, Senators Mike DeWine of Ohio and James M. Jeffords of Vermont, were unhappy with a proposal by Senator Nancy Landon Kassebaum, the Kansas Republican who is chairman of the committee, to raise $4.4 billion over seven years by charging colleges 2 percent of the loans they issued.


U.S. Is Facing Confident Underdogs
They come here as underdogs, Europe's 12 semi-angry men on a mission.
There are four Britons, a Spaniard, a German, a Welshman, an Irishman, an Italian, a Swede and two Scots.
This is the 1995 European Ryder Cup team, a disparate group of golfers that will be under a great deal of scrutiny and even more pressure when the matches get under way Friday at Oak Hill Country Club.
The reason for that is simple: the hopes of a continent ride with the team.
It has been 10 years since Europe first beat America to take possession of the Ryder Cup, a small gold trophy that has come, fairly or not, to symbolize global golf supremacy.
That breakthrough in 1985, and two successful defenses in 1987 and 1989, ended more than a quarter century of American domination of the matches.
Hopes were raised on the continent.
Europe was no longer the golf stepchild of the world.


An Eager First Day, but an Uncertain Future
Once again, holders of AT&amp;T are about to get a blizzard of paper in place of one share certificate.
The last time that happened, more than a decade ago, holding onto the package for years was a smart strategy.
This time may be different.
Wall Street reacted with enthusiasm yesterday to the highly surprising announcement by the AT&amp;T Corporation that it will split into three pieces, while selling off a variety of assets.


Corrections
A theater review on Wednesday misstated the title of the play at Here, 145 Avenue of the Americas, near Spring Street in SoHo.
It is "Floating Rhoda and the Glue Man."


INSIDE
Trade Deficit Widens
Even as the United States deficit with Japan narrowed for the fourth straight month, its trade gap widened, to $11.5 billion in July.
Page D2.
Temporary Budget Plan
Republican Congressional leaders said they had a temporary spending plan to keep the Government going into the new fiscal year.
Page B9.
Steinbrenner Open to Jersey
George Steinbrenner, the Yankees' lead owner, said he would listen to any new stadium proposals, including one from New Jersey.
Page B13.
Sagging Fortunes in India
The fortunes of India's Prime Minister have worsened with those of his controversial faith-healer.
Page A3.


Fraud Can Flourish Without the Internet
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 19 front-page article on the discovery by two University of California graduate students of a flaw in Netscape, the software used for purchases over the Internet's World Wide Web, raises a number of obvious questions.


Sports of The Times; Strange Case Of a Ryder Cup Choice
WHEN the Ryder Cup matches begin tomorrow, Curtis Strange will tee off at Oak Hill for the first time since 1989 when he won the United States Open for the second consecutive year.
But for all his precise shots and putts there, he is remembered for hurrying into the interview tent late that Sunday afternoon and leaning toward a microphone.
"Move over, Ben," he said.


Bridge
The World Bridge Federation is expected to consider a plan for a World Junior Knockout Team Championship played by computer, with all the players sitting in front of terminals in their own towns, observed by an official.
Their teammates and opponents can be separated from them by vast distances.
This would not be the first computerized team event.
Last year, 32 teams from eight countries played in a knockout team event using the OKbridge program, hooked into the worldwide Internet.
The winners were an American team that was helped by the diagramed deal.


There's No Rest for Ailing McDowell
Not surprisingly, Jack McDowell will start tonight against the Blue Jays, as scheduled and as he vowed he would.
Even if feels a twinge in his upper back, McDowell will still strut to the mound at Yankee Stadium.
Games are disappearing from the calendar, so there is no time to rest.
McDowell does not consider himself courageous to be pitching in pain.
It is his job.
It is why he is earning $5.4 million this season.
Besides, how much pain could the muscle strain produce?


Accounts
*
Hammacher Schlemmer, Chicago, to Baldi, Bloom &amp; Whelan, New York, to handle advertising for the retailer and catalogue marketer, previously done in-house.
The billings were estimated at more than $1 million. *
Center Care Health Plan, New York, to the Rivera Group, New York, to handle its advertising, marketing and public relations, previously handled in-house.
The billings were estimated at $1.5 million.


Slaying Shocks Usually Upbeat Brazilians
To Joao De Matos, a newspaper publisher and president of a travel agency, the police sketch of the jogger who was slain over the weekend in Central Park was hauntingly familiar.
After learning her name, Maria Isabel Pinto Monteiro Alves, Mr.
De Matos finally located her in his memory and his records.
Ms.
Alves, 44, had used his agency, BACC Travel, to buy and pay in full for a $975 airline ticket from New York City to Rio de Janeiro on Dec. 21, with a return on Feb. 2.
For Mr.
De Matos, it was a sad footnote to the life of a fellow immigrant, who, like so many Brazilians here, moved back and forth between her homeland and New York, never quite sure where to settle once and for all.


Most Employees of Bell Labs Will Join Equipment Business
The breakup of the AT&amp;T Corporation extends to its highly regarded research-and-development arm, Bell Laboratories, which is based in Murray Hill, N.J.
Most of the 26,000 employees of the labs will become part of the new communications equipment and technology business, one of three separate companies to be created by the breakup.
This part of the research organization will retain the Bell Laboratories name.


Philip Wichard, 76, Collector of Antique Autos
Philip Wichard, an antique automobile collector who developed his passion for cars as a 10-year-old junkyard scout who was allowed to steer junkers being towed for scrap, died on Tuesday at his home in Huntington Bay, L.I.
He was 76.
His family said the cause was cancer.


Corrections
An article on Monday about the jogger found dead in Central Park rendered her name incorrectly, and a correction in this space yesterday also erred in some copies.
The jogger was Maria Isabel Pinto Monteiro Alves.


A Tree That Knows When to Bend
When Robert E. Allen, the chairman of AT&amp;T with the style of Mister Rogers, visits the Kirkland, Wash., offices of McCaw Cellular Communications, he does something telling: He forgoes his conservative neckties, the better to fit in with the freewheeling atmosphere at McCaw, the cellular company that AT&amp;T acquired last year.
The gesture symbolizes Mr.
Allen's willingness to change and to make the $12 billion merger work.
But like his far-reaching proposal, announced yesterday, to reinvent AT&amp;T, the gesture may have been prompted by hard experience in a business transformed by competition.


G.O.P. to Offer a Temporary Spending Plan
Seeking to avoid a budgetary "train wreck," Republican Congressional leaders said this evening they had devised a temporary spending plan that they intended to offer the White House to keep the Federal Government going for six weeks into the new fiscal year that begins Oct. 1.
But the White House threw cold water on the idea immediately.


Rutgers Confronting a Big-Time Obstacle
Late Tuesday evening, Marco Battaglia, the star tight end on the Rutgers football team, and Rahsaan Giddings, a starting linebacker, sat at a table in the rear of Davidson Hall discussing Rutgers football -- past, present and future.
The immediate topic was the Scarlet Knights' game against Penn State on Saturday at Giants Stadium.
Battaglia and Giddings expressed confidence, although each player took a turn letting uncertainty slip out in the form of, "If we win -- I mean when we win."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
4.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.75
5.73
4.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.17
5.18
4.78
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.19
5.20
5.17
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.10
6.13
7.56
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.46
6.48
7.80
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.40
7.46
8.63
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.02
6.02
6.52
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


In Vietnam Era, U.S. Had Asia Experts
To the Editor:
Robert S. McNamara (letter, Sept. 14) tries to minimize President Kennedy's responsibility for the Vietnam War.
Although commitments to a non-Communist South Vietnam went back to President Truman, it was J.F.K. who put the prestige of the United States on the line with his Vietnam policy.
As he explained to John Kenneth Galbraith in 1961:


Police Say Aim Was Protecting Simpson
After months in which they have heard the Los Angeles Police Department depicted as inept, corrupt and out to frame O. J. Simpson, prosecutors presented testimony today that on June 13, 1994, the police were sensitive and solicitous toward Mr.
Simpson and determined to ease his grief.
Keith Bushey, the police commander in the West Los Angeles District on the night Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman were killed, recalled that he quickly ordered four detectives from the crime scene to Mr.
Simpson's house not because he was a suspect but to spare him the grim fate of John Belushi's kin 13 years ago: learning of a loved one's death from reporters.


CHRONICLE
Gov.
GEORGE E. PATAKI has learned something new (actually, it's something very old) about taking a trip: performing an act of charity on arrival helps to insure the traveler's safety.
The Governor, who is to leave tomorrow on an 11-day trip to Hungary and Italy, the homelands of his grandparents, met the other day with ABRAHAM H. FOXMAN, the national director of the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith, and with other officials of the league.


Three Educators Waiting for One Chancellorship
Over the last several weeks, the Board of Education has winnowed its list of potential candidates to be the city's next schools chancellor.
Yesterday, three remained, with Leon M. Goldstein emerging as the favorite of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
Here are profiles of the candidates.


The G.O.P.'s 'Family Cap' Has a Democratic History
When the Senate passed its welfare overhaul package on Tuesday, it omitted an element of the House version that many moderate Republicans considered too harsh: the elimination of benefits for children born to women already on welfare.
Yet this "family cap" provision was a keystone of a law adopted in New Jersey three years ago at the behest not of Republicans like those now in control of Congress but of a Democrat, and a fairly liberal one, Gov.
Jim Florio.


Corrections
A chart yesterday with an article about papal souvenirs misstated the cost of a silver medallion that will be sold to commemorate the visit of Pope John Paul II to the New York City area.
It will be $90, not $1,125.


World News Briefs; Colombian Rebels Kill 24 Plantation Workers
In the third such incident in northwestern Colombia in recent weeks, rebel forces killed 24 banana plantation workers this morning after they were ambushed on a bus taking them to work, military officials in the region said.
The killings were the latest in a series of attacks in Uruba, in northwest Colombia, where more than a hundred people have been killed in the last month.


Brodeur Goes Home Without a Contract
Martin Brodeur is eager to end his contract dispute with the Devils.
The 23-year-old goaltender of the Stanley Cup champions spent two days in New Jersey trying to work out a new deal but received an unfavorable response from the Devils and returned to Montreal this evening empty-handed.
"We came down from what we wanted, but we're not any closer because they also reduced their base salary offer," Brodeur said.


For Serbs, A Flashback To '43 Horror
People here say that as the Croatian Army's artillery opened up on this rural town on the Una River on Tuesday, the chilling fears that have lived here for 52 years were confirmed.
The attack on this town at the edge of the war in western Bosnia was not, the residents insisted, part of the Croatian Government's effort to help Bosnia reclaim territory taken and brutally purged by Serbian forces three years ago.
Rather it, and the campaign against other small towns in this region, was a continuation of the crusade to exterminate Serbs.


Directory Assistance; The Answer to Some Questions About AT&amp;T's Breakup Plan
Q.
Why has AT&amp;T decided to split itself up?
A.
Rejecting the notion that bigger is better, the company thinks its parts are worth more sundered than together; each business would be more nimble, better able to respond to changing market condition and unshackled from the financial or regulatory pressures of other units.
One impetus is the telecommunications act that Congress is debating, which will substantially deregulate the phone industry.
Q.
How will AT&amp;T be divided into parts?
A.
The plans call for AT&amp;T to be split into three new companies 1.
A COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES COMPANY
This one will be much the biggest and will keep the AT&amp;T name.
It will operate long distance service, wireless communications and the AT&amp;T Universal Card, the nation's third-most-popular credit card, plus a consulting business and research arm.
Last year, these operations had revenues of $49 billion.
AT&amp;T chairman Robert E. Allen will run this company. 2.
A COMMUNICATIONS HARDWARE COMPANY
Not yet named, this company would manufacture, sell and lease telephone and network equipment and make computer chips.
These operations had combined revenues of $20 billion last year.
No chief executive has been named. 3.
A COMPUTER SYSTEMS COMPANY
AT&amp;T's computer division, known as Global Information Solutions, had sales of $8 billion last year.
AT&amp;T will restructure the unit as it is spun off, shutting the personal computer business and laying off 8,500 people.
Lars Nyberg, who became this division's chairman and chief executive in June, will run the new company.
AT&amp;T's majority interest in AT&amp;T Capital, which provides financing for equipment leasing, is to be sold, with the money going to help pay off some of AT&amp;T's $26 billion in debt.
Q.
What happens to the company's employees A. About 8,500 jobs in the computer business will be eliminated, including 1,000 at the unit's Dayton, Ohio, headquarters.
Beyond that, AT&amp;T said the three new companies are likely to "have fewer employees than the current AT&amp;T," which employs 303,000 workers, down from 373,000 in 1984.
Page D10.
Q.
Who are the people behind this deal?
A.
Robert E. Allen, 60, a longtime telephone company executive, has been chairman and chief executive of AT&amp;T since 1988.
Mr.
Allen earns more than $3 million a year.
He was advised by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
Pages D8-9.
Q.
What's in this announcement for investors?
A.
More Americans - 2.3 million - own stock in AT&amp;T than in any other company., will be exchanged for a single share in each of the three companies.
Each share of AT&amp;T will be exchanged for shares in each of the three new companies.
Page.
D9.
Q.
Why did AT&amp;T's computer business sour?
A.
In 1991, AT&amp;T paid $7.4 billion for the NCR Corporation, securing a foothold in computer manufacturing, which it thought would fit well with its core businesses.
But shifts in computer usage and stiff competition from lower-cost computer makers kept the deal from paying off.
Page D9.


Solomon Litt, 92; Active in Charities
Solomon Litt, who was active in Jewish philanthropic causes in New York, died on Monday in Vassar Brothers Hospital in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
He was 92.
Mr.
Litt was a retired senior partner of the Asiel &amp; Company brokerage, where he worked for more than 70 years.


17 Arrested in New York In a Nationwide Drug Sting
Using the prospect of immigration documents as bait in a sting operation, law enforcement officials lured scores of suspected Jamaican drug traffickers out of hiding and were rounding them up yesterday in six cities across the country, the authorities said last night.
Of 119 people charged with violating drug laws or immigration laws or both, 17 are from New York City and were arrested as they went to the Holiday Inn at Kennedy International Airport to get their documents, or green cards.


Last Days of Summer (Dresses)


The Costly Marriage to NCR Becomes a Vision That Failed
When AT&amp;T finally overcame the resistance of the NCR Corporation in 1991 and paid $7.4 billion for what was the nation's fifth-largest computer company, AT&amp;T's chairman, Robert E. Allen, proclaimed a new era in which AT&amp;T would make "global computer networks as easy to use and accessible as the telephone network is today."
That vision of a convergence of computers and telecommunications is held even more widely today, as businesses and consumers move to the Internet in search of the next generation of business technology.


G.O.P. Bills Aim to Delay Ban on Chemical in Ozone Dispute
In another effort to roll back environmental regulations, conservative Republicans in Congress are moving to postpone the phasing out of chemicals that scientists say are destroying the earth's protective ozone layer in the stratosphere.
Representative John T. Doolittle, Republican of California, today introduced a bill to postpone, until Jan. 1, 2000, a ban on the production of chlorofluorocarbons, or CFC's, which scientists widely consider the major destroyers of ozone.
Production is now supposed to cease as of next Jan. 1 under both United States law and an international agreement negotiated in the Bush Administration and ratified by the Senate in 1993.


Rene Anselmo, 69, the Founder Of a Satellite Network, Is Dead
Rene Anselmo, who built a Spanish language television network in the United States and then at age 61 bet his fortune on creating the world's first privately owned global satellite network, died yesterday at Greenwich Hospital in Greenwich, Conn.
He was 69.
The cause was heart disease, his company, the PanAmSat Corporation, said.


BUSINESS DIGEST
AT&amp;T Plans to Split Itself Into 3 Separate Companies In the largest dismantling of a corporation in American history, AT&amp;T said it would divide its business into three companies: communi cations services, communications equip ment and computers, a tacit acknowledgment that its vast information technology empire had become unfocused and too unwieldy to manage.
The company will drop out of the personal computer business, abandoning its vision of combining communications and computers into a single corporate empire.
Market Place.  [ D12. ]
Court to View Greenpoint Deal  A Federal court agreed to hear a challenge to Greenpoint Financial's deal for 60 New York branches of Home Savings of America.  [ D4. ]
Toyota Doubles Stake in Daihatsu  Toyota doubled its stake in Daihatsu Motor, to 33.4 percent, a move aimed at giving Toyota more control of the small car maker.  [ D5. ] Lehman Brothers' Earnings Triple  Lehman Brothers Holdings said its earnings more than tripled in its fiscal third quarter to $71 million, or 52 cents a share, aided by strength in financial markets and a surge in the underwriting of stocks and bonds on Wall Street.
Revenue from investment banking rose 46 percent, to about $251 million.  [ D7. ] Vow on Children's Programming  Westinghouse said it would increase the amount of children's educational programming to a minimum of three hours a week if it succeeds in acquiring CBS.
After the announcement, a coalition of public interest groups that had sought to block the deal withdrew its petition with the F.C.C.  [ C13. ] New York May Delay Electric Cars  Gov.
George E. Pataki is hinting that he may push back New York's deadline for auto makers to begin selling electric cars.  [ B6. ] Ford Plans Huge Taurus Campaign  Ford is readying a campaignthat includes a huge promotion for its redesigned Taurus.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D6. ]


Judge Blocks Scrambling Of Cable Fare
A Federal judge in Manhattan issued an order yesterday blocking Time Warner Inc. from scrambling sexually explicit programs on a local cable channel, saying that the law the company used to justify its plan was likely to be held unconstitutional.
But even as he granted a preliminary injunction against the media giant, Judge Leonard B. Sand of District Court urged the United States Court of Appeals in Manhattan to review his opinion immediately.


Regions Fight Over the Way Health Money Is Distributed
Regional conflicts over the distribution of Federal Medicaid money flared today as members of Congress scrutinized Republican proposals to limit the growth of the program, and Democrats complained that Republicans were trying to ram the changes through Congress without adequate debate.
But the protests seemed unlikely to thwart the effort by House Republican leaders to eliminate the Federal guarantee of health insurance for millions of poor people and let states decide who receives what health benefits.


Visiting Isak Dinesen, via Julie Harris
In a television landscape littered with pretty young things being adolescently silly, a Julie Harris performance can be thoroughly invigorating.
Although most viewers will probably remember Ms.
Harris for her seven years as Lilimae Clements on "Knots Landing," theatergoers know better.
Her career on the stage has been illustrious ever since her 1950 success in Carson McCullers's "Member of the Wedding."
Among her more memorable credits are portrayals of Emily Dickinson and Mary Todd Lincoln.


F.B.I. Agent Defends Report on Standoff
The F.B.I. agent who prepared a discredited internal disciplinary report on the standoff at Ruby Ridge, Idaho, defended the review today before a skeptical Senate panel.
The agent, Charles Mathews 3d, testified that the report was "thorough and objective and my recommendations were provided without influence or prejudice." The report concluded that no employees of the Federal Bureau of Investigation intentionally violated agency rules when an F.B.I. sharpshooter fatally shot Vicki Weaver, the wife of Randall C. Weaver, a white separatist.


The Roots of Morality
Of Robert Coles's concern and respect for children, there can be no doubt.
In his long and productive career, the psychiatrist has been their loyal advocate, educating the nation about their strengths and vulnerabilities, their needs and potentials.
"Listening to Children: A Moral Journey With Robert Coles" offers a glimpse into the way he goes about his work and presents his answers to the narrator's question, "How does a child grow up to be a good person?"
The 90-minute program on PBS tomorrow night is given mainly to Mr.
Coles's encounters with eight youngsters, beginning with Ruby Bridges, who was one of the first black children to enter the New Orleans school system in 1960.
He is looking and listening for the influences that nurture or block moral feelings in Ruby and the others: two sisters in a migrant farm family; two sisters in a largely black, riot-ravaged Los Angeles neighborhood;  a boy in an institution for juvenile offenders; another in a New Orleans project, and two youths from well-to-do homes.


Mr. Aristide's First Year
A year after American troops landed in Haiti to secure the return of its exiled President, the country is clearly in better shape.
Despite the fears of his detractors, Jean-Bertrand Aristide has not incited his followers against their former oppressors, but urged reconciliation.
Most Haitians no longer live in fear of political violence.
Mr.
Aristide has reached out to business leaders.
He has made a credible beginning, but there is still much to do.
Mr.
Aristide wisely declared he will not run for another presidential term, resisting the temptation to take advantage of his popularity to carry on the Haitian tradition of government by personality cult.
Now he needs to use the time left in his term to broaden his governing skills.
Mr.
Aristide is not much of an administrator.


Fate and Indifference, as Dissected by Descartes
Tough, fiercely original and defying expectations, the French choreographer Maguy Marin gets down to the basics of human behavior in "Waterzooi," the New York premiere that her modern dance troupe, Compagnie Maguy Marin, presented on Tuesday night.
What a wonderful piece of work is man, Ms.
Marin agrees, but she, for one, is intent on examining both light and shade.
Like the Belgian stew that provides its title, "Waterzooi" is a mix of text, dance and music that zeroes in on Ms.
Marin's favorite theme: man's fate.


Hitchcock's Start A Happy Ending
Sterling Hitchcock could have pitched a shutout or perhaps even a no-hitter last night and it would not have changed Buck Showalter's master plan.
This was Hitchcock's last regular start.
Unless there is an injury or the wild-card chase quickly ends, Hitchcock should have all his calls forwarded to the bullpen.
His days as a starter have finished dwindling.
They are finished.
With this information lodged in the recesses of his mind, Hitchcock tempted Showalter to think about him as he nearly pitched a shutout and the Yankees continued rumbling by edging the Blue Jays, 2-1, at Yankee Stadium.


Editorial Notebook; An Unexpected Treasure
Patrick Egan, an Irish laborer from County Galway, opened an account at the Emigrant Industrial Savings Bank in lower Manhattan on the night of Sept. 30, 1850, when the bank first opened for business.
That nugget of information comes from a newly uncovered trove of data in the bank's records, shedding new light on the first mass migration to America -- the flood of refugees from Ireland's devastating potato famine in the middle years of the 19th century.
It illuminates that dramatic era and the following decades with fresh human and economic detail.
More broadly, it illustrates how the interpretation of history is constantly enriched by the discovery of something in someone's attic or, in this case, a bank's basement.


Off Broadway House Rising on Broadway Next to Roundabout
Todd Haimes, the 39-year-old artistic director of the Roundabout Theater, has never bowed to conventional theatrical wisdom.
After virtually everyone in the theater world had written off the debt-ridden company 12 years ago, he cut costs and brought it back from the dead.
After nearly everyone pronounced the play an endangered species on Broadway, Mr.
Haimes moved the Roundabout from its Off Broadway base to a new home on Broadway, in the heart of Times Square.
Now he is at it again.
Having honed the company's reputation as one of New York's top revival playhouses, Mr.
Haimes has decided he wants his theater to be known as more than a haven for old plays.
So he is creating that rarity in the theatrical world of the 1990's, a new theater.


Executive Changes
BEAR, STEARNS &amp; CO., New York, a unit of the Bear Stearns Companies, named Michael Winchell senior managing director and head of the risk management group.
Also, David Marren and Timothy Greene, senior managing directors, were named co-managers of the fixed-income finance department.
DUN &amp; BRADSTREET CORP., Wilton, Conn., named Nicholas Trivisonno executive vice president for finance and chief financial officer.
FIRST DATA CORP., Hackensack, N.J., named Jack P. Kutner chief operating officer of its shareholder services group.
GAP INC., San Francisco, named Robert Fisher, its executive vice president and chief financial officer, chief operating officer.
Warren Hashagen, senior vice president of finance, becomes senior vice president and chief financial officer.
INTERNATIONAL PAPER CO., Purchase, N.Y., named John T. Dillon president and chief executive.
JAMES RIVER CORP., Richmond, said Ronald Singer, president of its European consumer-products division, had left the company.
The reason was not disclosed.
John Lundgren, who is responsible for European strategy and marketing and business operations in Greece and Turkey, was named acting president of the division.
PLAYTEX PRODUCTS INC., Westport, Conn., said Calvin Gauss, its president and chief operating officer, had resigned.
Michael Gallagher, its chief executive, will assume Mr.
Gauss's title of president, while the company will not name a chief operating officer.


Clinton in Awkward Role In the Debate on Welfare
President Clinton's campaign promise to "end welfare as we know it" was the signature element of his contention that he was a "new Democrat." It allowed him as he ran for election to advocate a "third way" that was neither conventional Democratic liberalism nor the conservatism that had been practiced by the Reagan and Bush Administrations.
In what was often his best applause line, Mr.
Clinton declared that all able-bodied welfare recipients should have to get off relief and go to work after two years.
He also promised additional education, job-training and child-care assistance to make work possible for uneducated, unskilled adults with young children.


Nets Say They Won't Trade Coleman
The Nets have no intention of trading DERRICK COLEMAN despite his wish to leave, General Manager WILLIS REED said yesterday.
After discussing the situation with the owners, Reed said the Nets expect Coleman to honor the final four years of his contract, worth $7.5 million per season.
And if Coleman does not report to training camp Oct. 6, Reed said the team would be willing to fine or suspend its star forward, who demanded a trade through his lawyer, HAROLD MacDONALD, last week.


Newark School Chief's Priorities
Dr.
Beverly L. Hall, Superintendent of the Newark school district, wants to get all 5-year-olds into all-day classrooms, give principals more control over their schools and find a new way to combat low attendance.
Dr.
Hall, speaking to community leaders at a reception yesterday in the Newark Museum, included these plans in her list of priorities for this school year, the first year in which the troubled district is under state control.


Economic Scene; The curse of natural resources. They can keep a country poor.
WEALTH can be a curse, and not just for the spoiled progeny of corporate executives and movie stars.
Economists have long suspected that natural wealth -- oil, minerals and the like -- undermine the prospects for growth in less developed countries.
That may run against all common sense, but Jeffrey Sachs and Andrew Warner of Harvard's Institute for International Development have now documented the impact.
In an as-yet-unpublished research paper, they offer a variety of possible explanations.
The best of them appears to be that natural resource exports interfere with the development of industry and the export-oriented manufacturing that, according to Mr.
Sachs, seems to be the most promising "way out of poverty."


Holiday Gift Ideas From Artist
ART MATTERS, a private New York-based foundation that supports contemporary (and sometimes controversial) artists, has recently published a catalogue of holiday gifts.
It includes 214 objects by artists, including porcelain plates with Weimaraner portraits by William Wegman and T-shirts with pithy quotes by Jenny Holzer.
A curlicued, weathered-steel ribbon candelabrum, right, by Isabell Ringenberg and Axel Soldwedel costs $185.
Profits go toward grants to artists.
The telephone number for a copy of the catalogue is (800) 909-7656; to order: (800) 979-2787.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL REPORT
St. Mary's
St.
Mary's College of Moraga, Calif., is sending its team east to play in New York on Saturday for the first time in 49 years.
The opponent will be Columbia rather than Fordham, its rival in a show-business series of 13 games between 1930 and 1946.


Taiwan Again Tries to Join U.N., and Again China Bars Door
There is an inevitability to autumn's arrival in New York.
Green leaves turn brown and carpet Central Park.
Diplomatic cavalcades clog midtown Manhattan once the United Nations convenes its General Assembly.
And Taiwan tries to get back into the United Nations while China works just as hard to keep it out.
Today, China amassed enough support for the third year in a row to delete from the General Assembly's agenda a proposal that Taiwan's lack of representation be considered.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association  NEW YORK KNICKS -- Named Lori Hamamoto director of media services.


Kings Are Sold but Won't Be Moved
The Los Angeles Kings, left in financial chaos by their former owner, BRUCE McNALL, were sold yesterday to Majestic Anschutz Venture, a partnership of the Denver investor PHILIP ANSCHUTZ and the Los Angeles developer EDWARD ROSKI Jr.
The team will remain in the Los Angeles area and eventually play in a new sports and entertainment complex that will also house the Los Angeles Lakers.
Earlier in the day, the Kings filed for bankruptcy to allow the purchase to proceed.
The sale is subject to the approval of the N.H.L.
Board of Governors. (AP)


McAdoo Is Named to Riley's Staff on Heat
BOB McADOO, who led the National Basketball Association in scoring three times, and the long-time coach SCOTTY ROBERTSON were hired by the Miami Heat as assistant coaches yesterday.
The Heat also hired STAN VAN GUNDY as an assistant coach and JEFF BZDELIK as a scout, giving the new coach, PAT RILEY, a full staff for the 1995-96 season.
McAdoo, a five-time All-Star, will coach for the first time.
A 14-year veteran, McAdoo played for Riley in Los Angeles for four seasons and retired after the 1985-86 season. (AP)


Events: Museum Shows
Eclectic Vignettes  The Abigail Adams Smith Museum, 421 East 61st Street (at York Avenue).
Exhibition hours: 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
A design exhibition to benefit the restoration of the Abigail Adams Smith Museum on the Upper East Side will feature a cozy New York colonial kitchen by the dealer and designer John Rosselli and other eclectic vignettes (for example, "George Washington's Bath Day" ) created by T. Keller Donovan, Brian Murphy for Parrish-Hadley, Bunny Williams, Carolyn Guttilla and Matthew Smythe.
A preview benefit will be held tonight at 6 P.M.
It opens to the public on Sept. 22 and closes on Sept. 28.
For information about tickets for the preview ($125 and up) and other dates ($10): (212) 838-7390.


Seagate Agrees to Buy Conner Peripherals
Seagate Technology Inc. said today that it had reached an agreement to acquire Conner Peripherals Inc. in a stock swap valued at $1.1 billion.
With 1994 sales of $4.5 billion, Seagate is already the largest maker of disk drives in terms of revenue; a deal would move the company past the Quantum Corporation as the largest in terms of units as well.


Investors Said to Back Off Mesa Proxy Fight
Convinced that management of Mesa Inc. is making a serious attempt to sell the company or find a merger partner, the billionaire Marvin Davis and two other dissident shareholders have agreed not to pursue a proxy fight for a time, people with knowledge of the details of the agreement said yesterday.
These people said Mesa would announce today that Mr.
Davis, David Batchelder and Dennis R. Washington, who have been threatening such a fight, had reached an agreement with T. Boone Pickens, Mesa's chairman and chief executive, and the company's board to step back from a proxy fight until Mesa's annual meeting next year.
If Mesa and the board were unable to come up with a satisfactory deal, the dissident group could then begin its proxy fight and nominate its own slate of directors.


AT&amp;T, REVERSING STRATEGY, ANNOUNCES A PLAN TO SPLIT INTO 3 SEPARATE COMPANIES
More than a decade after breaking up the Bell System to settle a Federal antitrust suit, the AT&amp;T Corporation announced yesterday that it would dismantle itself yet again -- this time voluntarily.
The move, a tacit acknowledgment that its vast information technology empire had become unfocused and too unwieldy to manage, is the largest dismantling of a corporation in American history, based on the stock-market value of the company, which exceeds $101 billion.


Officials Scrutinizing Doctor Bonuses in Managed Care Plans
State health officials are taking a hard look at the bonuses paid to physicians by managed care plans, a practice that critics say is eroding the relationship between doctors and their patients.
Physicians can earn bonuses from the plans, which cover a growing number of patients in New Jersey and other states, by limiting the number of patient referrals to specialists and the number of diagnostic tests or hospital stays they order.


Toyota Doubles Its Holdings in Daihatsu Motor of Japan
Moving toward more efficient production, the Toyota Motor Corporation doubled its stake today in the Daihatsu Motor Company, a small Japanese car maker that is considered part of the Toyota group.
The move, which increased Toyota's stake to 33.4 percent, appears aimed at allowing Toyota to get more control of Daihatsu in order to coordinate operations better and concentrate production in the most efficient plants of both companies.


No Headline
"I'm 63 years old, and I've worked here since 1957, and I don't remember a moment that's been worse. Even during the Great Depression, there was a sense that people cared enough to turn it around. But now, the prevailing public attitude views those at the lowest rungs of society as responsible for the country's problems. It's madness." EUGENE SKLAR, who runs a settlement house in Harlem.  [ B11:1. ]


Court to Hear A Challenge To Greenpoint
In a rare rebuke to bank regulators, a Federal court has agreed to hear a challenge to the acquisition by the Greenpoint Financial Corporation of 60 New York branches of Home Savings of America.
The court will hear a suit brought by Inner City Press/Community on the Move, a community group in the South Bronx, saying the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation should not have approved the $660 million deal because Greenpoint does not adequately serve low-income areas.


The Quiet Knight From India; 64-Square Question: Who Is Anand? Kasparov Is Finding Out
The disappointment was audible.
"I don't understand it!"


Japan Shows How to Kick Lumber Habit
To the Editor:
Re "Raise the Roof Beams, Japan" (Business Day, Sept. 14): Fortunately for the world's forests, Japan's home-building industry learned before we did that "Western-style" homes could be framed with materials other than wood.


Charlotte Ramsay, Conservationist, 53
Charlotte Appleton Kidder Ramsay, a philanthropist and wildlife conservationist, died on Saturday at George Washington University Hospital in Washington.
She was 53.
Her death, which her husband, William Ramsay, said was caused by an aneurysm, occurred two days before that of her mother, Dorothy Robinson Kidder, who died of cancer at age 78.


In Vietnam Era, U.S. Had Asia Experts
To the Editor:
Robert S. McNamara (letter, Sept. 14) repeats the statement in his book that in Vietnam there were no "senior officials in the Pentagon or State Department with comparable knowledge" to those who advised the Kennedy Administration on Russia.


Here, the Federal Overhaul Looks Very Familiar
The welfare overhaul passed by the Senate on Tuesday bore a striking resemblance to legislation passed earlier this year in Connecticut, where Gov.
John G. Rowland has made reducing the welfare rolls a centerpiece of his administration.
The state has already cut the amount it will spend on Aid to Families With Dependent Children, has approved the nation's strictest time limit on benefits -- 21 months -- and has vowed to move more than half its A.F.D.C. recipients into jobs over the next four years.


Plan to Scramble Sex Shows Is Blocked
A Federal judge in Manhattan yesterday issued an order blocking Time Warner from scrambling sexually explicit cable shows, saying that the law the company used to justify its plan was probably unconstitutional.
The scrambling plan was the first practical application of a controversial amendment to the Federal Cable Act, which conservatives intended to ban indecent programming.
Article, page B1.


NEWS SUMMARY
But a canvass of states indicates "welfare reform" has been taking place all across the country.
A1 STUNNED IN NEW YORK The directors of New York City's 37 settlement houses, which provide charitable services to more than half a million low-income people every year, were stunned by the Senate's action.
B11 MUCH IN NEW TAX BILL The $52 billion tax bill that the House Ways and Means Committee approved on Tuesday was advertised as an attempt to shut down unwarranted corporate tax breaks, but the bill include a lot more.
A1 JOCKEYING ON MEDICAID Congress scrutinized Republican proposals to limit the growth of Medicaid, and Democrats complained that Republicans were trying to ram the changes through Congress.
B9 MISSTEPS ON SWEATSHOPS With the raids on sweatshops in Los Angeles, state and Federal investigators have issued assurances that they are flushing out such operations.
But an examination of past investigations shows a series of missteps dating to 1988.A16 POLICE CALLED SENSITIVE Prosecutors in the O. J. Simpson case argued that after the killing of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman, the police were sensitive toward Mr.
Simpson and determined to ease his grief.
A16 PLAN TO POSTPONE OZONE CURBS Conservative Republicans in Congress are moving to postpone the phasing out of chemicals that scientists say are destroying the earth's protective ozone layer in the stratosphere.
A20 Metro Digest B1 CHANCELLOR SEARCH NARROWS The Board of Education narrowed its search for a new Chancellor for New York City's public schools to three candidates, including a college president from Brooklyn who has emerged as Mayor Giuliani's latest candidate.A1 Business Digest D1 Arts/Entertainment C13-22 Off Broadway theater rising on Broadway.
C13 Music: By Paul Bowles.
C13 Poplife C16 Dance: Compagnie Maguy Marin, at the Joyce Theater.
C13 Susan Rethorst C18 Books: Essays by Milan Kundera.
C19 Television: Julie Harris in "Lucifer's Child." C20 "Listening to Children." C20 The Home Section C1-11 Parent &amp; Child: Practicing safety on the Internet.
C1 Obituaries B12 Sports B13-19 Baseball: Yankees are awaiting a proposal from New Jersey.
B13 Yanks win to tighten race.
B13 Angels in a free fall.
B15 Mets win: 7 out of 8.
B16 Pro Basketball: Mason is set to re-sign with the Knicks.
B13 Columns: Anderson on golf B13 Pro Football: Taylor gives the slumping Giants a pep talk.
B13 Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23 Editorials New York's bilingual 'prison.' Mr.
Aristide's first year.
Attack on low-income housing.
Richard E. Mooney: Immigrants.
Letters William Safire: Testiness up top.
Maureen Dowd: The rise of the fallen.
Lynne A. Munson: Art by committee.
E.
Clay Shaw Jr.: A credit that's fair.
Chronicle B24 Bridge C18 Crossword C16


Lambach Journal; 6 Durers Gone! Good Heavens, a Monk's Caper?
There is no way to overlook the massive bulk of the Benedictine Monastery that rears over this old town on the River Traun like a moored ocean liner.
And since the beginning of this month, there has been no way, either, to overlook the fact that, within the monastery's mustard-colored walls, someone has been less than observant with a couple of the Ten Commandments, specifically those relating to theft and mendacity.


A Credit That's Fair
The earned income tax credit, which provides cash to poor and low-wage workers, enjoys widespread support.
But a careful examination shows that in addition to its obvious strengths it is marred by costly flaws.
That's why on Tuesday the House Ways and Means Committee voted for reforms that promote equity and efficiency while saving taxpayers $23 billion over seven years.
In 1993, Congress voted to use the credit to provide childless low-wage workers with a maximum of $300 in cash.
But House legislation would disallow that.
Republicans don't think taxpayers should supplement the income of those who are not rearing children.


BUSINESS DIGEST
SEARCH FOR CHANCELLOR NARROWS TO 3 After a day of back-room politicking, the New York City Board of Education narrowed its search for a chancellor of the city's public schools to three candidates, including a college president from Brooklyn who has emerged as Mayor Giuliani's latest candidate.
Leon M. Goldstein, the president of Kingsborough Community College, became one of the three finalists a day after it seemed that the board had passed him by in favor of three educators from outside the city -- none of whom appeared to have the Mayor's support.  [ Page A1. ] New York City, where the phrase ethnic politics is redundant, is on the verge of selecting a new schools chancellor without the usual squabbles over race.
Seventeen were arrested in New York City.  [ B5. ] Mayor Giuliani said that if Gen.
Colin L. Powell decides to run for President, he should do so as a Republican and compete in the party's primary in New York.  [ B2. ] REGION  ELECTRIC CARS MAY BE DELAYED Amid a strenuous lobbying campaign by the oil and auto industries, Governor Pataki is hinting that he may push back the state's deadline for auto makers to begin selling electric cars in New York State, now just over two years away.
His decision could have an important effect on whether the auto industry will sell electric cars or other fuel-efficient vehicles across the rest of the nation.  [ B6. ] OFFICIALS SCRUTINIZING DOCTOR BONUSES State health officials are taking a hard look at the bonuses paid to physicians by managed care plans, a practice that critics say is eroding the relationship between doctors and their patients.
Physicians can earn bonuses from the plans, which cover a growing number of patients in New Jersey and other states, by limiting the number of patient referrals to specialists and the number of diagnostic tests or hospital stays they order.  [ B6. ] Chronicle B24


Trophy for Morgan Stanley And Business for Its Rivals
The decision by AT&amp;T to divide itself into three separate publicly traded companies is something of a coup for Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, AT&amp;T's investment bank, showing off the robust telcommunications practice of the Wall Street firm.
But the huge reorganization, which will involve as much as $100 billion worth of AT&amp;T assets, also promises to deliver more rich business to Wall Street, and some of that could go to Morgan Stanley's competitors.


ALLIES SAY SERBS HAVE PULLED BACK GUNS AT SARAJEVO
United Nations and NATO commanders announced early today that Bosnian Serb forces had removed their heavy weapons from positions around Sarajevo and that as a result, NATO planes would not resume bombing attacks against them.
"The resumption of air strikes is currently not necessary," NATO's southern commander, Adm.
Leighton Smith, and the United Nations commander in Bosnia, Gen.
Bernard Janvier, said in a joint statement hours after a 10 P.M. deadline imposed by NATO for the removal of the Bosnian Serb heavy weapons.


Whitman Assails Medicaid Cuts
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman warned yesterday that New Jersey and other northeastern states faced likely cuts in medical services to the poor and disabled under Medicaid financing plans drawn up by her fellow Republicans in Congress.
At issue is how the states share the burden of cutting $180 billion from projected growth in Medicaid spending by 2002, when the Republicans want a balanced Federal budget.
Under a House Commerce Committee plan to reconcile House and Senate spending bills, New Jersey and 11 other northeastern states would be bigger losers than southern and western states.


Is Bucket Half Full?
Can a birdbath be refilled from a bucket of water?
Can dusty high school football and soccer fields be sprayed from private wells?
Can a car be washed during a rainstorm?


Boycott of Indy 500 Is Threatened
The biggest names in Indy racing may skip the biggest race next year.
IndyCar owners are threatening a boycott of the Indianapolis 500 unless the Speedway president, TONY GEORGE, rescinds a new qualifying plan that would affect teams and drivers not aligned with his new Indy Racing League.


Trail Blazers Trade Thorpe to Pistons
In a deal that had been expected since June, the Portland Trail Blazers traded forward OTIS THORPE to Detroit yesterday for the rookie guard RANDOLPH CHILDRESS and the second-year forward BILLY CURLEY.
The Pistons chose Childress, a sharpshooter from Wake Forest, with the 19th pick in the June 28 draft. (AP)


Practicing Safety On the Internet
FOR years, American parents have been encouraged to help their children join the ranks of computer-literate, Internet cruisers.
Coax them into the high-tech future, goes the theory, or they will join the benighted have-nots of the information age.
Yet, suddenly it seems that cyberspace is a dangerous place for children.
Last week, in a major raid, Federal agents arrested more than a dozen people who were charged with using America Online, the nation's largest computer network, to distribute child pornography and lure minors into sex.


Shards and Scraps Yield Outdoor Art
EARLY mornings at 285 Mott Street in Little Italy, a passer-by can hear artisans smashing old dishes for bits-and-pieces mosaics, a craft known as pique-assiette.
The artist, Linda Benswanger, makes planters, from $28 to $120; tabletops, from $150 to $3,000, and outdoor sculptures like this fat, alert rabbit ($550), all decorated with shards of leftover tile and porcelain.
The bunny might enliven even a drought-withered garden.
Mozayiks, (212) 219-1160.


Essay; Testiness Up Top
Why am I always the skunk at the garden party?
It seems I have offended the most popular person in the world.
In a New Yorker interview with Harvard's Prof.
Henry Louis Gates Jr., Gen.
Colin Powell says about Bosnia: "William Safire and Tony Lewis say this will only take a little bit of bombing and it will work. No historical precedent exists for such a position."


Dynamo Kiev Banned from European Play
Dynamo Kiev was suspended from European soccer for two years yesterday after an inquiry found that the Ukrainian club tried to bribe ANTONIO LOPEZ NIETO, a Spanish referee, to fix a Champions Cup game on Sept. 13 between Kiev and Panathinaikos of Greece.
Dynamo won, 1-0. (AP)


Candidates Urge Tax Options
After decades of pay-as-you-go taxation comes an offer of pay what you choose.
That, essentially, is the platform of the two Democratic challengers for Assembly in the 39th District, Dr.
Alan Baskin of Montvale and Kay Palacios of Englewood Cliffs.
Seeking to oust two Republicans, John E. Rooney of Emerson and Charlotte Vandervalk of Westwood, their campaign is propelled by the slogan "No School Property Taxes."


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $100 million of debentures due in 1996 through Fuji Securities.
The debentures, which are callable monthly beginning Nov. 3, carry an interest rate of 5.84 percent and are priced at par.


Great Words From Great Cheapskates
Is Voluntary Simplicity just a new swing of an old pendulum?
" 'Tis the gift to be simple," goes the Shaker hymn.
And indeed, ever since the Preacher ("Vanity of vanities. . . ") people have talked about doing more with less.
Prototype downshifters include St.
Francis of Assisi, Benjamin Franklin ("If a man empties his purse into his head, no one can take it away from him") and, a century and a half later, Mohandas K. Gandhi ("High thinking is inconsistent with the complicated material life based on high jspeed imposed on us by mammon worship").
Following, two more grand-daddies of downshifting - and one lucid dissenter.
TIMOTHY JACK WARD


Colgate Sees Job Cuts And Lower Earnings
The Colgate-Palmolive Company took Wall Street by surprise yesterday when it announced that dismal results in Mexico would lower its operating earnings by more than 30 cents a share this year and that it would cut 8.5 percent of its work force in a sweeping reorganization.
The company, whose products include Colgate toothpaste, Ajax cleanser and Fab detergent, said the revamping was not related to its problems in Mexico.
The long-planned reorganization of manufacturing and administrative operations will eliminate 3,000 of the company's 36,000 jobs and close or consolidate 24 factories in the United States and Europe.
The work force reduction is part of Colgate's third reorganization since 1987.


Mason Hits the Boards and the Jackpot With Knicks
Anthony Mason said last season that he was going to gamble.
He turned down a three-year, $9 million contract extension by the Knicks.
With a huge financial risk hanging over his head, Mason responded with his best season in the National Basketball Association.
"I came up 7's, didn't I?" he said earlier this week.


The Yankees Are Awaiting A New Jersey Proposition
If New Jersey state officials are waiting for George Steinbrenner to ask publicly for a proposal for a new stadium for the Yankees, consider it done.
As far as Steinbrenner, the Yankees' principal owner, is concerned, he already has extended an invitation.
"We said we're interested in anyone who will talk to us," Steinbrenner said yesterday.
"That's saying if you have something, come and talk to us."


New York's Bilingual 'Prison'
Instruction in English alone may not be the perfect method of helping immigrant students into the mainstream.
But neither is a system that dragoons children into bilingual programs that reinforce the students' dependency on their native language and then makes escape impossible.
The Board of Education made this point last year in a scalding report on bilingual education in New York.
Its broad conclusion was that new immigrants instructed in English alone performed better than students in bilingual education programs, where comparatively little English is spoken.
In a lawsuit based mainly on the board's report, a Brooklyn parents group charged this week that tens of thousands of immigrant children were being warehoused in bilingual classes well beyond the three years specified in state law, and taught neither English nor anything else very well.


Philharmonic Opens, Earnest and Edgy
The New York Philharmonic opened its season last night with an evening that was part gala and part policy statement.
Patrons circumnavigated Avery Fisher Hall wearing their best.
Television cameras whirled.
In the wings, orchestra members were sharpening their swords for the contract negotiations to come; the current agreement expired with this concert, and hours earlier the orchestra had authorized its negotiators to strike if strike they will.
Onstage, Kurt Masur conducted Strauss and Wagner: two dead Germans by way of a living one.
Mr.
Masur was beginning his fifth season as music director of the Philharmonic, and the old adjectives attached to him have not changed: earnest, blunt, dour, thorough.
Great music in Mr.
Masur's scheme of things is not unbridled bliss but hard work followed by commensurate reward.


Gloom and Despair Among Advocates of the Poor
The morning after the Senate voted to end the country's 60-year-old guarantee of relief for poor families, a group of people who have devoted their careers to those families gathered in a tired public-housing assembly room in Manhattan yesterday for one of the gloomiest meetings any of them could remember.
The directors of the city's 37 settlement houses, which provide charitable services to more than half a million low-income people every year, were stunned by the Senate's action, and particularly by the strong bipartisan support behind it.
There were calls for prayer at their monthly meeting, and there were fears of riots voiced.


When Ferocious Engagement Becomes the Ally of Dreamy
Susan Rethorst dances dreamily and with ferocious engagement.
Unsurprisingly, those were the dominant qualities in two pieces Ms.
Rethorst presented on Sunday night at Performance Space 122.
"Twain," a 1987 solo danced in silence, is a good introduction to Ms.
Rethorst's style, which takes the kind of squiggly, slippery movement perfected by Trisha Brown to new heights of fragmentation and elusiveness.
But the lack of readily discernible form and function are more than made up for by the poetic subtlety and richness of Ms.
Rethorst's gestures and her tiny sorties into activity.


G.O.P. Attack on Low-Income Housing
The Republican leadership has found a new way to pummel the poor: Cut programs that benefit them in the name of eliminating "corporate welfare." Embarrassed by accusations that the party's budget victimized the disadvantaged, Representative Bill Archer, chairman of the House tax-writing committee, pledged to go after corporations as well.
So his committee passed a closing of tax loopholes that, he says, subsidize rich corporations.
His list of loopholes does include needless handouts to poultry farms and Hollywood studios.
But it also includes a subsidy that has created most of the country's low-cost housing in recent years.
Mr.
Archer would eliminate the low-income-housing tax credit, a provision first passed in 1986.
The credit goes to investors -- mostly corporations -- that provide money to nonprofit groups for construction or rehabilitation of low-income housing.


Long Before the Word,There Was the Music
Anyone who has ever tried to write music knows that it requires an assortment of cruelly disparate skills.
The first is the ability to cultivate solitude, to pull sounds from the dreamy murk and test their musical promise.
Next comes the tedious labor of capturing these ideas on paper.
Add to this the thankless, endless task of getting one's music noticed, performed, published and preserved: the composer must be a poet and politician in equal measure.
Paul Bowles, the legendary expatriate who made his first American appearance in 26 years at a concert of his works at Alice Tully Hall on Tuesday night, is a case of a composer who gave up.
He drifted into composition at around the age of 20, and soon enough displayed striking gifts.
Despite an incorrigible lack of interest in the technical aspects of music making, he attracted the attention of leading American composers of the 1930's, particularly Aaron Copland and Virgil Thomson.
He wrote for theater and ballet, and his concert works shared programs with Elliott Carter and Roger Sessions.


For Brash Champ From Baku, Battles Away From the Board
"I want to see whether he is going to testify," Gary Kasparov was saying.
This was before his defense of his world chess title began, and Mr.
Kasparov, unshaven, barefoot, casually dressed in a T-shirt and slacks, was in the Battery Park City apartment he is using during the match.
The television set was on, tuned to a CNN summary of the O. J. Simpson trial.
"If he is innocent it is no problem for him to talk," Mr.
Kasparov said with customary assurance.
"A man with such an ability to talk is refusing to testify? Come on. I know the mentality, I belong to the same caliber, and I know, if I have a good case, I can speak better than the lawyer."


WELFARE IN TRANSITION:  States Are Already Providing a Glimpse at Welfare's Future; Wisconsin: Big Cuts Already, And More Ahead
In Wisconsin, where Gov.
Tommy G. Thompson has built a political career on shrinking the welfare rolls, the Congressional bills would open the way for even bolder cuts, including an end to cash payments to poor people who decline to work.
"This is the greatest news," said Kevin Keane, a spokesman for the Republican Governor, who took office in 1987.
"We're now going to be able to implement our own program."


Treasury Prices Advance Despite Wider Trade Gap
Treasury prices gained ground yesterday for the second consecutive session.
The advance came despite a Commerce Department report that showed the United States trade deficit widened to $11.5 billion in July.
The trade report also showed that imports of capital goods surged to a fifth consecutive record high, which did not help the market's cause.


Bonds Tumble On Big Jump In Fed Survey
Prices of Treasury securities were slammed to the mat yesterday, flipped by a weak dollar and a regional Federal Reserve report showing a strong business outlook.
That set back optimism for another rate cut by the central bank this year.
"Both the rise in the Philadelphia Fed survey of regional business activity and the weakness in the dollar tipped the scale," said Tony Crescenzi, head of fixed-income trading at Miller, Tabak, Hirsch &amp; Company, a New York brokerage firm.


Art in Review
Hans Bellmer  Ubu Gallery 16 East 78th Street Through Oct. 21
Hans Bellmer's time has come again, it seems.
Bellmer was a once-prominent Surrealist who died in 1975 in Paris at the age of 73, by which time he had largely passed from the public eye.
But his fetishistic images of rearranged limbs have lately become a touchstone for Surrealist-influenced young artists like Cindy Sherman, Jeanne Dunning, Greer Lankton and Rona Pondick.
He was born in Silesia and studied in Berlin, where George Grosz taught him to draw.
He developed a delicate, willowy style of draftsmanship very much of its moment.
It belied his often shocking imagery and came more to resemble Dali's art than Grosz's, though he always shared with Grosz a sardonic view of society.
Abandoning Germany after the Nazis came to power, he moved in 1938 to Paris, where he was already known to the Surrealists from various publications of his art.


Dow Retreats by 25.29 As Dollar Falls Sharply
The stock market slumped yesterday, dragged down by a plunge in the dollar that raised concerns that foreign investors might retreat from American securities.
Shortly before 2 P.M., the Dow Jones industrial average dropped 49.49 points -- just shy of the level that would set off the New York Stock Exchange's 50-point "circuit breaker" rule.
It was the second time this week that the Dow fell nearly 50 points in daily trading.


Buildings That Hide and Reveal
LIGHT CONSTRUCTION," the new architecture show at the Museum of Modern Art, is a painfully frustrating muddle. Excellent projects are on view, they are handsomely presented and an intriguing premise hovers in the air. But for a show that deals in large part with the themes of transparency and luminescence, "Light Construction" is unforgivably dim: poorly focused, capricious in its choice of projects and lax in its grasp of the history in which it sites them.
This is the first international survey organized by Terence Riley, chief curator of the Modern's department of architecture and design, since he took over the department's helm three years ago.
Despite its flaws, this is an important reading of contemporary architecture.
Mr.
Riley has done much to restore the department's luster as the country's premiere design showcase, and "Light Construction" is the most ambitious display of contemporary work he has put in that showcase.


Art in Review
'Dutch Wives, Phone Sex and Other Cheap Thrills'  Apex Art 291 Church Street Lower Manhattan Through Oct. 7
Jessica Fredericks and Andrew Freiser, the curators of this exhibition, define their theme as a search for the "erotic other." John Wesley paints a telephone and a bed.
Kevin Sullivan repaints (and defaces) the covers of old albums by Fleetwood Mac and Sly Stone.
Jasper Johns evokes a wooden device used by sailors for solace.
Andrew Lord contributes a bronze statue, "Jug Pressing and Squeezing."


BMW Association Narrows Review
The Tristate BMW Advertising Association in Yonkers said yesterday that it had narrowed the review on its account to 6 agencies from 32.
The account, with billings estimated at $5 million, had been at Ally &amp; Gargano in New York for almost three years until the association joined other clients in leaving the troubled agency.
Ron Napoli Sr., chairman of the association, confirmed a report this week in Adweek that the review had been narrowed to these agencies, all based in New York: Altschiller &amp; Company, owned by the Omnicom Group; DeVito/Verdi; Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos; Lois/USA; Slater Hanft Martin, and Waring &amp; LaRosa.
A decision is expected on Oct. 5, Mr.
Napoli said.


Art in Review
Jim Dow  Janet Borden Gallery 560 Broadway (at Prince Street) SoHo Through Oct. 14
There'll always be an England, and Americans will probably always find it both fascinating and a little weird.
Jim Dow, an American photographer, presents color images of English corner stores, from umbrella shops to florists' shops to fast-food takeaways specializing in jellied eels and other such delicacies.


Corrections
An obituary on Saturday about the Rev.
Mother Gayatri Devi, spiritual leader of a religious order rooted in Hinduism, misstated the place of her death.
It was South Shore Hospital in Weymouth, Mass., not in California at one of the order's religious communities.


Benny Bailey's Trumpet Takes the Middle Road
Older jazz musicians often make adjustments for age, finding a way to replace technique with lyricism or spareness.
Benny Bailey, an expatriate trumpeter who last performed in New York City during the late 1970's or early 80's, depending on who's talking, has figured out his approach.
He rarely performs any material over a medium tempo, and at that speed, where nothing is circumscribed by velocity, he places his notes carefully, moving from precise and even lines to smears and kissed notes.
One of the many small miracles be-bop bequeathed to jazz in the early 1940's was the even eighth note, and Mr.
Bailey, who is appearing at the Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at Perry Street, through Sunday, can play them.
His phrases on Tuesday night often featured a lean series of notes whose rhythms were insinuated by the internal weight given notes within a line.
And after a smooth phrase or two, he yelped or squealed a note on his horn; Mr.
Bailey is familiar with the swing vocabulary as well as be-bop's grammar, and he played everything with a large, open tone, as if the microphone were irrelevant to his way of thinking.


G.O.P. Farm-Subsidy Overhaul Unravels
Republican efforts to rewrite the nation's Depression-era system of farm subsidies have fallen apart in battles among interest groups, with Republicans from cotton-growing districts successfully banding together against Republicans from Midwestern grain states.
Five Republicans crossed party lines on Wednesday night to block the Republican leadership's bill, which would have replaced the traditional subsidies with fixed, slowly dwindling annual payments to farmers.
The payments would have been made regardless of what crops the farmers planted or even if they left their fields fallow.


A Back Seat For Ballesteros In Early Going
It was left to Lanny Wadkins, the combative, swaggering captain of the United States Ryder Cup team, to put the proceedings into perspective on the eve of the biennial matches that will begin on Friday at Oak Hill Country Club.
With his cap pulled low and his jacket collar flipped up, Wadkins squinted into the cameras today and delivered one of his patented rapid-fire bursts.
"Everybody is ready to play," he said.
"These guys have been wanting this for two years. Lets get the flags up, get the anthems sung, get to tomorrow and start playing golf."


Top Equestrian Is Convicted In Horse Insurance Scheme
A prominent equestrian who is the son of one of the richest men in America, was convicted of three counts of wire fraud today in the climax of a four-year Federal investigation into horse killing and insurance fraud.
George Lindemann Jr., 31, faces a mandatory prison term, which prosecutors said could be between 15 months and 15 years, and a maximum $3 million fine for ordering the 1990 killing of a show horse, Charisma, to collect $250,000 in insurance money.





RESULTS PLUS
HARNESS RACING  Nick's Fantasy Wins
A Hall of Fame driver, John Campbell, guided Nick's Fantasy to victory yesterday in Delaware, Ohio, in the 50th and fastest Little Brown Jug.
The day was marked by an accident that injured a driver, Michel Lachance.
Nick's Fantasy was timed in 1:512/5 , breaking the stakes record of 1:52 set by Life Sign two years ago.
The time also set a world record for a mile by 3-year-old gelding pacers on a half-mile track.
Nick's Fantasy became only the second gelding to win the third of pacing's triple crown events.
Sea Train won in 1975.


Medical Mystery With the Last Chapter to Come
Genes, Blood and Courage A Boy Called Immortal Sword  By David G. Nathan  276 pages.
Belknap Press. $24.95.
Anybody who as a young person read Paul De Kruif's "Microbe Hunters" knows just how exciting a medical detective story can be, more exciting in its way than conventional detective stories.
Medical mysteries, after all, are true stories, and they involve invisible dangers -- microbes, viruses, genetic accidents -- that kill people like us.


The Davis Cup Draw Is Truly a Spectacle
Like a horse of a different color, like an event beyond the pale, Caesars Palace staged a garish and glitzy draw ceremony today for this weekend's Davis Cup semifinal between the United States and Sweden, the defending champion.
"Las Vegas definitely adds another element to Davis Cup tennis," said Brian Tobin, president of the International Tennis Federation, who described the pomp and circumstance as "humbling."


As Prospects in Bosnia Brighten, G.O.P. Doubts a Need for G.I.'s
As chances for peace in Bosnia improve, bringing America's promise to send troops to enforce an agreement closer to reality, Republicans today questioned whether the United States should send any soldiers to Bosnia, even if the warring parties put down their weapons.
Administration officials warned that failure to meet the President's stated commitment to provide troops to enforce an accord would undermine the search for peace and cause serious friction with NATO allies.


School Officer Held in Abuse of Student, 14
A New York City school safety officer was arrested yesterday on charges of sexually abusing a 14-year-old special-education student in the bathroom of the school safety office at Intermediate School 190 in Forest Hills, Queens.
The officer was the 16th employee of the Board of Education's School Safety Division to have been implicated in a sex abuse case, said Edward F. Stancik, the special commissioner of investigation for New York City schools.


Death Penalty Law Is Not Easy to Apply
As the clock tolled midnight on Sept. 1, ushering in New York's death penalty law, prosecutors and defense lawyers began holding their breaths, expecting that a murder resulting in the first capital case would be hours, or at most, days away.
More than three weeks later, they are still waiting.


Sanders Gets a Razzing
San Francisco 49er fans showed up tonight to boo a San Francisco Giant.
Deion Sanders, in his first home game since signing a $35 million contract with the Dallas Cowboys, heard chants of "traitor, traitor" while trying to field baseballs in center field.


International Briefs; Total Signs Contract On Yemen Gas Project
Total S.A., France's second-largest oil company, signed the final contract yesterday with Yemen for a multibillion-dollar liquefied natural gas project.
The project calls for planned investment in Yemen by Total of $3 billion.


Mencken's Heart Belonged to Baltimore Paper
To the Editor:
Russell Baker (column, Sept. 19) appropriately laments the passing of the Baltimore Evening Sun and recalls that it was the "monument" of that most singular of all American journalists, H. L. Mencken.


Anand's Plan Is a Riddle as Draws Persist
If chess players are generals deploying their forces in battle, Viswanathan Anand has made a mystery of his grand design.
Assuming, of course, that he has a grand design.
Indeed, as Game 7 against Gary Kasparov ended yesterday in another draw, the seventh in a row, Anand has left everyone guessing.
Every time Kasparov has Black he plays provocatively, but Anand stays away from the many attacking lines of play against such a setup.
He may believe that he is the better strategist and should try to obtain and exploit tiny positional advantages.
But the trouble is he has not been able to get decent winning opportunities that way.


Japan's Socialist Party Disbands, Searching for a New Identity
The Socialist Party, which spent most of its 50-year history as Japan's leading opposition force, decided today to disband itself and form a new party by the end of next month.
The action, taken at a special party convention here, is meant to help the party survive in the gradual reorganization of Japan's political world.


On My Mind; While the Children Sleep
He strolled out of his apartment in Manhattan.
He knew where to get what he wanted, no problem.
He was back soon with his packages, the way some husbands come home with ice cream or flowers.
He took some of the contents, and so did his wife.
She died.
The two little kids were asleep.
They found out in the the morning.


More Limits To Curb Speed For Subways
In a directive that will mean slower subway service in many places throughout New York City, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority board yesterday decided to post speed limits wherever signal lights are too close together, to prevent accidents like the one on the Williamsburg Bridge in June.
About one-third of the system has the antiquated signals that are considered candidates for speed limits, though officials said not all of them will require one.
Just how many will is still under study.


For Yanks, a Nice Comeback and an Ailing Back
Every pitch that Jack McDowell unleashed last night pained him because of the nagging muscle strain in his upper back.
The injury troubled him and he could not locate his pitches.
The Yankees knew this might happen, but they considered an ailing McDowell better than most healthy starters.
So there was McDowell trudging through five tough innings, constantly working with Blue Jays on base and merely trying to keep the game tight until the Yankees unveiled an offensive explosion.
He waited through the pain while Toronto starter Paul Menhart handcuffed the Yankees and carried a seemingly sturdy 4-1 lead into eighth inning.
The 17,766 spectators at Yankee Stadium were ready to leave, and then, with a flourish, Ruben Sierra came through.


In Global Sales, Breakup Plan Will Give Units Room to Roam
Smaller may or may not be better, but the decision by the AT&amp;T Corporation to break itself into three separate companies could help its ambitions to expand around the world.
On many parts of the globe -- in China, India, Mexico, Brazil or various European countries -- AT&amp;T has been ramping up rapidly as either a supplier of advanced equipment or as a provider of communications services.


Knicks Reward Mason's Effort With New Deal
Anthony Mason, who often wears his conscience on his scalp, had his barber recently engrave a message to the Knicks.
His head read, "Whaddyagonnado?"
The Knicks thought deeply on this matter, and then replied by generously paying up.


Cordero Will Ride Again
The Hall of Fame jockey ANGEL CORDERO JR. will make his long-awaited comeback on Oct. 1 at El Comandante Race Track in San Juan, P.R.
Cordero was born in Puerto Rico and rode the first of his 7,054 career victories at El Comandante in 1960.


Dean Foods Co.(DF,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Aug 27


Keene Withdraws
Christopher Keene, the general director of the New York City Opera, has withdrawn from the company's new production of Toshiro Mayuzumi's "Kinkakuji," which he was to have conducted.
Mr.
Keene was recently hospitalized for anemia, and although he was released, his doctors have advised him not to undertake a new production.
In a statement, the company said that Mr.
Keene would "concentrate on his duties as a general director until his strength returns." The Mayuzumi work, for which Mr.
Keene provided an English translation, is to be conducted by Joseph Colaneri, the company's chorus master.


Promises in San Francisco


International Briefs; Swiss Discount Rate Cut
Switzerland's central bank cut its largely symbolic discount rate half a percentage point yesterday to 2 percent, the lowest level since January 1980, in a bid to spur exports and halt the Swiss franc's strong advance on currency markets.
Analysts were skeptical about whether the move by the Swiss National Bank would halt the franc's steep ascent against the German mark and dollar, the two biggest trading currencies for Swiss exporters. (Reuters)


Polygraphy Provides A Test for C.I.A.
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 17 editorial call for the Central Intelligence Agency to cease the use of polygraph tests is on target.
Those of us who have studied polygraphy have long understood that claims for its validity are fallacious.
Polygraphy has continued to be applied in the face of evidence.
In the late 1980's I briefed a White House national security group on the scientific data, and we discussed a hypothetical situation that later proved similar to the Aldrich Ames case.


Exel Ltd.(XL,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Aug 31


For Children
1995 Medieval Festival at Fort Tryon Park  The Cloisters, Fort Tryon Park Washington Heights (212) 795-1600 Recommended for all ages Sunday
When 7-year-old Kate Phillips went to the medieval festival last year, she was frightened by the joust.
But she reveled in the entourage of puppets and puppet shows (including a wicked Punch and Judy) and had her face painted.
None of it was ordinary, including the face painting.
As her mother, Ginny Donnelly, described the artwork on Kate, "It was delicate, like the edges of an illuminated manuscript." And, she added, it was worth the $5 it cost, since a photograph of Kate looking as beautiful as the Book of Kells has proved to be a fine one to send to friends.


Parking Rules
Because of Rosh ha-Shanah, alternate-side street-cleaning regulations will be suspended in New York City on Monday and Tuesday.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Whitman Creates a Sports Panel
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman set up a 12-member State Sports History Commission yesterday to organize celebrations for landmark New Jersey sports events.
Among them: the 150th anniversary next year of the first organized baseball game at Hoboken's Elysian Fields in June 1846.


Student Loans Show Sharp Rise, Report Says
Borrowing to pay for college has soared in recent years, with Federal loan programs disbursing more in the last four years than in their first 20, raising worries among educators about the debt burden being carried by students and their families.
The increase, which is believed to be particularly large among middle-class families, is being caused by a combination of rising costs, a shrinking of grants and loosening rules on loans, educators and loan officials said today.


Shopko Stores Inc.(SKO,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Sept 9


A Sickening Catalogue of Sins, Every One of Them Deadly
In "Seven," a grim urban environment is rocked by horrible murders, each more gruesome than the last and each with strong ties to the local library.
It seems that the killer, showily conversant with Dante, Milton, Chaucer and no doubt Agatha Christie, has devised an orderly string of crimes that deliver a collective message.
Each one interprets a deadly sin in terms that smack of Hannibal Lecter.
Pride: A beautiful model is butchered, with her nose cut off to spite her face.
Et cetera.
In case these crimes, however disgustingly rendered, are not formulaic enough, "Seven" also throws in two familiar detective types: the brash new guy (Brad Pitt), and the steady-handed veteran who is on the verge of leaving the force (Morgan Freeman).
The new guy has a loving, patient wife (Gwyneth Paltrow), and so the film treats her in ways you wouldn't treat a dog.
As for the veteran, if you guess that he has only one week to go before retirement, naturally you're right.


No Headline
"It wouldn't surprise me at all if some students hear all of this and then look at the O. J. trial and just decide, 'I'd rather be a dentist."' -- GENE NICHOL, dean of the University of Colorado Law School.  [ A24:1. ]


60 Arrests in Hoboken Stings
After a veritable masquerade party involving 38 city undercover officers, the Hoboken Police Chief, Carmen LaBruno, said yesterday that sting operations over two months had brought more than 60 arrests on charges including burglary, drug selling, prostitution and vandalism; 39 summonses for taxi violations and 8 summonses against bars for serving underage drinkers.


AT&amp;T Move Is a Reversal Of Course Set in 1980's
What a difference a decade makes.
In splitting itself into three companies, the AT&amp;T Corporation might seem to be replaying the original Bell System breakup of more than a decade ago.
In actuality however, it is reversing course.


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan art shows:  "VULNERABILITY," the Dahn Gallery, 39 Wooster Street, SoHo (through Sept. 30).
In this group show of Oriental and Occidental artists, the standouts are Kunie Sugiura's assemblages of X-ray photographs displayed in postcard racks and Ruth Pastine's square canvases of closely valued colors merging almost imperceptibly into one another, like melted-down Rothkos (Pepe Karmel).
"VIETNAMESE PROPAGANDA ART," O. K. Harris Gallery, 383 West Broadway, between Spring and Broome Streets, SoHo (through Oct. 7).
How could a small, impoverished country like North Vietnam have defeated a large, wealthy nation like the United States?
That country's victory seems even more amazing when you see what drab, uninspiring propaganda posters it had (Karmel).
RON TAYLOR, Richard Anderson Fine Arts, 476 Broome Street, SoHo (through Oct. 14).
Ghostly elongated figures on dark grounds with hissing neon highlights: Pavel Tchelitchev for the 90's (Karmel).
MARILYN MINTER, "Coral Ridge Towers," Postmasters Gallery, 80 Greene Street, SoHo (through Oct. 8).
The black-and-white photographs in this show -- of the artist's mother, a Florida recluse sustained by drugs and a ruined 1930's glamour -- date from 1969, just after Ms.
Minter had been in contact with Diane Arbus.
They're certainly in the grotesque, darkly comical Arbusian vein, but infused with a tough empathy (Holland Cotter).
HELEN SOREFF, M-13 Gallery, 72 Greene Street, SoHo (through Sept. 30).
For more than two decades, Ms.
Soreff has been producing somber, painterly abstractions based on the Minimalist grid.
This time she's whited or blacked the grid out, giving the show an interestingly muffled, ghostly, last-minute-decision look (Cotter).


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
4.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.75
5.72
4.78
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.21
5.17
4.77
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.27
5.19
5.17
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.20
6.10
7.53
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.55
6.46
7.77
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.50
7.40
8.59
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.07
6.02
6.53
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Racial Charge Causes Anger At Newspaper
Some journalists at The Washington Post reacted with fury this week to a magazine article that portrayed the paper's staff as divided along racial lines and its news coverage as soft on Washington's black officials.
The cover article in the current issue of The New Republic said that The Post's quest for diversity on its staff had diminished the quality of its coverage.
The writer, Ruth Shalit, suggested that editors would "adjust their traditional hiring standards" to employ more minority journalists.


Brazil Massacre Has Roots in Land Crisis
To the Editor:
The gruesome torture and summary execution of Brazilian squatters (front page, Sept. 19) illustrate the desperate position of landless communities throughout the third world and portend the insurrectionary path that repressed squatter movements will probably continue to choose.


Merged Bank to Close 7 Offices in Poorer Areas
Low- and middle-income neighborhoods in New York City will lose seven bank branches because of the pending merger of Chemical and Chase Manhattan banks, a Chemical official announced yesterday.
The two banks now have 95 branches in these neighborhoods, but that number will be reduced to 88 when the 7 branches -- none more than two blocks from another -- are consolidated.
Two closings are to take place in the Bronx, two in Brooklyn, two in Queens and one in Manhattan.
Two Bronx branches within three blocks of another branch will become primarily automated teller machine operations.


The Houses That Humanity Built


Discussions Continue by Boards Over Turner-Time Warner Deal
The boards of Time Warner Inc. and the Turner Broadcasting System held marathon meetings yesterday to consider approval of Time Warner's proposed acquisition of Turner.
But by late evening, neither board had voted, several people familiar with the discussions said.
The Time Warner board adjourned at about 8 P.M., and the Turner board continued meeting.


Bill to Tighten Economic Embargo on Cuba Is Passed With Strong Support in the House
Despite the Clinton Administration's last-minute threats of a veto, the House of Representatives voted overwhelmingly today to tighten the trade embargo against Cuba.
By a vote of 294 to 130, the House backed a bill that seeks to step up pressure on Fidel Castro by discouraging foreign investment in Cuba, which the bill's sponsors say provides much-needed hard currency to prop up the Cuban economy.


Sports of The Times; Mattingly Should Know The Drill
JUST because Don Mattingly has seen it happen to other great Yankees doesn't mean he can accept it happening to him.
"Just treat me with respect; don't back-stab me," Mattingly said, quite poignantly, last night before the Yankees beat the Blue Jays, 6-4, going into what could be the last weekend Mattingly will ever play for them at Yankee Stadium.


International Briefs; Montedison and Ferruzzi Post First-Half Profits
The Italian industrial giant Montedison S.p.A. and its parent company, Ferruzzi Finaziaria S.p.A., reported a surge back to profit in the first half of 1995.
Montedison reported a profit of 1.09 trillion lire, or about $680 million, in the first six months of the year while Ferruzzi had earnings of 287 billion lire, or about $173 million.


Diner's Journal
If you're looking for a perfect place to meet someone for a drink, you might consider the beautiful new bar at Oceana.
It's a dark and elegant place with bottles of wine stacked halfway up to the very high ceiling.
A large metal fish perches at the top, coolly surveying the people below as they consume excellent shrimp cocktails, fried calamari, salmon tartar and clams and oysters on the half shell.
Martinis are stirred, not shaken; they make a solid sound as they are set down on the marble bar.


Mariners Vote Rallies
As of about 10 P.M.
Tuesday, the Seattle Mariners, a franchise that has long had the word futility stitched to its name, looked to be at the end of their 19-year history in this city.
A vote to build a new stadium was going down in early returns, and the team was losing by 4-1 in a crucial game with the Texas Rangers.
Today, the Mariners are tied for first place in the American League West after a sweep of the Rangers, and they are holding the narrowest of leads in election returns on the proposal to build an open-air, natural-grass stadium here.


Executive Changes
LEHMAN BROTHERS INC., New York, a unit of Lehman Brothers Holdings, appointed Ronald A. Stack a managing director and head of public finance for the Northeast.
RISK CAPITAL HOLDINGS INC., Greenwich, Conn., named Paul Malvasio chief financial officer.
RYKA INC., Norwood, Mass., named Dennis Di Dominicis president.


Affirmative Action Isn't on Gay Agenda
To the Editor:
Richard Tafel (Op-Ed, Sept. 9) misrepresents not only my position on affirmative action for gay men and lesbians but also the position of virtually all those active in the fight against homophobia.


Russian Court Blocks a Use of Smirnoff Name
A Russian court has ruled that the American vodka Smirnoff, the world's biggest-selling vodka brand, cannot be sold under that name in Russia.
The ruling follows a complaint brought in 1993 by the American distributor and producer of Smirnoff, Heublein Inc., which sought to stop the Russian descendants of Peter Smirnoff, who distilled vodka for the czar before the Russian Revolution in 1917, from selling vodka under the Smirnoff name in Russia.


Romance In the Sun, Foiled And Then Unfoiled
John Irvin's film "A Month by the Lake" is an irresistibly likable example of an emergent genre: the movie as a high-toned, sunlit European vacation.
An offshoot of the Merchant-Ivory school of genteel nostalgia, the genre became distinct two years ago with "Enchanted April." And "A Month by the Lake," which is set just before World War II in the glorious Alpine foothills around Lake Como in northern Italy, gives it an extra polish.
Vanessa Redgrave, in one of her most delicious screen roles, plays Miss Bentley, a spirited middle-aged English woman and amateur photographer returning to the Fascioli resort, a lakeside getaway she has visited with her father every year since childhood.
It is 1937, and this time she is alone, her father having recently died.
Upon arrival, she finds herself drawn to Major Wilshaw (Edward Fox), another solo traveler from England, who is roughly the same age.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League


Art in Review
Toland Grinnell  Basilico Fine Arts 26 Wooster Street SoHo Through Oct. 14
There's a fleeting "Installations R Us" charm to Toland Grinnell's all-vinyl solo debut, an environmental piece titled "Booty" that tells the story of a gravel-voiced, peg-legged pirate marooned on a desert island with a spotted dog and a blond, Chewbacca-like gorilla.
The relentlessly fake vinyl, mostly in colors of brown and cream, suggests a rec room in revolt.
It encases most of the gallery (reception desk included), covers all of the artist (seen only on videotape, enacting his tale) and is cleverly cut and glued to form all the remaining objects, props and characters (most obtrusively, the island, but also the animal companions).


G.O.P. vs. G.O.P. on Health Spending for the Poor


Inside Art
Till Death Do Us Part
Some works of art are so important to a corporation's image that no matter what the circumstance, the art and the company stay together.
In Manhattan, at the Equitable Life Assurance Society of America, that means moving Thomas Hart Benton's 10-panel mural, "America Today," one block east from the Equitable Tower at 787 Seventh Avenue to its new location, 1290 Avenue of the Americas, between 51st and 52d Streets.


Spending Bill Would Reverse Nation's Environment Policy
House and Senate negotiators completed work today on a spending bill that reverses decades of Democratic environmental policy and reduces protection for endangered species, cutting deeply into Federal conservation programs and expanding opportunities for logging, mining and ranching interests on public lands.
Ending four days of deliberations, the negotiators cleared the way for the full House and Senate to vote on the spending bill, which pays for the operations of the Interior Department and other agencies in the 1996 fiscal year, beginning on Oct. 1.
The Interior Department would be allowed to spend $6 billion, 8 percent less than in the current fiscal year.


The Spoken Word
NORWEGIAN FOLK ART: THE MIGRATION OF A TRADITION, New York City Department of Cultural Affairs, 2 Columbus Circle, at Broadway and 59th Street.
A symposium with lectures, crafts and storytelling. 9:30 A.M. to 3:30 P.M.
Sponsored by the Museum of American Folk Art.
Admission: $25.
Information: (212) 977-7170.
READINGS, New York University, Andre and Bella Meyer Hall of Physics, 2-4 Washington Place, Greenwich Village.
John David Morley, author of the novel "The Anatomy Lesson"; Joline Blais, a fiction writer, and Andrew Levy, a poet.
Tonight at 7.
Free.
Information: (212) 998-7292.
ART AT THE MET, Metropolitan Museum of Art.
TODAY: "Greco-Roman Origins of Early Christian Art," by Dimitris Katsarelias, 11 A.M.; "A Closer Look: Titian's 'Venus and Adonis,' " by Frederick Ilchman, 12:30 P.M.; "The Domestic Scene in the Renaissance: Fantasy and Reality," by Fern Luskin, 3 P.M.


Art in Review
Tabboo!  Tricia Collins Grand Salon 83 Grand Street Through Oct. 14
It's hard to imagine a cheerier kickoff to the season than this good-will extravaganza by Tabboo!, a painter who moonlights as a drag performer -- or possibly it's the other way around -- and has another name (Stephen Tashjian).


Corrections
A map yesterday with an article about accusations that Israeli forces executed captured Egyptians during the 1956 and 1967 Middle East wars represented the area of Israeli control incorrectly.
The map and the key should have shown the West Bank, not Egypt, under Israeli occupation.


On Stage, and Off
A Play Doctor in the House
Like a madcap impresario in some 1930's screwball comedy, Rocco Landesman burst into the Martin Beck Theater after Monday night's performance of "Moon Over Buffalo" and shouted, "What about this!"
The play's author, Ken Ludwig, and its director, Tom Moore, listened from the stage as Mr.
Landesman, one of the show's producers, laid out his idea for changing the play's ending.
"Rocco walks in, in his tux, and says: 'I've got the ending! Stop the presses! It's solved!' " Mr.
Ludwig said.


HOUSE G.O.P. PLAN DOUBLES PREMIUMS OF MEDICARE USERS
House Republicans disclosed today that their plan to slow the growth of Federal Medicare costs would gradually double health insurance premiums for the elderly.
It would also limit payments to victims of medical malpractice and encourage doctors and hospitals to join together in selling their services to consumers.
While putting forth new details, the Republicans failed to provide the text of any legislation and acknowledged that they were still short of their goal of saving $270 billion over seven years.
They left Democrats and elderly people hungry for more specific information about the Republican plan to redesign Medicare.


Magazine Is Rebuffed By High Court
In an unusual First Amendment ruling, Supreme Court Justice John Paul Stevens Jr. refused yesterday for procedural reasons to overturn a lower-court order prohibiting Business Week from publishing an article containing information from sealed court documents.
The ruling sent the case back to the Federal District Court in Cincinnati that issued the order.
Later yesterday, at a hearing in that court, Judge John Feikens extended until Oct. 3 the order he had issued on Sept. 13.
This meansthe magazine will probably be prohibited for a third week from publishing the article with the disputed material.
Business Week is complying with the order so that it will not be found in contempt of court.


Study Favors Heart Bypass Surgery for Many Diabetics
Federal health officials today recommended coronary bypass surgery over angioplasty for diabetics with coronary artery disease because of surprising long-term findings from the world's largest study of the two heart procedures.
The recommendation applies only to diabetics treated with insulin or with pills called oral hypoglycemics to lower blood sugar and who have two or more blocked coronary arteries, the officials said at a news conference at the National Institutes of Health here.


Market Place; Fraud can occur at a company, even with auditors checking.
IN every annual report, the letter from the auditors, attesting to the financial statements, carries a warning: "These financial statements are the responsibility of the company's management."
The auditors, the form letter goes on to state, try to obtain "reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement."


A new shop specializes in building brand personality at the genetic level.
OUT West, there are horse wranglers.
On movie sets, you'll find baby wranglers, reptile wranglers and even, for "Batman Forever," a Batsuit wrangler.
Nick Shore and Paul Bennett are what you might call brand wranglers.
Mr.
Shore and Mr.
Bennett, both 30-something Britons, have helped build sales for Snapple and other name-brand products.
Now they're offering marketers like the Seagram Company creative and strategic advice on how to start, sustain and strengthen brands.


The Old College Try: Date Rape
Douglas Tirola's film "A Reason to Believe" explores the issue of college date rape with such a concentrated sense of its social responsibility that its screenplay often sounds like a dramatized pamphlet on the subject.
The movie is firmly on the side of its main character, Charlotte Byrne (Allison Smith), a student who is unwillingly coerced into sex at a drunken fraternity party.
At the same time, it doesn't look any more kindly at the campus feminist organization that exploits Charlotte's plight than at the fraternity that held the party.
As the film rolls along, you can feel the arguments and counterarguments being measured out in teaspoons, half-teaspoons and pinches.
Among the smugly chauvinistic frat boys, who vow to protect one of their own, there are more than enough descriptions of sexually active women as sluts and references to feminists as "lesbo Nazis" and "the dyke squad."


FILM REVIEW;
WITH fearless investigative zeal, Paul Verhoeven and Joe Ezsterhas, the director and writer of "Basic Instinct," decided to blow the lid off Las Vegas lap dancing and everything it stands for.
This quest for truth forced Mr.
Verhoeven to watch nearly every big Vegas nightclub show and Mr.
Ezsterhas to experience lap dancing on an up-close, personal basis.
The research must have been murder.
But it was vital if the end product, "Showgirls," were to hold a mirror up to society while lucratively turning the Motion Picture Association of America's rating system into a joke.
Unfortunately, the strain of trying to make America's dirtiest big-studio movie has led Mr.
Verhoeven and Ms.
Ezsterhas to create an instant camp classic.
And the surprise is that despite the intense steaminess of "Basic Instinct," ""Showgirls" is, in every sense, not so hot. The film makers had declared they were bravely exploring new levels of licentiousness, but the biggest risk they've taken here is in making a nearly $40 million movie without anyone who can act. The absence of both drama and eroticism turns "Showgirls" into a bare-butted bore.
It's also a demonstration of how coarseness and uninvited laughter can have anti-aphrodisiac effects on even the smuttiest of stories.
Mr.
Ezsterhas, the Andrew Dice Clay of screenwriting, bludgeons the audience with such tirelessly crude thoughts that when a group of chimps get loose in the showgirls' dressing room and all they do is defecate, the film enjoys a rare moment of good taste.
As for laughter, let's just say that Elizabeth Berkley, who stars in this film as a highly principled lap dancer named Nomi, will not be the next Sharon Stone.
With the open-mouthed, vacant-eyed look of an inflatable party doll, Ms.
Berkley should have been well suited to a film that treats its heroine like a shiny new toy.
But she has trouble even dancing alluringly, in stiffly choreographed production numbers that suggest Michael Jackson videos and Oscar night kitsch, just as she has trouble repeatedly insisting, "I am not a whore." As declarations of integrity go, that one appears to rank with "I am not a crook." That's because it's easy to miss the fine moral distinctions that "Showgirls" makes among hookers, lap dancers and G-string-wearing chorus girls.
And despite the film makers' claims that this story sends Nomi on a journey of ethical self-discovery, "Showgirls" sounds too dopey to play like anything but a live-action cartoon.
Of course, not everybody suckered in by the film's heavily hyped nudity will care whether Nomi can become a better human being.
Some viewers will simply share the concerns of the man who tells Nomi, about five minutes after she arrives in Las Vegas, "Sooner or later you're gonna have to sell it." Not even Nomi's instant friendship with Molly (Gina Ravera), the nice seamstress who invites Nomi to share her mobile home, can protect her from such wolves.
When the film makers imagine domestic life between Nomi and Molly, they see chicks in lingerie who giggle, clutch stuffed animals, fuss about manicures and say, "What am I going to wear?" or, "Who ate the chips?"
As luck would have it, Molly's needlework chores include repairing G-strings at the Stardust, the nightclub where Nomi catches the eye of Cristal (Gina Gershon), the star who is this film's topless, leering, inarticulate version of Margo Channing.
Nomi would like to be Cristal, since that would allow her to dance before the Stardust's smoldering fake volcano while dressed (barely) in gold lame.
Cristal is supposed to resemble a goddess when she does this.
Instead, Nomi is forced to take a sleazier job at a joint called the Cheetah, where Cristal shows up and pays her $500 to dance naked on the lap of Cristal's boyfriend, Zack (Kyle MacLachlan).
Cristal watches avidly while Nomi wriggles.
Innuendoes abound.
By the way, "Showgirls" includes much less lap dancing or frontal nudity than might be expected, and its graphic scenes concentrate more on voyeurism than on explicit sex.
Indulging in the sort of modular film making that allows story ideas to be mixed and matched, "Showgirls" comes up with several different men for its ingenue to meet.
Though Nomi appears to have no sexual interest in anyone but Cristal, the men may be helpful as she claws her way up the career ladder.
There is Tony (Alan Rachins), a producer so powerful that he enjoys insulting every woman in the Stardust's chorus line.
There is Zack, who remains Cristal's coke-snorting plaything but cares enough about Nomi to help her pronounce "Versace" right.
There is James (Glenn Plummer), the aspiring choreographer who pegs Nomi for a great dancer while she is still at the lap level.
James drops the name of Alvin Ailey, denounces Nomi's slumming and says things like: "Well, it ain't right! You got too much talent for it to be right!" As played decently enough by Mr.
Plummer, he is the film's only half-interesting male character, although viewers with the right sense of fun might prefer the film's Very Famous Rock Star.
It is he who arranges the gang rape that leads Nomi to her crisis of conscience.
Is it really that difficult for rock stars in Las Vegas to make friends?
Or is "Showgirls" simply filling its quota for the arbitrary luridness, action and extravagance needed to lure audiences around the globe?
Mr.
Verhoeven, trying to fuse the rawness of his early Dutch films (including "Spetters" and "Keetje Tippel") with the slick proficiency of his American hits ("Robocop," "Total Recall"), becomes a man without a country this time.
He never gets past the vantage point of an outsider looking in.
However familiar he may have become with the world that "Showgirls" exploits, his film still seems awestruck rather than knowing, and that naivete is too apparent.
Whether spying in the showgirls' dressing rooms or delivering a mother lode of Vegas glitz, its only real objective is inviting the audience to gape.
And gape about everything: when "Showgirls" finds Nomi in Zack's pool, splashing and thrashing in laughably fake ecstasy, the setting is as meaningful as the sex.
Zack's house, car, Champagne and green neon palm trees (really) are as important to this pornographic epiphany as Ms.
Berkley herself, who is no less a commodity than anything else on screen.
That scene, like a lot of "Showgirls," aspires to the sleek seductiveness of "Basic Instinct," the kind that lures the viewers into a world of exoticism and danger.
But the enticement is ruined by voyeurism too bare and flagrant to be anything but embarrassing, and by the soul-numbing stupidity that plagues Mr.
Eszterhas's dialogue, preventing any character from entertaining two consecutive thoughts in a given scene.
And the sexy, malevolent energy of Mr.
Verhoeven's usual directing style is strangely absent here, leaving "Showgirls" as cold and joyless as it is contrived.
Elvis has left the building, in the words of the screenplay's favorite Las Vegas cliche.
"Showgirls" is rated NC-17 (No one under 17 admitted).
It includes wall-to-wall, witlessly obscene language and just enough frontal nudity to justify its strip-club setting.
It also includes brief sexual situations, some highly suggestive dancing and much more dancing that awkwardly filters sexual suggestiveness through the prism of modern dance.
Costumes are topless and minuscule in many scenes.
Probably the extras caught colds.
SHOWGIRLS  Directed by Paul Verhoeven; written by Joe Eszterhas; director of photography, Jost Vacano; edited by Mark Goldblatt and Mark Helfrich; music by David A. Stewart; production designer, Allan Cameron; produced by Alan Marshall and Charles Evans; released by United Artists.
Running time: 97 minutes.
This film is rated NC-17.
WITH: Elizabeth Berkley (Nomi Malone), Kyle MacLachlan (Zack Carey), Gina Gershon (Cristal Connors), Glenn Plummer (James Smith), Robert Davi (Al Torres), Alan Rachins (Tony Moss) and Gina Ravera (Molly Abrams)


Show of Unity for Effort To Create 50 Small Schools
A year ago, the Annenberg Foundation announced that it would give $25 million to replace some of New York City's large, overcrowded schools with smaller alternatives, provided New York could raise matching amounts from both public and private sectors.
For the public share, the Board of Education pledged $25 million.
And yesterday, a group known as the New York Networks for School Renewal announced that it had commitments for $10.5 million, including $1 million from the Ford Foundation.


West Orange to Pursue Inquiry
A day after county prosecutors said they would present testimony against Police Chief Robert Spina to a grand jury next month, the Township Council president, Herbert I. Waldman, said yesterday that the Council would appoint an investigator and a hearing officer to ascertain whether Mr.
Spina had engaged in "conduct unbecoming a chief." Clifford J. Minor, the Essex County Prosecutor, said that the grand jury would review allegations of abuse and corruption.
The chief was appointed by his father, Mayor Sam Spina.


Andrew Ruotolo, 42, A County Prosecutor
Andrew K. Ruotolo Jr., who as Union County Prosecutor in New Jersey created a special task force to wage war against car theft in Newark, died on Thursday at his home in Westfield, N.J.
He was 42.
The cause was cancer, according to his sister, Diane Webber.


PM Dawn Singer Faces Charges
The lead singer of the rap and soul group PM Dawn was charged with sexual assault involving consensual intercourse with a 14-year-old female cousin, the A.P. reported.
Burlington County Prosecutor Stephen G. Raymond said yesterday that Jarrett Cordes, 24, of Jersey City -- who is known professionally as "J.C. The Eternal" -- was arrested Tuesday at the girl's home after her mother called the police.
The case will go to a grand jury in about a month.
Through his lawyer, Mr.
Cordes declined to comment.


Raymond O'Connor, 63, Head Of U.S. Energy Panel in the 80's
Raymond J. O'Connor, who wielded power in Washington as head of the agency that oversees the natural gas and oil-pipeline industries but was stubbornly immune to Potomac Fever, died on Wednesday at his home in Douglaston, Queens.
He was 63.
The cause of death was a brain tumor, his family said.


In This World on Ice, Fleming Still Glides
Drumroll, spotlight.
Miss Peggy Fleming glides into a corner of our consciousness, middle-aged now yet confident in her signature elegance.
She still looks like a swan.
It is the time of ice shows again, and this season, thanks to Tonya Harding, they are bigger than ever.
Remember Tonya?
"It takes all kinds," says Fleming in her cool TV analyst voice.
"It proves we're not all cookie cutter. But it was an aberration. It could never happen again."


International Briefs; Wella Shares Plunge After Chief Departs
The shares of Wella A.G., Germany's largest hair-care products maker, fell 110 German marks, to 1,050 marks, or $724, on news that the chief executive, Peter Zuhlsdorff, had left the company because of differences over its future direction.
A Wella spokesman said Mr.
Zuhlsdorff's departure, which was announced Wednesday night, was the result of irreconcilable differences with Wella family shareholders, who control around 67 percent of the shares, over whether to consolidate or expand the company.


In America; If Colin Powell Runs
Julio Rodriguez pointed toward a parking lot on the other side of Kelly Street in the South Bronx and said, "He lived right over there."
The tall fence at the entrance to the lot was topped with coils of razor wire.
Several cars, a school bus and a boat were parked in the lot.
The Bronx is a motley place.


Brown Wants to Put A Stop to All the Talk
The Giants know it's a big game.
It has been drilled into their brains by their coaches and by each other.
And it may be the biggest for one player in particular: Dave Brown.
If the Giants beat the Saints (0-3) on Sunday at Giants Stadium and Brown has a good game, he can put to rest for a while talk that Tommy Maddox will replace him.
But if Brown has a poor game, the Maddox talk will stay with him for some time.


Outrageous in the 1960's but Seeming Serene in the 90's
Standing in the southwest gallery of the Dan Flavin show at the Dia Center for the Arts, you get about as close to finding inner peace as is possible in New York City.
Each corner of the room is occupied by a work from Mr.
Flavin's series of "European Couples": square, open frames made from four fluorescent light fixtures, each of them 8 feet long.
The horizontal fixtures at the top and bottom of each frame face forward, throwing light into the room; the vertical fixtures at the sides face backward, filling the corner behind each work with color.
White light floods downward from a skylight at one side of the room, mingling with the blue, green, pink and amber glows emerging from Mr.
Flavin's sculptures.
The colors seem to have been extracted from the sunlight, intensified rather than artificially generated by the fluorescent bulbs.
The Dia show and the concurrent exhibition of Mr.
Flavin's work at the Guggenheim Museum SoHo offer many moments like this.
In the face of such gorgeous serenity, it's hard to remember how raw and outrageous this work seemed back in the 1960's, when it was first exhibited.
Light sculpture in itself was no novelty.
But to make it from off-the-shelf fixtures available at any hardware store, that took chutzpah.
Anyone, it seemed, could have bought the same fluorescent fixtures and screwed them to the wall (or to each other) in the same simple geometric arrangements.


Edwards (A.G.) Inc.(AGE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Aug 31


Weston and Mapplethorpe. Hmm.
At first blush, the comparison proposed by "The Garden of Earthly Delights: The Photographs of Edward Weston and Robert Mapplethorpe," now at the midtown branch of the International Center of Photography, seems more provocative than enlightening.
Weston was, after all, the revered Modernist master who turned away from soft-focus Pictorialism in the 1920's, and adopted a sharp-focus style with which he created near-abstractions of such diverse subjects as nude women, vegetables and sea-worn rocks.
Mapplethorpe, on the other hand, was the bad boy of photography in the 1980's, producing both elegant society portraits and shocking, if equally elegant, images of sadomasochistic sex.
Attacked by politicians for his explicit subject matter, Mapplethorpe became a symbolic victim of intolerance, particularly after his death from AIDS in 1989.
Despite his celebrity, Mapplethorpe's critical reputation is still in flux, and the comparison with Weston may strike many viewers as far-fetched.
But as "The Garden of Earthly Delights" demonstrates, more than a few bases for such a pairing can be found.


Seoul Journal; A Firebrand Revisited: Mirror of the New Korea
When political discussion in South Korea was conducted with rocks and punches, when tear gas hung over campuses the way romance does today, Woo Sang Ho was at the center of the debate.
Then a smoldering student leader, Mr.
Woo was an architect of the student campaign to topple the military Government.
Mr.
Woo spoke his mind in an interview with The New York Times that riot-filled summer of 1987, and the authorities promptly arrested him on the basis of those comments. (He compared the Government to the Nazis.)


House Panel Approves Plan To Register Immigration Status
The House Judiciary Committee today approved a plan to establish a national registry of names, Social Security numbers and immigration data on all citizens and legal aliens and to require employers to use it to verify the legal status of job applicants.
The 17-to-15 vote, which crossed party lines, came after a debate that pitted public anger over illegal immigration against concerns about privacy.


Holding On to Mason Was the Only Move
Anthony Mason had options. The Knicks did not.
If the Knicks had lost Mason, any realistic chance of winning a championship this season would probably have been lost as well.
Mason was the league's best sixth man, the most coveted free agent on the market and the Knicks' most versatile player.
He is still only 28 years old while all five Knicks starters from last season are at least 30.
Remember, the Knicks lost in the second round of the playoffs last season, and Patrick Ewing turned 33 in August.
Losing a player as talented as Mason, in his prime, while getting nothing in return would have been a devastating way for the Knicks to begin Don Nelson's first season as coach.


Just No Perfect Explanation
No matter how long they play baseball, nobody will ever pitch a better World Series game than DON LARSEN.
No runs, no hits, no errors.
Nothing.
Thirty-nine years later, the former Yankee right-hander still has no explanation for his 2-0 gem against the Brooklyn Dodgers at Yankee Stadium in Game 5 of the 1956 Series, the only perfect game ever pitched in a World Series.
"It just happened," he said yesterday.


Abroad at Home; Power To Punish
Getting the Federal Government's hands off private institutions is one of the main aims of the new Republican leaders in Congress.
So they say.
What they do is another matter, as we learn from Representative Robert Livingston of Louisiana, chairman of the House Appropriations Committee.
In July Mr.
Livingston wrote to the presidents of three private colleges, Middlebury in Vermont and Bowdoin and Colby in Maine.
He complained about their rules on fraternities, for example barring any that are limited to one sex.


Filipinos Protest Soaring Prices for Rice


Robitaille Sees Pals at Forum
Luc Robitaille returned to the Forum for the first time since being traded by the Kings to the Pittsburgh Penguins before last season.
Now he's a Ranger, having been acquired from Pittsburgh on Aug. 31 with Ulf Samuelsson.
Robitaille, the fourth-leading scorer in Kings history, arrived early before the Rangers' exhibition game, which New York won by 4-0, to visit members of the Kings' organization.
Robitaille said he couldn't stop grinning as he shook hands, exchanged hugs and swapped stories.


Ex-No. 2 at the F.B.I. Calls Himself Blameless
The former Deputy Director of the F.B.I. emotionally defended himself before a Senate subcommittee today, saying he had recently unearthed notes that show he did not authorize the shoot-on-sight rules in effect during a bloody standoff in 1992 between a white separatist and an elite F.B.I. assault team.
The witness, Larry A. Potts, who was suspended last month from theNo. 2 position at the Federal Bureau of Investigation and now faces an obstruction-of-justice inquiry, protested that he had been wrongly accused of issuing the shooting orders and as a result had found his once-fast-track career "turned upside down" in the turmoil over the standoff, at Ruby Ridge in Idaho.


Snowiest Day This Summer


CHRONICLE
RONALD O. PERELMAN, the billionaire financier, has donated $4.7 million to Princeton University to create a multidisciplinary institute for Jewish studies, the university announced yesterday.
The institute, to be called, not surprisingly, the Ronald O. Perelman Institute for Jewish Studies, will bring together scholars in Jewish history, religion, literature, politics and culture.
There will also be an endowed chair, the Ronald O. Perelman Professor of Jewish Studies.


Medicaid Push by Pataki and Other Governors in the Region May Fray G.O.P.
The Governors of New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, as well as several Republican members of Congress from those states, are battling the proposal from other Republicans in the House of Representatives to slow the growth of Medicaid spending, setting the stage for a regional showdown that is fraying party unity.
Gov.
George E. Pataki of New York spent the morning on Capitol Hill, urging the state's 14 Republican representatives to fight the proposal, which he says shifts Federal money from New York to faster-growing states in the South and the West.


F.D.A. Proposes Rules on Experimental Emergency Treatment
The Food and Drug Administration yesterday proposed rules to make it easier to carry out experiments on patients who are unable to give their consent because they are unconscious or undergoing emergency treatment.
Dr.
David A. Kessler, the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, said many experiments intended to be performed in an emergency setting had been stymied by "conflicting and confusing regulations" governing alternatives to prior informed consent from patients or their representatives.


INSIDE
Heart Surgery and Diabetes
Unexpectedly, a long-term study found that bypass surgery was more favorable than angioplasty for diabetics with coronary artery disease; Federal health officials sent an alert to the nation's doctors.
Page A22.
Appeal in Park Slaying
Investigators appealed for help in finding a man who told three people that he heard someone boasting about having killed a woman in Central Park.
Page B1.
Speed Limits for Subway
In a move that will mean slower subway service in New York City, speed limits are to be posted wherever signal lights are too close together to prevent accidents.
Page B1.


Rockies and Dodgers Hold Their Positions
Giants 5, Rockies 3
Barry Bonds and Glenallen Hill hit two-run homers as the host San Francisco Giants defeated the Rockies, 5-3, last night to slow Colorado's push toward a playoff spot.
Colorado hold a 1 1/2-game lead over Los Angeles in the National League West.
Sergio Valdez (4-4) allowed three runs and seven hits in seven innings, and Rod Beck pitched the ninth for his 31st save.
He has been successful in his last nine save situations.


Supervalu Inc.(SVU,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Sept 9


Wyman-Gordon Co.(WYMN,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Sept 2


Battle Lines Over Cuba
Despite threats of a presidential veto, the House voted 294 to 130 yesterday to approve a bill to tighten the Cuban trade embargo.
In a letter to the Speaker, Newt Gingrich, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said the bill, which is awaiting Senate action, would "damage prospects for a peaceful transition in Cuba."
Article, page A8.


Catholic Voter-Registration Push
The New Jersey Catholic Conference is sponsoring statewide voter-registration drives at more than 500 parishes this weekend.
A conference coordinator, Mary Ellen Procaccini, said the purpose was to deliver votes to candidates "who will respond to the concerns that Catholics have" about legalized abortion, private school vouchers and other issues.
A spokesman for the Diocese of Trenton, Joseph Donadieu, said that although the drives could strengthen the voice of Roman Catholic voters, "there's no monolithic Catholic voting bloc; there's conscientiousness and concern."


A Shadow Over the Spy-Shop Business
Federal authorities in Manhattan charged three men with buying illegal eavesdropping equipment yesterday, in what they said was the beginning of a crackdown on customers of the multimillion-dollar spy shop industry.
They charged an executive of a financial services company in Louisville, Ky., with buying an elaborate phone-tapping device and using it to eavesdrop, illegally, on an employee.


Corporate ExpressInc.(CEXP,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Aug 26


Through Czarist And Soviet Years, A Century of Talent
THE story of Jewish artists in the country that was Russia, then became the heart of the Soviet Union and is now Russia again is in many ways a simple one.
It is the story of talent under pressure.
This pressure is palpable throughout most of "Russian Jewish Artists in a Century of Change: 1890-1990," the rich, tumultuous, if flawed exhibition at the Jewish Museum.
It is full of artists of different abilities and sensibilities with one thing in common: as Jews in Russia or the Soviet Union, they all worked under regimes that were never truly sympathetic and were sometimes violently hostile to them.
In the face of this, they produced art that ranged from revolutionary to conformist to propagandistic, and covered most bases in between.


Encore for Suriname's Ex-Dictator?
Thirteen years after the United States considered sending marines up the muddy Suriname River to force a left-leaning military dictatorship from power in this small South American country, the dictator who ran that Government is now running for President.
The ex-dictator, Desire Bouterse, a 49-year-old career soldier who helped stage one coup in 1980 and another in 1990, is now chairman of the National Democratic Party.
As he heads into national elections scheduled for next spring, his popularity is growing.


International Briefs; De La Rue Sells Unit
De La Rue P.L.C. of Britain said yesterday that it had sold its J. R. Crompton paper company to a management team for $:70.3 million, or about $109 million.
De La Rue, a money printer, will receive $:58 million in cash and the remainder in Crompton shares.
Crompton is among the world's largest suppliers of paper for tea bags, with 1994 sales of $:41.9 million.
De La Rue acquired Crompton as part of its purchase of Portals Group P.L.C., a printer based in England. (AP)


47 Accused in an Insurance Claim Scheme
In what a Manhattan grand jury indictment called "a pervasive pattern of criminal conduct," 47 people were charged yesterday in a widespread scheme in which insurance company adjusters were said to have been bribed to expedite personal injury settlements involving unsuspecting clients and more than a dozen insurance companies.
Twenty-one lawyers and 16 insurance adjusters were charged, as were 6 people accused of acting as middlemen -- known in the industry as 10 percenters because of the kickbacks they skimmed from the settlement.
Also indicted were two law firm employees.


Food Lion Inc.(FDLNB,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Sept 10


In Ireland, a Difficult Coming of Age
Just when life seems to be rolling along in a fairly manageable way, fate steps in and deals a catastrophic blow.
That is a lesson that Danny (Matt Keeslar), an innocent 18-year-old boy from a village in County Cavan, just south of the border with Northern Ireland, learns again and again in Peter Yates's fine coming-of-age movie "The Run of the Country."
As the film begins, Danny's mother has just died, and he and his stern father (Albert Finney), a local policeman, are struggling to come to terms with her loss.
When the father prods his son to be a substitute homemaker, Danny rebels and begins hanging out with Prunty (Anthony Brophy), a high-spirited ruffian who lives nearby in a shack and breeds fighting roosters, among other illicit activities.


Detoxifying Custody Fights
The real victims in bitter custody disputes are usually the children of divorce.
They need not be, however, if compassion and common sense prevail -- which, thanks to a court initiative suggested by the presiding judge of the statewide custody court, Joseph Steinberg, is increasingly the case in Connecticut.
Since September 1994, parents whose custody battles have brought them to the brink of a trial have been meeting with lawyers known as "special masters." Working pro bono, these lawyers try to bring cool reason to the adversaries' heated debates.
So far they have cut the trial rate by 80 percent.


Europe's Dream of Common Currency: A German Warning Shot
On the eve of a summit meeting of European Union leaders, Germany has weighed mightily into the region's monetary debate, castigating fiscal management by other European countries and raising doubts about Bonn's overall commitment to the idea of a common currency.
The adoption of a common currency is central to the European Union's goals of political and economic integration.
But the German official's disparaging comments reflected growing unease among Germans that their robust economy will be undermined by a common currency, which under a 1992 treaty is to be created by 1999.


Delay in Picking Schools Chief Stirs a Dispute
Now that the city has three finalists for schools chancellor, the Board of Education president and the Mayor began their endgame in earnest over the selection, even as officials said that the Mayor's candidate, Leon M. Goldstein, the president of Kingsborough Community College in Brooklyn, appeared to have the support of a majority of the board.
The board, however, put off reinterviewing its three finalists, who were named at a meeting on Wednesday, until at least a week from today, touching off a dispute about the timing.


Measurex Corp.(MX,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Sept 3


'Twin Peaks' Meets 'Mayberry'
And now for something truly different, at least in the context of the new season.
"American Gothic, created by, of all people, Shaun Cassidy, once one of the clean-cut "Hardy Boys," looks at small-town America as an eerie place somewhere between "Mayberry, R.F.D." and "Twin Peaks." Tonight's premiere on CBS wastes no time in establishing that the local sheriff, Lucas Buck (Gary Cole), is a malevolent force in the manicured community of Trinity, S.C.
Lucas is a total control freak determined to prove that the American dream is not a thing of the past.
Of course, he adds: "You have to know who's boss. For those who don't follow my lead, it can be a mighty rough road." As he tells his cowed deputy, Ben Healy (Nick Searcy), in a conversation about the color of a gun, "Your idea of gray and my idea of gray might differ: it's all a matter of perception."


Rudolph Peierls, 88, Atomic Physicist, Dies in England
Sir Rudolph Peierls, the physicist whose surprising calculations at the University of Birmingham in England in 1940 helped paved the way for the atomic bomb five years later, died on Tuesday at a hospital in Oxford, England.
He was 88 and had been under treatment for kidney problems.
When he lay on a hill in southern New Mexico on June 16, 1945, and looked through a darkened glass as the first atomic bomb turned night into day, Rudolph Ernst Peierls was as awed as anyone.


In Some Cases, Goldman, Sachs Is Pitted Against Its Own Clients
Are they with us or against us?
That's the question a lot of companies and institutional investors are asking about Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
For the third time in a year, Goldman, attempting to find the best return for investors in a fund that includes its own partners' money, has found itself pitted against its own clients.


A Breakup of Limited Portent
AT&amp;T's decision to split into three companies stands in sharp contrast to the gigantic media mergers -- Disney and ABC, Time Warner and Turner, Westinghouse and CBS -- that have been announced this summer.
But it would be a mistake to think that the AT&amp;T breakup signals a reversal of the trend toward giantism or suggests that other companies now trying to grow large through mergers are making a huge error.
The truth is that AT&amp;T's decision was driven by peculiar legislative and competitive circumstances that affect it alone.
The breakup reveals little about whether other mergers will proceed apace or slack off.
Nor will it reshape the media, phone or computer markets.
What the decision does reflect is a management that rejected faddish reasons to remain a huge merged entity in order to take account of its company's unique circumstance.


From Head to Toe


N.F.L. Matchups: Week 4
SUNDAY 1 P.M.
GAMES New York Giants (0-3) vs.
New Orleans (0-3)  Key stat: Saints' defense leads the N.F.L. with 15 sacks and have given up just one rushing touchdown.
The Giants have scored just 23 points -- tied with New England for fewest in the league.
Comment: The Giants haven't won for good reason.
The Saints have caught a couple of tough breaks, losing their three games by an average of 3 points.
Jim Everett has thrown for 883 yards -- the most in the N.F.L.
Dave Brown threw 50 passes last week at Green Bay, but not one of them went for a touchdown.
The Giants' offense is reeling right now.
The Saints' defense won't give them a break.
Game Score: New Orleans 22-12.
Chicago (2-1) vs.
St.
Louis (3-0)  Key stat: The Rams are the only team in the N.F.L. without a turnover and lead the league with a plus-12 turnover ratio.
The Bears have committed 15 penalties for 98 yards -- the fewest in the N.F.L.
Comment: The Rams have been one of the biggest surprises in the league this season.
This is an opportunity for them to make a few more believers.
The Rams' defense brings pressure from the front seven, and then the secondary pounces on the mistakes.
St.
Louis leads the league with 9 interceptions.
The Bears' passing game isn't that strong to begin with.
Quarterback Erik Kramer might find the pressure a little too hot to handle.
Game Score: St.
Louis 19-17.
Washington (1-2) vs.
Tampa Bay (1-2)  Key stat: Gus Frerotte's average of 8.83 yards per pass play leads the N.F.L.
The Bucs are holding opponents to 32.5 percent on third-down conversions.
Comment: While Heath Shuler's shoulder heals, Frerotte has people wondering whether the Redskins are going with the right young quarterback.
He completed 60 percent of his passes last week, but the Redskins came up short against Denver.
Tampa Bay has beaten the Redskins in the last three meetings.
Frerotte will help Washington break that streak.
Game Score: Washington 26-17.
Minnesota (1-2) vs.
Pittsburgh (2-1)  Key stat: The Vikings' defense is giving up 5.3 yards per carry.
Chad Brown leads the A.F.C. in sacks with 4.5.
Comment: For the first time since quarterback Neil O'Donnell and cornerback Rod Woodson went down with injuries, the Steelers weaknesses were exposed.
The Dolphins did it with pressure on Mike Tomczak and some pinpoint passing from Dan Marino.
Warren Moon is capable of the same type of aerial attack, and the Vikings' defense can bring plenty of heat and shut off the run.
That's enough to derail the Steelers.
Game Score: Minnesota 25-19.
SUNDAY 4 P.M.
GAMES  Jets (1-2) vs.
Atlanta (2-1)  Key stat: Jets cornerback Otis Smith has had an interception in each of the team's three games.
Eric Metcalf's 30 receptions lead the N.F.L., and his 339 yards in receptions are No. 2 in the league.
Comment: The Jets got a confidence boost last week with their victory over the Jaguars.
The Falcons aren't an expansion team.
Quarterback Jeff George can fill the air in Atlanta's run-and-shoot offense if the Jets don't get enough defensive heat on him.
Boomer Esiason will see a lot of Chris Doleman, who leads the N.F.L. with 5.5 sacks.
That kind of disruption can stall the Jets' offense.
Game Score: Atlanta 28-23.
Denver (2-1) vs.
San Diego (2-1)  Key stat: Natrone Means leads the A.F.C. in rushing with 294 yards on 64 carries.
Four of John Elways's 15 career victories against the Chargers have been on fourth-quarter comebacks.
Comment: Both teams needed late touchdown plays to win last week.
Means managed to roll up 122 yards rushing on 23 carries against the Eagles' defense.
But one of the Chargers' best weapons against Denver might be running back Ronnie Harmon, who is averaging 5.5 yards per catch against the Broncos.
Denver's strong passing attack could be grounded by the Chargers' defense.
Game Score: San Diego 31-25.
Houston (1-2) vs.
Cincinnati (2-1)  Key stat: Carl Pickens has caught a touchdown pass in eight straight games -- the fifth-best mark in the N.F.L.
Comment: Jeff Blake had a field day against the Oilers last season, passing for 354 yards and 4 touchdowns.
The Oilers will welcome him this year with the No. 1 pass defense in the league.
It might not matter because the Oilers' offense is hurting.
Quarterback Will Furrer, replacing an injured Chris Chandler, had a rough time against the Browns last week.
Things won't get any better against the Bengals.
Game Score: Cincinnati 27-15.
Kansas City (3-0) vs.
Cleveland (2-1)  Key stat: The Browns have allowed just 9 touchdowns in their last 10 home games.
The Chiefs have converted 4 of 4 fourth-down attempts.
Comment: Steve Bono is looking more and more like his predecessor, Joe Montana, including his penchant for fourth-quarter comebacks.
With Bono, the Chiefs are never out of a game.
But the Browns are tough at home, particularly on defense.
Safety Stevon Moore leads the N.F.L. in interceptions with 4.
He and the Browns' defense will bring Bono back to earth.
Game Score: Cleveland 16-6.
Arizona (1-2) vs.
Dallas (3-0)  Key stat: Cowboys' offensive line has given up just 2 sacks.
The Cardinals are giving up 195 yards rushing a game, the most in the N.F.L.
Comment: Emmitt Smith is going to go nuts against the Cardinals' porous run defense.
Smith leads the league with 427 yards rushing (6.4 yards a carry).
Without defensive end Eric Swann, the Cardinals don't have the force up front to deal with Dallas's offensive firepower.
This game has the potential to get ugly on several layers, mainly for the Cardinals.
Game Score: Dallas 34-13.
Philadelphia (1-2) vs.
Oakland (2-1)  Key stat: Kelvin Martin's 14.6 yards per punt return is No. 1 in the N.F.C.
The Raiders are holding opponents to 5.3 yards per punt return, tied for second-best in the A.F.C.
Comment: The Eagles will be visiting Oakland for the first time since 1971, and they bring with them the N.F.C.'s No. 3 rushing offense and No. 3 rushing defense.
The Raiders will have to be on the mark on both sides of the ball to counter that.
Defensive end Nolan Harrison is out with a back injury, but his absence shouldn't be a major problem for the Raiders.
The Eagles will fall to their second straight A.F.C.
West opponent.
Game Score: Oakland 31-28.
SUNDAY NIGHT GAME  Green Bay (2-1) vs.
Jacksonville (0-3)  Key stat: The Packers have outscored their opponents by 21-0 in the first quarter.
The Jaguars have scored 17 of their 30 points in the fourth quarter.
Comment: Quarterback Mark Brunell leads his team in rushing with 113 yards on 15 carries.
Mostly, he spends a good deal of time running for his life.
With Reggie White and Sean Jones rushing from bookend positions on the defensive front, Brunell will spend a lot of time sprinting around the field.
And the Jaguars will go nowhere.
Game Score: Green Bay 35-12.
MONDAY NIGHT GAME  San Francisco (3-0) vs.
Detroit (0-3)  Key stat: In seven games against the Lions, Steve Young has completed 69.4 percent of his passes for 9 touchdowns and 2 interceptions.
The Lions, defense is giving up 142 yards rushing per game.
Comment: The Lions are down and out.
It's certainly not the time to face the 49ers.
But with the way San Francisco is playing, there might not be a good time to face them.
The real fun in this game will be watching Barry Sanders scoot around the field.
If he can get past the line of scrimmage, Sanders can make things interesting for the Lions.
Whatever he does won't be enough to lead Detroit past the 49ers.
Game Score: San Francisco 27-14.
OPEN DATE: Buffalo, Carolina, Indianapolis, Miami, New England and Seattle.


Mattingly Is Finding More Explaining to Do
Another statement about his future with the Yankees.
Another statement Don Mattingly insisted has been misconstrued.
Another day for the focus on the Yankees to switch from post-season baseball pursuing to in-season crystal ball gazing.
What will Mattingly mumble or mutter next?
His comments in the last month have caused him almost as much discomfort in the clubhouse as pitchers have caused him at the plate.


As Usual, Maddux Proves Masterly
As good as the Mets have been lately and as many ways as they have found to win baseball games, everything must be lifted to a higher and more precise level when the opposing pitcher is Greg Maddux.
The execution must be crisp and the defense must be sound because Maddux, the best in the business, doesn't offer many chances to beat him.
It's easier for a team to beat itself.


Child Is Slain, and a Neighborhood Voices Its Frustrations
Hovering along the dusty alley where 3-year-old Stephanie Kuhen was slain last weekend, residents of the mostly Hispanic Cypress Park neighborhood shared the shock and anguish of the city at large.
But they also expressed their particular despair that it had taken the death of a white child to draw attention to the urban war zone in which they live.
The killing took place early Sunday, as Timothy Stone, 25, drove home a carload of people from a birthday barbecue for a friend.
Unfamiliar with the neighborhood and not noticing a dead-end sign, Mr.
Stone mistakenly turned onto Isabel Street, a dark, narrow alley of single-family stucco houses.


Carnival Corp.(CCL,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Aug 31


Death Penalty Law
As the clock tolled midnight on Sept. 1, ushering in New York's death penalty law, prosecutors and defense lawyers began holding their breaths, expecting that a murder resulting in the first capital case would be hours, or at most, days away.


AT&amp;T's Big Switch: A Tool To Compete?; Opportunity And New Risk For a Spinoff
Like a drenching in cold water, the spinoff of the AT&amp;T Corporation's telecommunications equipment business will prove stimulating or paralyzing, analysts and competitors say.
The spinoff will either win more customers in corporate America for the fledgling equipment concern or throw it into so much confusion that it will lose customers in hotly contested, multibillion-dollar markets now developing, like cellular transmission and personal communications services, the next generation of wireless telecommunications.


NETSCAPE AGREES TO BUY COLLABRA SOFTWARE
Netscape Communications, based in Mountain View, Calif., agreed yesterday to buy the privately held Collabra Software Inc. for 1.85 million shares of Netscape stock.
The acquisition, Netscape's first, is expected to close by Jan. 31.
Netscape shares gained $4 a share yesterday, closing at $58.75, making the deal worth $10 million.
Collabra, also of Mountain View, makes software that allows people to work on common documents over computer networks.
Under the deal, Collabra founder Eric Hahn would join the management of Netscape, the leading maker of software for electronic publishing on the Internet's World Wide Web.


CHOICE ON VERDICT FOR SIMPSON JURY
Judge Lance A. Ito today handed O. J. Simpson a major setback and jurors some maneuvering room, ruling that even if they found that Mr.
Simpson killed two people impulsively rather than with deliberation, he could still be convicted of murder.
Over impassioned objections from the defense, Judge Ito essentially accepted prosecutors' arguments that jurors should not be boxed into an all-or-nothing situation in which, unless they concluded that Mr.
Simpson had planned and premeditated the murders of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman, they would be bound to set him free.


Islanders Eager to Deal For Offensive Punch
The Islanders begin the season on Oct. 7, and General Manager Don Maloney hopes to make a deal to help his scoring-starved offense.
The three biggest names out there are Ottawa's Aleksei Yashin, Chicago's Jeremy Roenick and Winnipeg's Keith Tkachuk.
Maloney said today that he thinks he has a 50-50 chance of landing one of the three.


Words Dropped in Bomber Tract
The Washington Post published in its Friday issue 72 words that had been inadvertently dropped from the 35,000-word manifesto written by the serial killer known as the Unabomber that it printed on Tuesday.
The Post acceded to the request of Attorney General Janet Reno and the Federal Bureau of Investigation to print the manifesto unaltered after the bomber had offered to stop the killing with mail bombs if the text were published by The Post or The New York Times.
The Times concurred with The Post's decision and shared the printing costs with it.


Home Video
A Fistful of Fall Bargains
No announcement has been made, but distributors say "Apollo 13," the big summer hit starring Tom Hanks, is to be released on videocassette by MCA/Universal in November.
The price is expected to be $22.98, which would make the film the latest addition to a grab bag of titles priced low this fall.
Last year, two films, "Jurassic Park" and "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs," dominated the season.
This fall, with consumers buying more tapes than ever, the supply has exploded in all directions.
Titles to be released include "Batman Forever," "Casper," "The Santa Clause" and "Free Willy 2." But this is also a year of old titles in new packages.
This week, for example, a set of the three "Star Wars" movies, priced at $49.98, is the No. 1 best seller.
And next month, high demand is expected for the James Bond series, which is to be re-released after a period out of distribution.
Then there are several prime rental titles that have undergone quick price reductions in time to sell during the holidays.
These films include "Little Women," "Legends of the Fall," "Dumb and Dumber" and "Stargate," all of which cost close to $100 retail for anybody who just has to own them before the prices drop to below $20 each.
Even this season's Disney title, "Cinderella," to be released on Oct. 4 at a price of $22.98, has already been on home video.
In 1988, when people didn't buy so many cassettes, the film sold about seven million copies before it was withdrawn, as is Disney's practice with all its major animated titles.
This time around, Disney expects to sell more than 15 million cassettes.
Help for the High-Minded
Meanwhile, a long way from "Dumb and Dumber," a dozen independent film and video makers have received fresh support for projects that eventually could find their way into video stores but most likely will be available as part of institutional and library collections.
Fellowships recently awarded by the Rockefeller Foundation are aiding film makers like Susan Meiselas, who is making a CD-ROM about the Kurds; Salem Mekuria, at work on a video about the revolutionary conflict in Ethiopia, and Meena Nanj, who is developing an experimental video about the century-long migration of his Gujarati Ismali family from India to Kenya to Los Angeles.
The grants, which are for $35,000 each, are awarded annually.
Past winners include Charles Burnett, who received a fellowship for his critically acclaimed film "To Sleep With Anger," which is available on home video, and Julie Dash, who won a grant for "Daughters of the Dust," her highly regarded film about her Gullah roots.
A panel of 40 film makers nominates more than 100 projects a year.
"We look for new voices or old voices used in a new way," says Tania Blanich of National Video Resources, a New York nonprofit group that makes the final selections and administers the grants.
This weekend, one of the winners, "High Horses" by Randy Redroad, is on view at the Native American Film and Video Festival at the National Museum of the American Indian in Manhattan.
NEW VIDEO RELEASES The Madness of King George  1994.
Hallmark. $98.23. 110 minutes.
Closed captioned.
R.
There's rarely a regal moment, at least of the decorous variety, in Nicholas Hytner's often riotous tragicomedy about George III.
Portraying a monarch given to wild flights of aberrant behavior (ascribed to a metabolic imbalance called porphyria), Nigel Hawthorne is splendidly wily and unpredictable as he rushes about his domain shocking the court with refreshing, if unsettling, proclamations and fending off scheming rivals.
As the strong and long-suffering Queen Charlotte, Helen Mirren is also memorable in, Janet Maslin wrote in The New York Times, "a deft, mischievous, beautifully acted historical drama with exceptionally broad appeal."  Don Juan DeMarco  1995.
New Line. $98.31. 92 minutes.
Closed captioned.
PG-13.
Release date: Tuesday.
A young man (Johnny Depp) declaring that he is Don Juan is talked down from a high ledge by the psychiatrist Jack Mickler (Marlon Brando), who then takes on his case.
Mickler, a portly suburbanite with a wife (Faye Dunaway) equally as estranged from passion, comes to accept his patient's contention that a little romance is always possible.
If that sounds a bit silly, the premise is saved by the ardent Mr.
Depp and a playful Mr.
Brando, who cruises through the film with an engaging manner.
"The movie is cheesy, but its stars certainly are not" (Maslin).
Once Were Warriors  1995.
New Line. $95.92. 102 minutes.
Closed captioned.
R.
Release date: Tuesday.
Frustrations erupt into extreme domestic violence in Lee Tamahori's film about Maori New Zealanders who, having lost contact with their heritage, find themselves disconnected in an urban world.
Decked out in black leather, the brawny Jake Heke (Temuera Morrison) acts the way he looks, especially when drunk and pounding his wife, Beth (Rena Owen).
But then she is as tough as he is, accepting his brutality with gritty resignation.
Left to witness this behavior and be forever affected by it are the couple's five children, who must also absorb the punishment in a visceral film that "offers social realism with a savage kick" (Maslin).
The Basketball Diaries  1995.
Polygram. $94.95.
Laser disk, $34.95. 102 minutes.
Closed captioned.
R.
Release date: Tuesday.
The writings of the neo-Beat poet and musician Jim Carroll lose much of their vibrancy in a film long on stylized misery and showiness but wanting in substance.
The one strength is a raw, scary performance by Leonardo DiCaprio as the young Carroll, who stokes a heroin addiction and tries to break his mother's door down looking for drug money.
On the page the story is a precocious tale.
As directed with a hollow flashiness by Scott Kalvert, it "has no special voice or style" (Maslin).
FROM YEARS PAST One Actress, Four Roles
Helen Mirren, perhaps best-known as the detective Jane Tennison in the BBC production "Prime Suspect," has given many edgy, intelligent performances, most recently as the resilient Queen Charlotte in "The Madness of King George," released on Tuesday.
Here are some of her films on tape.
EXCALIBUR.
Ms.
Mirren is the King's splendidly wicked half-sister in John Boorman's solemn but grand telling of the Arthurian legend. 1981.
Warner. $19.98. 141 minutes.
PG.
THE LONG GOOD FRIDAY.
Bob Hoskins is a crime boss and Ms.
Mirren his mistress in John Mackenzie's gangster film. 1981.
Not in distribution but rental copies available. 109 minutes.
R.
CAL.
The Protestant widow (Ms. Mirren) of a policeman slain by the I.R.A. has an affair with an I.R.A. member (John Lynch) who helped kill her husband. 1984.
Warner. $19.98. 102 minutes.
R.
THE MOSQUITO COAST.
In Peter Weir's film, an inventor (Harrison Ford) disgruntled with life in the United States moves his wife (Ms. Mirren) and children to the Honduran jungle, where he tries to set up a model community. 1986.
Warner. $19.98. 117 minutes.
PG.


Legal Services Plan Would Strip Poor of Rights
To the Editor:
You report Sept. 14 that the House Judiciary Committee has approved a measure abolishing the Legal Services Corporation, slashing its former budget almost in half and sending it to the states in block grants to provide for the civil legal representation of poor people with the following string attached -- none of the money can be used to assert their constitutional rights.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14  SECOND THOUGHTS ON BOSNIA
As chances for peace in Bosnia improve, bringing America's promise to send troops to enforce an agreement closer to reality, Republicans questioned whether the U.S. should send any soldiers to Bosnia.
A1  SERBS BEAT BACK ATTACKS
After two weeks of disastrous defeats, Bosnian Serb forces appeared to stiffen their defenses, fending off Croatian and Muslim attacks along crucial battle lines.
A12  HOUSE TOUGHENS STANCE ON CUBA
Despite last-minute threats of a veto by the White House, the House voted overwhelmingly to tighten the trade embargo against Cuba.
A8  SENATE LIFTS PAKISTAN SANCTIONS
With support from the White House, the Senate voted to lift all economic sanctions and some important military sanctions imposed on Pakistan five years ago because of its secret nuclear weapons program.
A3  EX-DICTATOR RUNS IN SURINAME
Thirteen years after the U.S. considered sending marines to Suriname to force a left-leaning military dictatorship from power, the dictator who ran that Government is running for President.
A8  ARAB-ISRAELI NEGOTIATORS GO ON
Foreign Minister Shimon Peres and Yasir Arafat, went into their sixth night of intensive talks over the shape of their complex disengagement in the West Bank.
A11  In India, worshipers claimed the god of learning drinks milk.
A5  Canada's Supreme Court voided an all out ban on tobacco ads.
A6  Japan's Socialist Party decided to disband and form a new party.
A7  Seoul Journal: A radical transformed in the new South Korea.
A4  National A16-29  G.O.P.
OFFERS MEDICARE DETAILS
House Republicans disclosed that their plan to slow the growth of Federal Medicare costs would gradually double health insurance premiums for the elderly.
A1  ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY OVERHAUL
Congressional negotiators completed work on a bill that reduces protection for endangered species and cuts deeply into Federal conservation programs.
A1  SIMPSON JURY GETS AN OPTION
Handing O. J. Simpson a major setback, the judge ruled that even if jurors find that Mr.
Simpson killed two people impulsively rather than with deliberation, he can still be convicted of murder.
A1  LESS INTEREST IN LAW SCHOOL
Applications to law schools have dropped in recent years, down to 78,000 this year, from a peak of 94,000 in 1991.
A1  A GINGRICH THREAT ON DEBT
Speaker Newt Gingrich threatened to send the United States into default on its debt, to force the Clinton Administration to balance the budget on Republican terms.
A1  COLLEGE LOANS UP SHARPLY
Borrowing to pay for college has soared, with Federal programs disbursing more in the last four years than in their first 20.
A16  GRIEF OVER A KILLING
After the shooting death of a young girl on a Los Angeles street, the outpouring of grief and sympathy has come from near and far.
A16  RULING AGAINST MAGAZINE
A Supreme Court justice refused to overturn a lower court order prohibiting Business Week from publishing material from sealed court documents.
A16  RECOMMENDATION FOR DIABETICS
Federal health officials recommended heart bypass surgery over angioplasty for diabetics with coronary artery disease.
A22  F.B.I.
AGENT DEFENDS ACTIONS
The former deputy director of the F.B.I. told a Senate panel that he had recently unearthed notes that show he did not authorize the shoot-on-sight rules in effect during a bloody standoff in 1992.
A28  Metro Digest B1  Business Digest D1  Weekend C1-32  Architecture: Buildings that hide and reveal.
C1  Film: "Showgirls." C1  "The Run of the Country." C3  "A Month By the Lake." C3  "I, the Worst of All." C10  "Canadian Bacon." C20  "Tie-Died." C10  "A Reason to Believe." C18  "Seven." C18  For Children C12  Theater: On Stage, and Off C2  "Mister Lincoln." C32  Restaurants C24  Art: Russian Jewish artists at the Jewish Museum.
C1  New sculpture garden.
C25  Inside Art C26  Light sculpture.
C30  Art in Review C31  Weston and Mapplethorpe.
C30  Books: Medical detective story.
C32  Television: TV Weekend D17  Home Video D18  Sports B8-16  Baseball: McDowell survives and Yankees rally to win.
B9  Maddux silences Mets.
B11  Basketball: Mason's reward.
B9  Columns: Vecsey on Yankees B9  Football: Rams perfect so far.
B9  Golf: "We're ready," says the United States Ryder Cup captain.
B9  Obituaries B7  Rudolph Peierls, atomic physicist.
Walter A. Haas Jr., patriarch of the family that controls Levi Strauss.
Editorials/Op-Ed A30-31  Editorials  A breakup of limited portent.
Graves and questions in the Sinai.
Stirrings on lobbying reform.
Detoxifying custody fights.
Letters  A. M. Rosenthal: While the children sleep.
Bob Herbert: If Colin Powell runs.
Anthony Lewis: Power to punish.
David C. Bloomfield: Decentralize now.
Chronicle B6  Crossword C31


COMPANY BRIEFS
FEDERATED DEPARTMENT STORES INC., Cincinnati, said the antitrust review waiting period had expired for its proposed acquisition of Broadway Stores Inc., Los Angeles.
SEAGRAM CO.
LTD., Montreal, has authorized buying back up to 3 percent of its common stock, which represents about 11.2 million of the company's 373.3 million shares outstanding.


A Portrait of Lincoln Shows His Magnanimity
If one quality shines through "Mister Lincoln," Herbert Mitgang's concise dramatic portrait of America's 16th President, it is his magnanimity of spirit.
In his public utterances and private correspondence, Lincoln combined a lofty humanitarianism and linguistic eloquence gleaned from the Bible, Shakespeare and Robert Burns (whom he lauded as a "people's poet") with a folksy, self-deflating humor.
The man who wrote the Gettysburg Address, one of history's most profound and uplifting eulogies, was also capable of telling a story on himself in which he and another man argue about which one is uglier.
Whoever comes out the winner, it is agreed, deserves to be shot on sight.


Art in Review
Jackson Pollock  Jason McCoy 41 East 57th Street Manhattan Through Oct. 28
This show includes 16 paintings and drawings by Jackson Pollock, including one he did for a greeting card; a suite of 21 prints, and three collage studies for the design of a book jacket.
All the works have become known to scholars since 1978, when the Pollock catalogue raisonne was published, so they are to be included in a new supplement to the catalogue, which comes out in October.
It is the occasion for this exhibition.


Talking of Vision, and the Lack of It
THE folks at the Helen Keller Services for the Blind Nassau County Senior Center are often on the go.
One day, it's Atlantic City.
Another, Broadway.
On Tuesday, the center was making plans for a group to be on America's Talking, an NBC cable network.
But the network said no when an audience coordinator found out group members are blind.
This was odd.
The center has never been turned away from anywhere.
"I was flabbergasted," said Janet Sarro, the director.
"What an unenlightened view."


Art in Review
Michael Mulhern  Rosenberg and Kaufman Fine Art 115 Wooster Street SoHo Through Oct. 14
Michael Mulhern's pictorial vocabulary -- strokes of black, white and aluminum paint applied directly to raw canvas -- comes straight out of Jackson Pollock.
But Mr.
Mulhern manages to make something personal out of these familiar elements.
His loopy lines of black and white have the feeling of intimate doodles blown up to mural scale; they're simultaneously awkward and graceful, like teen-agers not quite at ease with their adult-size bodies.


Corrections
An entry in the Executive Changes listing in Business Day yesterday about a management change at the International Paper Company misstated John T. Dillon's new position.
He was named president and chief operating officer, not chief executive.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in Manhattan that are to close soon:  Closing This Weekend "FOR COLORED GIRLS WHO HAVE CONSIDERED SUICIDE WHEN THE RAINBOW IS ENUF," TriBeCa Performing Arts Center, 199 Chambers Street.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today at 7:30 P.M.; tomorrow at 4 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
Information: (212) 346-8510.
"SYLVIA," Manhattan Theater Club, City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan.
The A. R. Gurney comedy about a Manhattan couple and a dog.
Closes tomorrow and reopens, with cast changes, on Sept. 29 at the John Houseman Theater, 450 West 42d Street, Manhattan.
Performances: Today at 8 P.M. and tomorrow at 2:30 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $45.
Information: (212) 581-1212.
Closing Next Weekend "TRAVELS WITH MY AUNT," Minetta Lane Theater, 18 Minetta Lane, Greenwich Village.
An adaptation by Giles Havergal of Graham Green's novel about a retired banker and his elderly aunt; directed by Mr.
Havergal.
With Brian Murray, Martin Rayner, Tom Beckett and Larry Linville.
Through Oct. 1.
Performances: Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays at 8 P.M.; Wednesdays and Saturdays at 2:30 and 8 P.M.; Sundays at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $27.50 to $45.
Information: (212) 307-4100.
"WE'LL MEET AGAIN," 45th Street Theater, 354 West 45th Street, Manhattan.
A one-woman musical by Vicki Stuart, set in World War II London.
Through Oct. 1.
Performances: Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays at 8 P.M.; Wednesdays and Saturdays at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sundays at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $36.
Information: (212) 307-4100.


Police Officer Is Arrested
A police officer has been arrested for making improper advances toward a woman he stopped for a traffic violation, authorities said yesterday, according to The Associated Press.
Eugene Radin, 55, was charged with official misconduct and making terroristic threats.
After the motorist filed a complaint, an internal investigation caught Officer Radin on videotape Tuesday making advances toward a second woman, Police Director William R. Celester said.


Corrections
An article in The Home Section yesterday about the conversion of a mansion in the Stuyvesant Heights Historic District in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, into a bed and breakfast misstated the date of a house tour that will visit it.
The tour, Brownstoners of Bedford-Stuyvesant, will be on Oct. 21, not this Saturday.


Mylan Labs Sees Big Rise In Its Uncovered Short Sales
he bears seem to have known something was not going well at Mylan Laboratories before the bulls figured it out.
The monthly figures on uncovered short sales released yesterday showed that the number of open positions in Mylan, a maker of generic drugs, leaped 6.5 million shares, to 17.7 million, in the month that ended with trading on Sept. 12.


More Scorn and Less Money Dim Law's Lure
When Barry Pearson, a marine pilot, won admission to the venerable Northwestern Law School here, his peers in the military did not exactly salute his career change.
"You're taking a big step down in prestige," he recalled one friend saying.
Another asked: "You want to become a self-serving leech? A parasite? A drain on society?"


Bosnian Serbs Fend Off Croatian and Muslim Attacks
After two weeks of disastrous battlefield defeats, Bosnian Serb forces appeared to stiffen their defenses today, fending off Croatian and Muslim attacks along crucial battle lines.
Croatian units halted their advance across the international border from the north and retreated back into Croatia from positions around the Bosnian Serb stronghold of Banja Luka today.


Lawyer Admits He Laundered Drug Money
A Manhattan lawyer pleaded guilty yesterday to taking part in what officials called one of the largest money-laundering operations ever uncovered in New York City, a ring responsible for hiding more than $19 million in drug profits for the Cali cocaine cartel.
The lawyer, Harvey Weinig, 47, of Riverside Drive, pleaded guilty in Federal District Court in Manhattan to one count of conspiracy to commit money laundering and one count of using his assets for money laundering.
Of the 14 people charged in the case, all but one have pleaded guilty.


Graves and Questions in the Sinai
Israel and Egypt must not try to finesse the discovery of two mass graves in the Sinai.
Cairo says they contain the remains of Egyptian prisoners of war and unarmed civilians executed by Israel during the 1967 war.
Whatever happened in the desert nearly 30 years ago, even if no longer prosecutable under Israeli law, should be investigated by Israel and a public accounting should be made.
Allegations of unprovoked killings first appeared last month when a retired Israeli General, Arieh Biroh, admitted he had killed Egyptian prisoners in the 1956 conflict with Egypt.
Then the current Israeli Housing Minister, Binyamin Ben-Eliezer, was accused of participating in the execution of civilians and prisoners of war in 1967.
Mr.
Ben-Eliezer denied the charge and the matter was not pursued by the Government.
Cairo, too, initially shrank from looking into the allegations, fearing it might offend both Israel and the United States.


Stirrings on Lobbying Reform
A coalition of impatient G.O.P. freshmen, reform-minded senior Republicans and persistent Democrats is pressing to end Congress's addiction to the favors provided by powerful special interest groups and the lobbyists who represent them.
Until now, the Republicans appear to have been more interested in exploiting their majority status to maximize fund-raising than in addressing voter anger at Washington's habitual self-dealing.
However, according to a Times report by Adam Clymer, House Speaker Newt Gingrich may finally be willing to tackle an issue for which he, like his Democratic predecessor, Thomas Foley, has shown no real enthusiasm.


Bankers Trust Hires Former Treasury Deputy
Creating what may be a horse race for its top job, the Bankers Trust New York Corporation yesterday named Frank N. Newman, a former Deputy Treasury Secretary, to its No. 3 position.
Filling a new position as the bank's senior vice chairman, Mr.
Newman would be a leading candidate to fill the chairman's spot, which Charles S. Sanford Jr. plans to vacate by mid-1996.
Analysts said yesterday that it was curious that Bankers Trust would announce the hiring of Mr.
Newman, who is 53, without naming a choice for the top job.


Police Seek Man Who Said He Heard Boast of Park Slaying
In a tantalizing development after days of frustratingly little progress, investigators appealed for help last night in finding a man who told three people that he had overheard someone boasting about having killed a woman in Central Park.
Commissioner William J. Bratton said the man, who drove a 1992 gray Nissan with an invalid personalized license plate, "SOBER," made the remarks on Tuesday morning to a security guard at Mount Sinai Medical Center, and later to two traffic agents who were ticketing his car.


Falcon Passing Game Has the Jets on Guard
The Jets' big people were tumbling like acrobats today and running downfield, huffing and puffing, after the little people.
For in football's version of the dance of the elephants, the Jets' defensive linemen, outweighing their prey by 100 pounds, will be chasing those oh-so-quick Atlanta Falcon receivers on Sunday.


America's Cold War With Canada. Just Kidding!
When the President of the United States decides that starting a cold war with Canada would be the most efficient way to boost his sagging popularity, the news media have a field day promoting a campaign called Operation Canadian Bacon: A Line in the Snow.
Overnight the term "Canuck" acquires the same sinister connotations that were once attached to "Commie." A newscaster points to a map of the United States with maple syrup dripping over Montana and Minnesota and mutters darkly about the evil seeping across the border.
Everything from Canada's use of the metric system to Neil Young and Anne Murray is identified as part of a conspiracy to destroy America.


International Briefs; Share Offer Authorized
SGS-Thomson Microelectronics N.V. is planning to sell another 14 percent of the company to the public -- taking in about $900 million at its current share price -- to finance its expansion in the booming chip market.
SGS-Thomson, Europe's biggest independent chip maker, raised around $460 million by selling about 17 percent of the company in an initial public offering last year, and its supervisory board has authorized a second offering of about 18 million more shares, to be completed in this year's fourth quarter. (Bloomberg Business News)


A Forbes Is Ready to Spend In Pursuit of the Presidency
"Pick a number," said Malcolm S. Forbes Jr. on the eve of his run for the Presidency, genially highlighting his willingness to dip deep into his family fortune in a dark-horse quest for the Republican nomination.
"I've seen everything from 10 to 40 million mentioned," he said of what he might personally spend on a blitz to become a household name and crash the Presidential sweepstakes from an offstage vantage of business power, social privilege and political zeal.


Wright and Gallacher Still Trading Jabs
The Ryder Cup may inspire pro golfers to feelings of goose-bumpy patriotism and a pristine love of the game.
Why they all wear uniforms, not sponsor-made duds.
Team spirit!
No prize money!
But two men from the former British Empire -- Bernard Gallacher, the European team captain, and Ben Wright, who will comment on the three-day event for the USA Network -- are having a fine old pie fight.
"He ranted at me in Kiawah Island that I was a traitor to Britain because I have an American wife, an American child and live in America," said Wright, who will be seen from the Oak Hill clubhouse today and on USA's 11 P.M. highlights shows.
"I suppose you can call me that, but he was very rude.


Turning an Alley Into a Showcase for Sculpture
Almost since the day in 1979 when it moved into its quarters on 125th Street, the Studio Museum in Harlem has eyed the city-owned alley next door as a place to show outdoor sculpture.
It was an unpromising site, to be sure, a shadowy sliver of urban wreckage between two blank five-story walls running the length of the block from 125th to 124th Street.
Still, the museum saw potential in it and has spent the last dozen years or more grappling with city administrations, an altered City Charter and the challenge of raising private money in one of New York's poorest communities.
Meanwhile, the costs of developing the site ballooned to $1.6 million from some $500,000.
The 5,200-square-foot concrete Sculpture Garden that has just opened is thus a triumph of determination.
But it is more than that.
To an extent that could not have been foreseen, it is a surprisingly pleasurable place in which to see art.
Working with Fred Bland of the New York City architectural firm Beyer Blinder Belle, the museum made the very most of the difficult space, breaking it up with a raised platform at one end and a tall triangular glass bay window in the middle that functions both as an entrance and a source of light indoors.
Finding sculptures that suit the space (201 feet by 26 feet), not to mention that look good together, will remain a challenge.
But the inaugural installation of 12 works by 12 artists demonstrates that the museum has already come up with a satisfying plan.


Chancellor Candidates Woo Both Sides
All three candidates to become the next New York City Schools Chancellor have assured Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani that they favor giving him a greater role in the schools' finances and security.
But they have also assured the Board of Education that they would be loath to give the Mayor new powers without the board's consent.
"Every candidate believes that once they get the job, they'll be able to work with everyone," said William C. Thompson Jr., the board member representing Brooklyn.
"They're trying to be nice to both sides."


Countrywide Credit Industries(CCR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Aug 31


A Free-Spirited Nun's Poetry Shows Seeds of Her Undoing
When an admirer asks Juana Ines de la Cruz, the 17th-century Mexican poet, scholar and nun, why she never wanted children, she points proudly to the tools of learning that surround her in the convent where she lives in comfort and is treated like a star.
"These are my children," she says, showing off her sundial, obsidian mirror, astrolabe, magnets, quill and telescope.


Despite Nuclear Fears, Senate Acts to Lift Pakistan Curbs
With support from the White House, the Senate voted today to lift all economic sanctions and some important military sanctions imposed on Pakistan five years ago because of its secret nuclear weapons program.
The measure passed by a 55-to-45 margin despite angry objections by both Democrats and Republicans that it sends the wrong signal to would-be nuclear powers like Iran and undercuts the Administration's commitment to curb the spread of nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles.


Univar Corp.(UVR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Aug 31


AT&amp;T's Breakup Offers Opportunity And Uncertainties
By deciding to split itself into three separate companies, AT&amp;T is charting a course that few large corporations have taken.
The reorganization raises questions about what directions the individual businesses will take and what investors can expect.
A big advantage of the breakup appears to be that it will help AT&amp;T expand around the world at a time when many countries are rushing to modernize their telephone systems.
By splitting off its equipment business from its long-distance operations, AT&amp;T can avoid the conflicts of trying to sell technology to European and Asian companies that are its competitors in long distance.


Man Drowns at Bradley Beach
Riptides off North Jersey's coast have claimed another victim.
Wayne Merz, 45, drowned off the Second Avenue beach on Wednesday, the A.P. reported.
Mr.
Merz, whose body was found near a jetty in nearby Avon, was the 14th person to drown at the Jersey Shore this summer, and the third in Bradley Beach.


Peace Effort in Israel Leads to War of Words
The Jewish High Holy Days, which begin on Sunday night with Rosh ha-Shanah, demand both introspection and a searching look ahead, an emotional and intellectual challenge perhaps best experienced in spiritually familiar surroundings.
So what could be more startling than leaving one's synagogue at this very time?
Yet that is exactly what Abraham H. Foxman has done; publicly, too.


Proposal Seeks to Save Shipyard
The Delaware River Port Authority agreed yesterday to put up $110 million in a new proposal to bring a German shipbuilder to the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard, which closed Friday.
Mayor Ed Rendell of Philadelphia also announced a revamped $486 million proposal to reopen negotiations with the firm, Joseph L. Meyer G.m.b.H., which has tentatively proposed building cruise and cargo ships at the 194-year-old shipyard.
JOE SHARKEY


3Com Corp.(COMS,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Aug 31


Trees as Pillars, Sky as Roof: An Intimate Central Park Cathedral for 350,000
Arthur Sikula walked slowly across the dusty ball fields of Central Park's Great Lawn, imagining a cathedral where others saw only trees and blue skies.
As the man who will design the outdoor site where the Pope will say Mass next month, Mr.
Sikula has the job of turning a place for ballplayers into a house of prayer, which he insisted was not that big a stretch.
"We need to create a living cathedral," said Mr.
Sikula, a liturgical architect.
"The raw elements all church architecture tried to create in Gothic and Romanesque cathedrals -- domed structures for a cosmic sky and columns for trees -- here in Central Park, we have them already."


CHRONICLE
Prosecutors in Washington yesterday dropped drunken driving charges against DEE DEE MYERS, President Clinton's former press secretary, after she spent 12 hours in a special alcohol education program, Reuters reported.


Shanghai Stock Market Cited for Scandal
When Wei Wenyuan was replaced as head of the Shanghai Securities Exchange last week, no official reason was given.
Yet securities executives widely suspected that Mr.
Wei was taking responsibility for the biggest scandal to roil the stock market since it opened in 1990: Last February, the bond futures market spun out of control, ruining China's leading securities firm and ushering in a period of reduced innovation and greater regulation.
Today, the reason for Mr.
Wei's departure was detailed in the first official accounting of the scandal.
In announcing the results of a seven-month investigation, the authorities blamed the securities exchange for lax supervision and accused two securities firms of manipulating the market, trying to rig prices and violating exchange rules.


Walter A. Haas Jr., 79, Leader Of Family Behind Levi Strauss
Walter A. Haas Jr., patriarch of the San Francisco family that controls Levi Strauss &amp; Company, died at his home in San Francisco on Wednesday.
He was 79.
Mr.
Haas died after a battle with prostate cancer, said Sean Fitzgerald, a Levi Strauss spokesman.


Accounts
Union Electric Co., St.
Louis, to TBWA/Chiat Day, St.
Louis, a unit of the Omnicom Group, to handle its account, previously at Griswold Communications, Cleveland.
The billings were estimated at $3 million.
AT&amp;T Wireless Services, Paramus, N.J., formerly known as Cellular One, to Quinn Fable Advertising, New York, to handle direct marketing and other duties, previously handled by various agencies on a project basis.
Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas, New York, a unit of the Interpublic Group of Cos., continues handling the print part of the account.
The billings were estimated at $1.5 million.


Study Critical of Savings' Recovery Effort
A Congressional staff report released today said that Treasury Department officials "inappropriately softened" a 1994 report on why the Government has recovered so little money from wrongdoers at failed savings institutions in Texas.
The report, by the Republican staff of the oversight subcommittee of the House Banking Committee, said the 1994 review of Texas recovery efforts, written by Treasury lawyers and other officials, was toned down to diminish criticism of the Resolution Trust Corporation, the Federal agency handling the cleanup.


Art in Review
Todd Webb  Yancey Richardson Gallery 560 Broadway (at Prince Street) SoHo Through Oct. 14
In 1945, after being discharged from the Navy, Todd Webb moved to New York City and began a remarkable project.
For the next year Mr.
Webb walked the streets of the city with a heavy camera and tripod, photographing the buildings and people he encountered.


Corrections
The Our Towns column on Sept. 12, about interest in opening a casino in Niagara Falls, N.Y., included an erroneous reference to a 1994 referendum on casino gambling.
It was held in Niagara Falls, Ontario, not Niagara Falls, N.Y.


Gingrich Threatens U.S. Default If Clinton Won't Bend on Budget
House Speaker Newt Gingrich threatened today to send the United States into default on its debt for the first time in the nation's history, to force the Clinton Administration to balance the budget on Republican terms.
His comments, a more extreme version of the hardball stance frequently used in past budget showdowns, raised the specter that the looming standoff may begin to rattle financial markets around the world.
Mr.
Gingrich's remarks came in the middle of a day in which the dollar plunged as much as 5 percent against major currencies before recovering slightly, sending interest rates up sharply.  [ Page D13. ]  The Speaker's statement appeared to be one of several factors that added to the markets' unsettled condition.


Art in Review
Rafael Ferrer  Nancy Hoffman Gallery 429 West Broadway (near Prince Street) SoHo Through Oct. 18
This outstanding retrospective of almost 90 drawings that Rafael Ferrer has done since 1969 is a great pleasure, and a reminder of his gifts as draftsman, colorist, portraitist, social observer and fantast.
In high-key images of high humor, he creates playful faces in crayon on paper bags and draws wry self-portraits.
He captures the ripe palette and sensuality of the Caribbean in depictions of sunbathers and fruit.
And in his latest, most accomplished drawings, he pays homage to the Japanese printmaker Hiroshige and to Wilfredo Lam.
The drawings derived from Lam's "Jungle" at the Museum of Modern Art are affirmations of Latin American culture, Surrealism and the modernist tradition to which both Lam and Mr.
Ferrer proudly belong.


Corrections
An article in Science Times on Tuesday about a forthcoming conference on research on genetics and criminal behavior incompletely summarized the views of Dr.
Diana Fishbein of the Justice Department on treatment for criminal offenders.
She said some violent offenders should receive mandatory medical, psychological or drug abuse treatment.


The Philharmonic Opens, Earnest and Edgy
The New York Philharmonic opened its season on Wednesday night with an evening that was part gala and part policy statement.
Patrons circumnavigated Avery Fisher Hall wearing their best.
Television cameras whirled.
In the wings, orchestra members were sharpening their swords for the contract negotiations to come; the current agreement expired with this concert, and hours earlier the orchestra had authorized its negotiators to strike if strike they will.
Onstage, Kurt Masur conducted Strauss and Wagner: two dead Germans by way of a living one.
Mr.
Masur was beginning his fifth season as music director of the Philharmonic, and the old adjectives attached to him have not changed: earnest, blunt, dour, thorough.
Great music in Mr.
Masur's scheme of things is not unbridled bliss but hard work followed by commensurate reward.


Grateful Dead Fans Act It All Out
Most of them own tape decks but almost none have faxes.
Twenty-five percent own at least one Jerry Garcia necktie, though where they need ties is anyone's guess.
The Grateful Dead camp followers seen in "Tie-Died: Rock 'n' Roll's Most Deadicated Fans" don't have many dress-up occasions.
They spend their time in parking lots near places where the Dead are playing, enjoying the Gypsy spirit of a communal acid flashback.
Some of the people interviewed here can cite the titles of their favorite Dead songs, but the purest fans are the ones who can't remember the names.
"Tie-Died," which opens today at the Sony Village VII, films these fans in a rambling style they themselves would best appreciate, trying intermittently to get to the heart of the Deadhead scene.
Fans are heard saying that their reverence for the Dead has something to do with the failure of their own families, but the serious side of this documentary doesn't go beyond that.
Indignation over mandatory minimum drug sentencing is the closest any Deadhead here gets to a political cause.


New Arbitrator Is Named
Baseball management and union personnel have agreed on a new arbitrator, NICHOLAS ZUMAS, a person involved in the sport's labor relations said yesterday.
Zumas, once he formally accepts the position, will succeed GEORGE NICOLAU, whom the owners dismissed six weeks ago after a nine-year tenure.


Angry Opposition Attacks the Process
It is hard to overestimate the anger of Congressional Democrats these days.
It is spilling into hallway shouting matches, into bitter exchanges in committees, even, beginning on Friday, into an extraordinary series of renegade hearings on the Capitol lawn.
It all springs from the Republicans' plan to extract $270 billion from the Medicare program in seven years, and the escalating war between the two parties over just what it will mean to slow the program's growth that much.
In the House, where, in contrast to the Senate, a minority has very few rights on the legislative floor, the outside battle for public opinion can be critical.


Restaurants
When Michael McCarty opened his first restaurant in Santa Monica, Calif., 16 years ago, the first critic to review it said, "Michael's needs a mother."
Most people agreed.
Mr.
McCarty was 25, most of the people working for him were younger and they all reveled in snubbing tradition.
Mr.
McCarty said there was "tons of room for creativity" and he wanted to "do the weirdest things." When he opened the sleek New York branch in 1989, his aspirations had not changed.


What Gave Carnegie Hall Glorious Sound
To the Editor:
It's astonishing that your Sept. 14 and 20 news articles on acoustical damage done by a concrete slab beneath the stage of Carnegie Hall fail to note the most glaring alteration made in the 1986 renovation.


A Shower of Falling Leaves


TELE-TV GIVES $1 BILLION CONTRACT TO THOMSON
Tele-TV Systems announced yesterday that it had selected Thomson Consumer Electronics Inc. to supply the set-top converter boxes for its new television service.
Tele-TV, the programming joint venture owned by the Bell Atlantic Corporation, the Nynex Corporation, and Pacific Telesis Group, said the contract was worth $1 billion.
Thomson, would supply three million boxes, which Tele-TV would connect to a wireless cable network to offer viewers a package of local broadcast channels, basic and premium cable networks, and some interactive services.
The company said the boxes would cost customers $350 each -- hundreds of dollars less than other estimates for similar technology.


Jack E. Murphy, Publicity Director, 74
Jack E. Murphy, a publicity director for the New York Philharmonic who also worked at Carnegie Hall, died on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 74 and also had a home in Italy.
The cause was bone cancer, a Carnegie Hall spokesman said.


CHRONICLE
MAIDA HEATTER, the cookbook author who lives in Miami Beach, lost her wallet with $500 in it during a visit to New York this week.
She was resigned never to see it again.
Then, on Wednesday, Miss Heatter was having lunch in Daniel, the French restaurant on East 76th Street, and was summoned to the telephone.
"I was dumbfounded," she said yesterday.
"I didn't think anyone there even knew my name. Then a young man said on the phone, 'I found your wallet.' "


Burlington Coat Factory Warehouse Corp.(BCF,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to July 1


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY 47 ARE CHARGED WITH INSURANCE FRAUD
In what a Manhattan grand jury indictment called "a pervasive pattern of criminal conduct," 47 people were charged in a widespread scheme in which insurance company adjusters were said to have been bribed to expedite personal injury settlements involving unsuspecting clients and more than a dozen insurance companies.  [ Page B3. ]
SHADOW OVER THE SPY SHOP BUSINESS
Federal authorities in Manhattan charged three men with buying illegal eavesdropping equipment, in what they said was the beginning of a crackdown on customers of the multimillion-dollar spy shop industry.
The charges are part of a Federal crackdown on the growing spy industry, which, investigators say, is increasingly selling eavesdropping devices illegally to businessmen, lawyers and private investigators.  [ B3. ]
TURNING A FIELD INTO A HOUSE OF PRAYER
Arthur Sikula walked slowly across the dusty ball fields of Central Park's Great Lawn, imagining a cathedral where others saw only trees and blue skies.
As the man who will design the outdoor site where the Pope will say Mass, Mr.
Sikula has the job of turning a place for ballplayers into a house of prayer.  [ B3. ]
SCHOOL CANDIDATES WOO BOTH SIDES
All three candidates to become the next New York City Schools Chancellor have assured Mayor Giuliani they favor giving him a greater role in the schools' finances and security while also assuring the Board of Education they would be loath to give the Mayor new powers without the board's consent.  [ B4. ]
Private support has been mixed for replacing some of New York City's large, overcrowded schools with small alternatives.  [ B4. ]
Now that the city has three finalists for school chancellor, the Board of Education president and the Mayor began their endgame in earnest over the selection.  [ B4. ]
SCHOOL OFFICER HELD IN ABUSE OF STUDENT
A New York City school safety officer was arrested on charges of sexually abusing a 14-year-old special education student in the bathroom of the school safety office at Intermediate School 190 in Forest Hills, Queens.  [ B4. ]
BANK MERGER WILL COST SEVEN BRANCHES
Low- and middle-income neighborhoods in New York City will lose seven bank branches because of the pending merger of Chemical and Chase Manhattan banks, a Chemical official announced.
The two banks now have 95 branches in these neighborhoods, but that number will be reduced to 88 when the 7 branches -- none more than two blocks from another -- are consolidated.  [ B4. ]
Game 7 of the world chess championship ended in a draw, the seventh in a row.  [ B5. ] REGION ON VISION AND LACK OF IT
The folks at the Helen Keller Services for the Blind Nassau County Senior Center in Hempstead, L.I., are often on the go.
One day it's Atlantic City.
Another, Broadway.
On Tuesday, the center was making plans for a group to be on America's Talking, a cable network.
But the network said no when an audience coordinator found out group members are blind.
Our Towns by Evelyn Nieves.  [ B5. ]
GIRL IS HELD IN DEATH OF TEEN-AGER
A 13-year-old girl was fatally stabbed in front of a school in Rochester after she got into a quarrel with another student, authorities said.
A 12-year-old girl was taken into custody.  [ B5. ]


Artists Need Some Affordable Space for Work
To the Editor:
As executive director of the Lower East Side Printshop, a not-for-profit organization providing work space for artists, I read with interest your Sept. 19 news article on the plan for an artists condominium in Peekskill, N.Y.
I congratulate the developers for recognizing the economic power that artists bring to declining or abandoned neighborhoods.


Arafat and Peres in 6th Night of Sparring Over a Hebron Deal
The Israeli Foreign Minister, Shimon Peres, and the Palestinian leader, Yasir Arafat, went into their sixth night of tense and intensive sparring today over the final shape of their complex disengagement in the West Bank, offering no firm indication when the deal might be done but determined to conclude one.
In Jerusalem, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin confirmed the determination: "Even if today or tomorrow the agreement is not concluded, and I hope that it will be, then it will be concluded in another week or two. We started on this path, and we will continue on it."


Conagra Inc.(CAG,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Aug 27


Olympia Unit In U.S. Agrees To Revamping
The board of debt-ridden Olympia &amp; York Companies (USA) agreed yesterday to a restructuring that may give control of the company to a group of creditors led by the Bronfman family of Toronto.
The group offered $167 million in cash as part of a $323 million bid to control at least 67 percent of the American real estate holdings of the company, the United States subsidiary of Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., the giant Toronto-based commercial real estate concern.
Among the real estate involved are some of New York's most prestigious properties, like the World Financial Center in lower Manhattan.
The balance of the bid consists of loans and other interests.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Rally in Dollar Stalls; Currency Is Below 100 Yen  The dollar tumbled against leading currencies, dropping to less than 100 Japanese yen, to 99.05, in a retreat fueled by tepid central bank support for the dollar and continued speculation about obstacles to a single European currency.
Traders had expected the Bank of Japan to buy dollars aggressively after the Japanese Government released a new economic stimulus program on Wednesday.
When no intervention occurred, currency dealers sold dollars and took profits.
The dollar also fell against the German mark, sliding to 1.4235 marks from 1.4613.  [ Page D13. ] The stock market slumped, dragged down by the dollar and fears that foreign investors might retreat from U.S. securities.
The Dow industrials closed at 4,767.40, down 25.29.  [ D6. ] The weak dollar and a strong business outlook from the Philadelphia Fed slammed bond prices, lifting the yield on 30-year Treasury bonds to 6.55 percent.  [ D16. ] Gingrich Threatens U.S.
Default To Force a Balanced Budget  Newt Gingrich threatened to send the United States into default on its debt to force the Clinton Administration to balance the budget on Republican terms, raising the possibility that the looming standoff may begin to rattle financial markets.
Mr.
Fraud Charges  In a case that seems to show how much fraud a company can get away with, even when an auditing firm is monitoring its books, JWP Inc. agreed to settle civil charges with the S.E.C.
Floyd Norris: Market Place.  [ D6. ] Smirnoffs Keep Name in Russia  A Russian court has ruled that the American vodka Smirnoff, the world's biggest-selling vodka brand, cannot be sold under that name in Russia.
The court ruled that the Smirnoff family had the legal rights to the name there, and Russia's Chamber of Appeals of the Patent Office ruled that Heublein Inc., the American producer of Smirnoff, had no permission to use the name.


For AT&amp;T Bondholders, Ghosts of Deals Past
For the owners of nearly $30 billion in AT&amp;T bonds and notes, the company's drastic revamping conjures up ghosts of earlier, similar deals -- with the key question for investors being which ghost will be invited to the feast.
"The word I keep hearing is 'Marriott,' " said Frank Plumley, an analyst with the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.
The word the market would love to hear, however, is 'ITT.' "


Goldman, Sachs Profits Soar
Goldman Sachs Group L.P., the parent company of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, earned $425 million before taxes in the third quarter, almost four times its pretax profit in the comparable period a year earlier, partners at the firm said yesterday.
The firm, which is privately held, has benefited from surging stock and bond markets and a boom in merger and acquisition activities.


For Rams, St. Louis Is a Perfect Spot to Call Home
We are, indeed, moving.
Let's go now.
The change in scenery, atmosphere and environment might do us good right away.
That was the attitude of the new Rams coach, Rich Brooks, last spring once the team's move from Anaheim, Calif., to St.
Louis was finally approved by the National Football League.


Investigation of F.A.A. Finds No Cover-Up
Transportation Department investigators said today that they have concluded that officials in the Federal Aviation Administration did not destroy documents relating to a fatal air crash to protect Senator Tom Daschle and his wife.
Mr.
Daschle, a South Dakota Democrat who is the Senate minority leader, is married to Linda H. Daschle, the F.A.A.'s second-highest official.


Robert G. Dunlop, 86, Executive Who Led Expansion of Sun Oil
Robert G. Dunlop, a retired chairman of the Sun Company Inc. whose 23-year tenure as president led to a rapid growth of the Philadelphia-based energy company and its expansion overseas, died at the hospital of the University of Pennsylvania on Wednesday.
He was 86 and lived in Bryn Mawr, Pa.
The cause was complications from a stroke he suffered last week, a Sun spokesman said.


Palffy's Hat Trick Leads Islanders Over Tampa Bay
When training camp began, Zigmund Palffy was in Mike Milbury's doghouse.
Tonight, he made major strides toward getting back into the Islanders coach's good graces.
Palffy, without a goal in the first three exhibition games, scored a hat trick -- his third goal came with 2 minutes 45 seconds remaining -- as the Islanders defeated the Tampa Bay Lightning, 5-4, at Nassau Coliseum.


Sentenced in Murder of Girl, 6
A judge sentenced Kevin Aquino to 55 years to life in prison for the March 1994 kidnap and murder of a 6-year-old neighbor, Amanda Wengert.
Mr.
Aquino, 21, pleaded guilty in July to first-degree murder, felony murder and kidnapping, in an agreement to avoid prosecution for the death penalty.


Don't Make the Teacher's Tough Job Tougher
To the Editor:
Re "Mayor Giuliani and the Teachers" (editorial, Sept. 15):


A Foot Low On Rain, Grateful For a Drip
It rained yesterday, enough to ruin golf outings and revive lawns and flowers.
But did it rain enough to break the drought or replenish the reservoirs?
Silly question.
"We are a foot under normal for the year," said Pamela Joyce, a New York meteorologist for the National Weather Service.
"If we're one foot under normal, do you really think three-quarters of an inch is going to make a difference?"


Local Sues Casino Commission
Local 1038 of the Communications Workers of America went to court yesterday to argue that the State Casino Control Commission has no right to block union attempts to represent about 120 commission inspectors and other employees.
The state maintains that the employees' work is sensitive and that the regulatory process could be compromised if they were represented by a union.
But Steven Weissman, a union lawyer, argued that current members of the union local include state-employed doctors, lawyers, auditors and social workers in far more sensitive jobs than the casino inspectors.
Judge L. Anthony Gibson of State Superior Court said that he would rule on the matter on Nov. 9, The Associated Press reported.


Doubleheaders Have Given Yankees Double Trouble
Managers never want to play doubleheaders.
Not in April.
Not in May.
They definitely do not want to play two games in one day in September, when a post-season berth is still available, but that is the situation Buck Showalter and the Yankees must endure after last night's game with the Detroit Tigers was postponed at Yankee Stadium.
The Yankees will play their third doubleheader of the season today as David Cone opposes Jose Lima in the opener at 1:35 P.M. and Scott Kamieniecki faces Felipe Lira in the second game.
Doubleheaders have not been pleasant for the Yankees in a season that has seen them swept at home by the Chicago White Sox on July 18 and by the Cleveland Indians on Aug. 10.


Former F.B.I. Director Says Idaho Shooting Was Unjustified


Democrats Stall G.O.P. Effort To Curb Aid for College Loans
Accusing Republicans of catering to bankers and ignoring needy college students, Senate Democrats today stalled proposals to curb direct Government loans to students and to charge colleges a fee for every loan their students receive.
With senators eager to leave town by early afternoon, Democratic speechmaking in the Labor and Human Resources Committee delayed a vote until Tuesday to give educational institutions and their lobbyists more time to plead for votes.


Medicare Prognosis for New York Is Grim
With far-reaching cuts in payments to providers, the House Republicans' proposal to redesign Medicare would deepen the financial crisis that New York hospitals are already facing, forcing some institutions to close wards and others to close their doors or eliminate services, particularly in areas that serve the poor and the uninsured, health care officials warned yesterday.
The plan would eliminate or curtail many Medicare payments that subsidize doctor training and that compensate hospitals serving disproportionate numbers of indigent patients -- a move that would be especially painful in New York, which has more academic hospitals and poor residents than most other cities.


THE 104th CONGRESS: THE OVERVIEW; REPUBLICAN BLITZ SHAKES CONGRESS
Capping a week of major legislative developments that have astonished this usually blase capital, the Republicans who seized control of Capitol Hill last November pressed ahead today with further plans to dismantle Federal medical aid for the poor and radically reshape Federal medical aid for the elderly.
Today's events in Washington, which came on the heels of the Senate's vote early this week to abandon the 60-year tradition of Federal assistance to all poor children, compounded an atmosphere of change so tumultuous as to verge on revolution.
Perhaps not since the Hundred Days at the start of the New Deal, to which many of the programs now under attack can trace their origins, has Congress moved with such speed on so many fronts.


Propeller Blade Examined
The National Transportation Safety Board said on Thursday that it had begun examining a 3-foot section of a propeller blade that snapped off a commuter plane on Aug. 21, causing a crash near Carrolton, Ga., that killed eight people.
The blade was found by a farmer near Wedowee, Ala., last week and reached Washington on Monday, said Alan Pollock, a spokesman for the board.


HIGH SCHOOL REPORT
C.H.S.F.L.
The elite teams in the Catholic High School Football League might have ironman football -- or their lack of it -- to thank for their victories over Xaverian Brothers of Massachusetts.


Medicaid Moves Yet Another Heated Day Closer to a Dismantling
Legislation to dismantle the current Medicaid program and turn the money over to the states advanced today on both sides of the Capitol, as Republicans declared that states must be free to design their own health care programs for the poor.
By a vote of 27 to 18, the House Commerce Committee approved legislation to give each state a lump sum of Federal money, known as a block grant, for medical assistance to low-income people.
The House bill was made public just three days ago.
Senate Republicans offered a similar proposal today and said it would be approved next week by the Senate Finance Committee.


INSIDE
Hospital Official Resigns
The chairman of the department of anesthesia at Long Island Jewish Medical Center has resigned in the midst of a state investigation that followed three patient deaths and several injuries this spring.
Page 25.
Balkan Foes Prepare to Talk
Much of Bosnia seemed to be settling into tense expectation yesterday as the fighting became more subdued and the warring parties maneuvered for position before talks scheduled for Tuesday in New York.
Page 4.
In Pursuit of the Presidency
The publishing executive Malcolm S. Forbes Jr. formally began his campaign for the Republican Presidential nomination yesterday, promising lower taxes to free the economy from "political repression." Page 10.


Synagogue Ruling
A Federal appeals court in Manhattan has ruled that a Rockland County village violated the First Amendment and housing rights of Orthodox Jews by banning the establishment of small synagogues in private homes.
In a strongly worded decision that both sides said would influence similar zoning battles throughout the country, a three-judge panel reinstated a jury verdict against the Village of Airmont.
Article, page 29.


Simpson Tells Why He Declined To Testify as Two Sides Rest Case
Breaking his long silence, O. J. Simpson rose today to explain his failure to testify, and to reiterate his innocence, his faith in the jury and his love for his family.
Then both sides in the Simpson trial rested, and Judge Lance A. Ito laid out the law to jurors who will soon decide the defendant's fate.
In a gesture that left prosecutors and the father of one victim literally trembling with rage, Mr.
Simpson turned a routine waiver of his right to testify into a mini-oration before the jury entered the room.
Aside from an occasional "Yes, your Honor" and one "too tight," it was his first public statement in months.
For all its seeming spontaneity, one member of the defense conceded that it was two weeks in the works.


Franklin Quest Co.(FNQ,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Aug 31


Jury Gets Federal Racketeering Case Against Latin Kings
After months of testimony about mayhem and drug deals on the streets of New Haven and Bridgeport, jurors broke out in laughter this week as the last of the lawyers for nine Latin Kings summed up.
The jury had already heard the main defense against Federal charges of racketeering: that the eight men and one woman were drug dealers first, Latin Kings second; they had been in business for themselves, not for the Almighty Latin Chartered Nation.


Vying of the Greens for Clinton Irish Trip
There is general agreement in Ireland that Bill Clinton will be enthusiastically received as a descendant native son when he visits here, as planned, in December, the third American President to return to the land of his Irish ancestors.
But beyond that, little is certain except that there is now considerable confusion and some contentiousness over the visit.


No Headline
"I did not, could not and would not have committed this crime." -- O.J.
SIMPSON  [ 1:5 ]


Reprise: Strauss, Wagner and Masur
Although the works have largely changed, Kurt Masur carried the spirit and some of the substance of his opening-night program into the New York Philharmonic's first subscription concert of the season on Thursday evening.
Strauss and Wagner remained the dual subject of Mr.
Masur's examination, with Strauss's "Don Juan" and Wagner's "Meistersinger" Prelude as the anchors of each half.
And although Jessye Norman was on hand only for the opener on Wednesday (with its "Live From Lincoln Center" broadcast), the vocal works she sang were easily replaced with orchestral pieces from both composers' catalogues.
"Don Juan" established the tone of the evening: its textures were brash but marvelously transparent; its overall coloration was bright and vivid, and Mr.
Masur took it at a tempo that was generally brisk and often a bit pushed.
The "Dance of the Seven Veils" from "Salome" shared all those qualities, and at times one had the impression that Mr.
Masur's principal concern was to produce thrilling sounds, with the works' descriptive and pictorial aspects only secondary considerations.
Indeed, sometimes his touches of frenetic energy seemed misplaced: one heard it at the start of Salome's dance, where it produced an immediate rush of excitement; yet the end of the work, which should threaten to spin out of control, was oddly tame.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Sorenstam Extends Lead to Six Strokes
The United States Open champion Annika Sorenstam had her second straight bogey-free round yesterday to take a six-stroke lead in the GHP Heartland Classic in St.
Louis.


Autozone Inc.(AZO,N) reports earnings for Year to Aug 26


Bridge
Some of the more complex squeeze plays are rarely seen outside books.
One of these is the compound squeeze, in which one player is pressured in three suits and then both players in two.
Ron Rubin of North Miami Beach successfully executed this on the diagramed deal from the Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championship in Phoenix in April, but was a bit deflated when he and his teammates compared scores.
Rubin and his partner, Michael Becker of Tenafly, N.J., use a strong club system with many relays.
The two-club bid showed at least six clubs, and the eventual four no-trump bid was a natural invitation, which South accepted.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Time Warner and Turner Finally Agree to Merger
Ending a tumultuous five-week courtship, Time Warner and Turner Broadcasting said they would merge, reinforcing Time Warner's position as the world's largest communications company.


Balkan Foes Now Jostle For Position At Talks
The warring parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina shifted their attention today from the battlefield to the peace effort, maneuvering for position before talks scheduled for Tuesday in New York.
Fighting continued in some areas, especially around the Serb-held town of Doboj, but United Nations officials said most confrontation lines were stabilizing.
Much of Bosnia seemed to be settling into tense expectation.


Onetime Long Shot Set to Bid for Pirates
KEVIN McCLATCHY, such a long shot to buy the Pittsburgh Pirates that he was given only two weeks to make a bid, said yesterday that he has the cash and will present a formal offer to the team's owners on Monday.
McClatchy, a California newspaper heir with no previous ties to Pittsburgh, will make his $85 million-plus pitch Monday morning to the Pirates' investment bankers.
The Pirates' 10 owners, who a week ago seemed ready to sell the 109-year-old team out of town, then will take up the proposal.


24 Believed Dead in Crash of Awacs Jet
An Air Force jet, one of the world's most advanced surveillance airplanes, crashed into a forest and burst into a fireball moments after takeoff today from Elmendorf Air Force Base in Alaska, apparently killing all 24 aboard.
The plane, an Airborne Warning and Control System, or Awacs, jet, had 22 American and 2 Canadian crew members.
Air Force officials said investigators were trying to determine the cause of the crash, which occurred at the start of a seven-hour training mission.


Observer; The Fun Doctor Calls
What fun it's been.
The Newt Revolution, that was fun.
Nobody has been more fun than Newt himself, although Rush has run him a close second.
Those bumper stickers saying "Rush Is Right" are fun bumper stickers, and listening to grouchy people phoning their grumps to Rush and to Rush shooting ideas from the hip like a kid with the latest water pistol -- that's been fun.
Bill Clinton, he's been fun.
Not as much fun maybe as Newt with his sci-fi vision of the future and his dalliance on the primrose path with Rupert Murdoch.
Still, you don't get that many Presidents who spend their whole first term trying to figure out why they wanted to be President in the first place.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about a New Hampshire woman's lawsuit against the Ford Motor Company over the death of her daughter in a car not equipped with an air bag misstated the history of court decisions on whether Federal safety law pre-empts state law.
A majority of decisions around the country, but not all of them, have held that Federal law prevails.


Corrections
The short interest tables in Business Day yesterday, showing the number of shares that had been borrowed and sold by traders, included erroneous figures supplied by the New York Stock Exchange for the monthly change in the uncovered short sales of two stocks -- Mylan Laboratories and Texas Instruments.
And the related article referred incorrectly to the change for Mylan.
Adjusted for stock splits, the short interest in Mylan rose by 961,198 shares, while that of Texas Instruments declined by 54,069 shares.


A Court's Disturbing Gag Order
Without warning or proof of harm, a Federal judge in Cincinnati ordered Business Week on Sept. 13 not to report about court documents filed in a commercial dispute.
The gag order was plainly unconstitutional prior restraint, the kind of judicial order long understood to be the essence of censorship.
Yet the United States Supreme Court has refused to intervene, and the judge has now extended the order into October, leaving the magazine unable to publish.
The court system must come to its senses and quickly halt this flagrant violation of the First Amendment right to a free press.
If the trial judge or appeals courts cannot move quickly, it behooves them to rule definitively that this kind of order is intolerable under the Constitution.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
4.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.68
5.71
4.71
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.17
5.21
4.77
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.27
5.27
5.19
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.23
6.20
7.55
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.58
6.55
7.79
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.55
7.50
8.63
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.11
6.07
6.53
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


A Removable Feast
Who needs the Feast of San Gennaro, with its soggy lasagna, greasy sausages and Heineken at $3 a can?
What can the pilgrims find night after night in their quest for communal stimulation, seeking bliss and finding only baffled replicas of themselves as their pockets are picked and their stomachs abused?


Rubin Renews Call for Bank-Insurer Mergers
Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin said today that the Administration continued to favor allowing banks to merge with insurance companies as well as securities firms, but might be willing to accept a less extensive plan that would allow mergers only with securities firms.
Until now, Mr.
Rubin has said nothing on the issue in recent weeks as Republicans have vigorously debated how broadly to rewrite some of the nation's most important financial regulatory laws.
The Republican chairmen of the House Banking Committee and the House Rules Committee plan to offer the House Republican leadership a fairly narrow proposal for lifting the Glass-Steagall barriers between the banking and securities industries.


Top Choice for Chancellor: Educator With Leverage
The spokeswoman at Kingsborough Community College in Brooklyn is the wife of the former Democratic Speaker of the State Assembly, Stanley Fink.
The dean for finance and development is married to another former Democratic Speaker, Mel Miller.
The husband of the top aide to Irene H. Impellizzeri, a member of the city's Board of Education, works at the college, as does the wife of a Brooklyn Democratic district leader.
The first thing that almost everyone says about Leon M. Goldstein, the president of Kingsborough and the man who has emerged as Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's choice to be the next Chancellor of New York City's schools, is that he is a shrewd politician who has forged close ties to influential elected officials.
They rarely say he is an educator.


METRO DIGEST
MOTHER CLAIMS DAUGHTER'S BODY
At Rio de Janeiro's international airport, Lidia Pinto Machado seemed calm and determined, far younger than her 65 years.
As the plane rose for the 11-hour flight to New York, where she was to claim her daughter's body and confront the political maelstrom her killing in Central Park on Sunday had caused, she raised her hands, in a gesture more of surrender than entreaty.
"God be with us," she said.  [ Page 1. ]


National Service Industries(NSI,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Aug 31


Lighthearted Goings-On in a Serious Cause
Planners of fund-raising performances would do well to model their events on "Hot Pink!," a benefit for the National Alliance of Breast Cancer Organizations on Thursday night at the Bessie Schonberg Theater.
There was not a moment spared for lugubriousness or back-patting in the fast-paced program, a well-chosen selection of evocative and funny excerpts and dances created by some of the most interesting modern-dance choreographers working in New York today.
Even the speeches -- by Martha Myers, dean of the American Dance Festival, and Amy Langer, executive director of the alliance -- were brief and almost painfully direct.


Luanda Journal; A Market Where Anything Goes, But for a Price
Looking for a used tin can?
A brand new frost-free refrigerator?
The sacks left over from a food relief effort in Zimbabwe?
The skin of an endangered species?
Try the markets of Luanda, including Roque Santiero, which stretches for more than a mile along the seafront in this war-torn city.
Just about anything can be bought or sold, including assault rifles, abortions and, in at least one case, babies.


Eighth Draw Sets a Record, But the Game Is a Lively One
With their eighth draw in a row, Gary Kasparov and Viswanathan Anand established a new record yesterday for consecutive draws at the beginning of a world championship chess match.
Afterward, when informed of their dubious feat, the 25-year-old Anand said, "It's not a record I wanted to break." (The former record was set by Anatoly Karpov and Viktor Korchnoi in 1978.)


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  BALKAN FOES PREPARE FOR TALKS As fighting continued in some areas, the warring parties in Bosnia shifted their attention from the battlefield to making peace, maneuvering for position before talks scheduled for Tuesday in New York.  4  Muslims returned to a town to find destruction and a mystery. 4


U.S. Message for Russians: Complaining Pays Off
As annoying as the American Government may find the process, Russia is learning that whining, too, has its uses.
After harsh attacks on NATO and the United States from President Boris N. Yeltsin and the Russian Parliament for bombing the Bosnian Serbs against Russian advice, Washington and its allies have shown unexpected willingness to manipulate a 1990 treaty on limiting conventional weapons in Europe to meet Moscow's objections.


A Slumping Team Muddles Through Together
Knowing how desperate their situation is, the Giants want to make sure they stay together.
That is why the team went to a "unification lunch" at an area restaurant today.
They were joined by -- guess who? -- Lawrence Taylor.
The meeting was called by veteran players, and the former Giants linebacker and future Hall of Famer tagged along.
This time, Taylor was more low key than he was on Wednesday.
Today, he made an appearance at Giants Stadium, staying out of the locker-room area and then leaving to join the Giants at the restaurant.
Just about every player attended.


Shuffle That Deck: Here Come the Jets
Not even Coach Rich Kotite, who backed up the truck and dumped half the team when he arrived, could have anticipated the drastic changes the Jets will unveil Sunday at Atlanta.
Essentially, Kotite has brought in a second truck.
The game against the Falcons marks the end of the team's first quarter.
By now, players should be familiar with one another.
But because of injuries and other factors, there are 10 Jets starters who weren't even penciled in to be first-string when training camp began.


Hillhaven Corp.(HIL,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Aug 31


Donald Davie, 73, Poet and Literary Critic, Dies
Donald Davie, a poet, professor and literary critic who was a major influence on British poetry in the 1950's, died on Monday in Exeter, England.
He was 73.
The cause was cancer, said Michael Schmidt, Mr.
Davie's editor at Carcanet, a publishing house in Manchester.


Police Officer Shot While Undercover
A drug dealer shot and wounded an undercover narcotics officer who was buying drugs from him on a Brooklyn street corner late Thursday night, the police said yesterday.
One bullet fractured the officer's left arm and penetrated his chest.


Exploiting Young Workers
The debate over raising the minimum wage is still stuck in summer reruns.
Worried that most Americans think of minimum-wage earners as affluent suburban kids saving up for nose rings and Nikes, Democrats insist that these workers are adults, hoping to evoke middle-aged mothers and fathers rather than young people.
Yet what supporters of a wage increase should be arguing is that it is precisely because most of the lowest-paid workers are young that the minimum should be raised.


Ex-County Clerk Is Sentenced
Michael S. Keating, a former Camden County Clerk, was sentenced to 10 years in prison yesterday for bribery and official corruption.
Mr.
Keating, 55, was convicted last month of taking $173,000 in kickbacks on county printing contracts for election ballots.


A Scrub Game Doesn't Count
Baseball purists who insist that the first modern game took place in Hoboken in 1845, please note.
When Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman created a State Sports History Commission on Thursday to commemorate the 150th anniversary of the first baseball game at Elysian Fields, the date for the celebration was set for June 19.
Like much else in baseball these days, that date is in some dispute.
Actually, the first newspaper account of a game under modern rules put the date as Oct. 21, 1845, when the New York Knickerbockers played at Elysian Fields.
For the record, "that was basically an intramural scrub game, with only eight players on each side," said Stephen E. Speiser, of American Baseball Heritage.
The following June 19, full nine-player teams took the field, and the game was on.


Keeping Fire Boxes Poses a Greater Risk
To the Editor:
Frederick M. Grant in "Fire Alarm Boxes Prove Their Worth" (letter, Sept. 16) makes a valid point about the use of a street alarm box to report a recent fire in a New York City office building.
Yet viewed against the 250,000 or more false alarms from alarm boxes, which translate into a million or more unit responses -- two engines and two ladder companies and a battalion chief generally respond to street alarms -- the situation demands redress.
Eliminating most street alarms, save for isolated areas or ones of public concern, makes sense.


Henry Bowman, 74, Fighter Pilot Who Broke Referee Color Barrier
Henry P. Bowman, who flew missions over North Africa and Italy during World War II as one of the Tuskegee airmen and who broke racial barriers as a black sports official in the Big 10 in the postwar years, died last Saturday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 74.
Mr.
Bowman had suffered for some time from heart disease and emphysema, said his son, Jon.


Bilingual Education
To the Editor:
The parents who filed suit against the New York State Department of Education for granting mass waivers of the three-year limit on having children in bilingual education programs (news article, Sept. 19) may be misinformed of their rights.


Man Is Sentenced to Two Life Terms in Murders of 4 in Montclair Post Office
In a courtroom filled with anger, anguish and tears, Christopher Green was sentenced yesterday to two life prison terms, plus 25 years, for murdering four men and wounding a fifth during a $5,100 robbery at a tiny neighborhood post office in Montclair, N.J., on March 21.
Widows, at once bitter and distraught, denounced Mr.
Green as a cold-blooded murderer who had taken loved ones and shattered lives forever.
Children wept while asking for explanations.
The maimed sole survivor of the execution-style slayings described feeling an explosion inside his head and hearing a second shot after failing to knock Mr.
Green's handgun away, then regaining consciousness, and struggling for each breath as blood filled his throat.


Comments By Fed Chief Hurt Bonds
Prices of longer-term Treasury securities fell in choppy trading yesterday, as the Federal Reserve chairman, Alan Greenspan, making his twice-a-year report to the Senate Banking Committee, described a rosy economic outlook.
There was some initial buying as a number of market participants interpreted his comments to mean there might still be room for further interest rate cuts somewhere down the road, but then the market pulled back.


En Garde


Officer Pleads Guilty to Corruption Charge
A police officer pleaded guilty yesterday to alerting organized-crime figures in Chinatown to police raids on illegal gambling dens.
A humbled Michael Lee came to Federal District Court in Brooklyn three months after his former partner made an appearance there, and for the same purpose.
In pleading guilty to one count of corruption, Mr.
Lee met the same fate as John Gaw, the charismatic partner whom he emulated practically from the time he joined the police force.


Redesign of 2 Vast Systems Advances
Republicans in Congress forged ahead today with plans to reduce Federal responsibility for two huge segments of the nation's health care system, Medicare and Medicaid, which finance care for more than 70 million people who are elderly, poor or disabled.
The efforts came over vehement protests by Congressional Democrats.
The Senate Democratic leader, Tom Daschle of South Dakota, said the Republican plan for Medicare was "an absolute disaster," and House Democrats said the Medicaid plan was worse.


Let's Have a Look at Janet Malcolm's Notes
To the Editor:
Re Anthony Lewis's Aug. 25 column concerning my lawsuit against The New Yorker and Janet Malcolm:


Currency Strife Punishes European Stocks
Turmoil in the currency markets spilled over into stocks and bonds in Europe today, sending prices down sharply.
Growing uncertainties about the ability of the European Union to forge a single currency by the end of the decade, as well as the recent weakness of the dollar, clearly unsettled stock markets in Frankfurt, Paris, London and other financial centers.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the arrest of a New York City school safety officer in the sexual abuse of a 14-year-old special education student misattributed some comments critical of the School Safety Division.
It was Jose Maldonado, the Commissioner of Juvenile Justice, not Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, who said: "Once again, here's another unfortunate incidence of a security officer arrested and charged with an act that jeopardizes the very safety of the children he is entrusted to protect. This certainly cries out for an evaluation of whether the Board of Education is the right agency to oversee the safety of children."


Howard Miller, 90; His Clock Company Is Industry's Leader
Howard C. Miller, founder of Howard Miller, the nation's largest clock manufacturer, died on Thursday at his home in Holland, Mich.
He was 90.
For 69 years, Mr.
Miller's business, based in Zeeland, Mich., has designed and manufactured an eclectic array of grandfather, wall and mantel clocks and collectors' cabinets.
Many early designs have become collectors' items.


Unser Restored as the Winner in Portland
A three-member appeals panel restored AL UNSER JR. yesterday as the winner of a June 25 Indy-car race in Portland, Ore., after Unser's car had been disqualified in a post-race inspection.
Late in the race, a piece of wood used as a skid plate on the bottom of Unser's car broke off.
When the car was measured for proper ground clearance afterward, it failed inspection.
But the appeals panel said that the measurement methods used on Unser's car after the race were not the same as those used on all the other cars.
When Unser's car was measured the same way as the other cars were, it passed inspection.


Owen Healthcare Inc.(OWEN,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Aug 31


A Large Icelandic Voice In a Modest-Size Hall
Most opera singers treat a recital in a modest-size hall as an opportunity to scale down their voices and communicate more intimately.
But the Icelandic tenor Kristjan Johannsson, who made his New York recital debut on Tuesday night at Hunter College, seemed ill at ease singing anything softer than a full-throated forte.
To be sure, his voice is enormous.
Next month, when Mr.
Johannsson sings Radames in the Metropolitan Opera's "Aida," he should have no trouble filling that cavernous space.
But on Monday, whenever he tried to cover the sound or turn a quiet phrase, his voice became grainy, the legato uneven and the sound breathy.
The whole evening seemed to be aiming toward the climactic high B at the end of "Nessun dorma" from Puccini's "Turandot," the final work on the program.
But Row G at the Kaye Playhouse was not an ideal place to experience that note.


Mariners Move Into First
Mariners 10, Athletics 7
Seattle moved into first place in the American League West, rallying from a six-run deficit to beat Oakland, 10-7, last night on a grand slam by Vince Coleman and a go-ahead homer by Alex Diaz.


U.S. Is Drug Suitor, Plying Mexico With Copters
With Republicans accusing the Clinton Administration of soft-pedaling Mexico's growing drug trade, Administration officials would like to celebrate President Ernesto Zedillo's visit to Washington next month with a tangible escalation of the drug war.
Like most things in the tragicomic world of drug politics, it is not so simple.


Goldman Plan For Rockefeller Center Spurned By REIT Board
The board of Rockefeller Center Properties Inc., the real estate investment trust that is scheduled to become the owner of Rockefeller Center, rejected a recapitalization proposal from Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company yesterday, saying it was not financially superior to a deal the trust had already signed.
Goldman made its offer after the real estate investment trust, or REIT, had signed an agreement with an investor group led by Sam Zell, the Chicago financier, and including the General Electric Company and the Walt Disney Company.


The Mets Take Alfonzo For a Crucial Test Drive
In this period of late-season experiments for the Mets, one apparently worked tonight against the Florida Marlins and another didn't.
Edgardo Alfonzo, a slick-fielding, line-drive-hitting third baseman, started his first game since going on the disabled list with a herniated disk Aug. 11, and played well in the Mets' 3-0, rain-shortened loss to Florida before 24,580 at Joe Robbie Stadium.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL REPORT
KEY GAMES OF TOP TEAMS Texas A&amp;M (2-0) at Colorado (3-0) A neat matchup of two of the best.
In little more than half of a 52-point victory last Saturday over Northeast Louisiana, Koy Detmer set a Colorado single-game passing record of 426 yards.
In two games, Leland McElroy of the Aggies has 345 yards rushing, 177 receiving and 122 on kickoff returns.
Stanford (2-0-1) at Oregon (3-0) Oregon looks more and more like a bowl contender.
It beat U.C.L.A. by scoring on a 3-yard pass with 62 seconds left and then stopping Karim Abdul-Jabbar on the 1-yard line as time ran out.
Stanford rallied four times to tie Wisconsin.
Southern California (2-0) at Arizona (2-1) A good conference test on the road for Southern California and its spectacular receiver, Keyshawn Johnson (8 for 176 against Houston).
Arizona lost a 9-7 heartbreaker to Illinois on a 52-yard fumble return in the fourth quarter.
Texas (2-0) at Notre Dame (2-1)  Less than two weeks after surgery to remove a bulging disc in the neck, Coach Lou Holtz is more or less back with Notre Dame.
Texas is a gritty team that beat Pittsburgh with two touchdowns in the last 2 minutes 14 seconds.
EAST Penn State (2-0) vs.
Rutgers (1-1) at East Rutherford, N.J.
Rutgers ran well against Navy, but Penn State is not a finesse team like Navy.
If the Rutgers defense is hammered early, the game could get out of hand.
Ohio State (2-0) at Pittsburgh (2-1) Ohio State is a top team.
Pitt has improved, but if it throws five interceptions, as it did in losing to Texas, it will be blown out.
Minnesota (1-0) at Syracuse (1-1) Syracuse is favored over a Minnesota team with a good sophomore quarterback in Cory Sauter and young receivers to match.
The Gophers' defense leads the nation, allowing only 176 yards in its only game.
St.
Mary's (Calif). (2-1) at Columbia (1-0) Columbia beat Harvard wih 19 seconds left.
St.
Mary's, although not the power of a half-century ago, may be as good as any of the Ivies.
Penn (1-0) at Lafayette (1-1) Penn's 22-game winning streak is the best in the nation.
As long as Penn has Miles Macik to catch passes (12 for 158 yards against Dartmouth), it will be all right.
Dartmouth (0-1) at Fordham (1-2) Dartmouth took advantage of Penn mistakes in the first half, but had no offense in the second.
This should be a competitive game.
Bucknell (2-0) at Princeton (1-0) Princeton should win, but it must get better output from its ground game, which gained only 89 yards in 40 carries against Cornell.
Yale (1-0) at Lehigh (1-1) In Yale's 42-38 upset of Brown, Chris Hetherington passed for 223 yards and rushed for 166.
This could be another offensive show for both teams.
MIDWEST Air Force (2-1) at Northwestern (1-1) An appealing matchup of teams that have been good or ordinary.
In losing to Colorado State, Air Force wasted its 424 yards in total offense with penalties and fumbles.
East Carolina (2-1) at Illinois (1-2) The slick passing game of East Carolina faces a big hurdle in Illinois's defense.
Linebacker Simeon Rice of Illinois made four interceptions against Arizona.
SOUTH Mississippi State (2-1) at Tennessee (2-1) Forget Tennessee's 62-37 blowout loss to Florida, an elite team.
Peyton Manning's passing should pull the Vols through.
Virginia (3-1) at Clemson (2-1) A stiff test for Virginia, but it should win if Tiki Barber repeats last week's rushing performance of 105 yards and four touchdowns.
Miami (1-1) at Virginia Tech (0-2) Tech's stagnant offense will suffer.
As its coach, Frank Beamer, said of his forces, "It's a good team. We just haven't played good yet." Rice (1-1) at Louisiana State (2-1) This should not be tough for Louisiana State, a team on the rise.
The Tigers held Auburn to 274 yards and two field goals and saved a 12-6 upset with an end-zone interception as time ran out.
Duke (2-1) at Maryland (3-0) Maryland's paper-tiger defense is just a memory.
The unbeaten Terps held West Virginia to 211 yards and collected seven turnovers.
Georgia (2-1) at Mississippi (1-1) If Mike Bobo's passing (270 yards and two touchdowns) was not a gift from New Mexico State's defense, the Bulldogs have a worthy successor to Eric Zeier.
Memphis (1-2) vs.
Arkansas (2-1) Up-and-down Arkansas upset Alabama, 20-19, on a touchown pass with six seconds left.
This week, it should be more comfortable.
FAR WEST Army (1-1) at Washington (1-1) Washington self-destructed against Ohio State (nine penalties for 96 yards in the first half alone) and still lost by only 10 points.
Army seems out of its class.
U.C.L.A. (2-1) at Washington State (1-1) Forget Ryan Fien's two concussions in two weeks and a slightly separated nonthrowing shoulder.
U.C.L.A. still has its quarterback, but its best defender, linebacker Donnid Edwards, is out for four weeks.
MISMATCHES Central Florida (2-0) at Florida State (3-0) Central Florida has beaten Eastern Kentucky and Carson-Newman.
No. 1 Florida State has run up 70 points against Duke, 45 against Clemson and (with 737 yards from scrimmage) 77 against North Carolina State.
Pacific (1-2) at Nebraska (3-0) With Nebraska's best tailback, Lawrence Phillips, suspended because of legal problems, Clinton Childs rushed last week for 143 yards and freshman Ahman Green for 111.
The beat goes on.
North Texas (1-2) at Oklahoma (2-0) Oklahoma should get the solid game it needs to prepare for Colorado next week.
It led Southern Methodist, a mediocre team, by only 9-3 at halftime before stretching out to a 24-10 victory.
Akron (0-2) at Kansas State (2-0) The last time out, Kansas State squeaked by Cincinnati despite five first-half turnovers.
But its defense is sound, and Akron will be fortunate to stay within six touchdowns.


Corrections
A headline on Thursday about Israel's release of a hijacked Iranian plane referred incorrectly in some editions to the plane's destination.
It was Iran, not Iraq.


Greenspan Is Optimistic On Economy
The chairman of the Federal Reserve, Alan Greenspan, today painted an optimistic picture of the economy.
His statements suggested to investors that the central bank would not lower interest rates anytime soon.
Indeed, Mr.
Greenspan, speaking before the Senate Banking Committee, said there was no evidence that relatively high short-term interest rates were slowing growth.
His testimony came just a few days ahead of the Fed's policy-making committee meeting on Tuesday and dashed any remaining hopes in the bond market for a rate cut at that time, dragging down Treasury prices.  [ Page 51. ]


Dark Clouds Dampen Napa Valley Fortunes
California's climate has long been celebrated as ideal for wine-making.
But the weather has not been kind to grape growers this year.
First came the endlessly wet winter.
Then came the downpours last spring that knocked many blossoms off the vines, followed by a cool summer punctuated by hot spells that slowed growth.
And now, the peculiar weather leaves wine makers with a new worry: a shortage of grapes that has sent prices soaring.


CHRONICLE
It was one of those moments of truth on the lecture circuit in New York: big-name speakers facing a sparse audience.
Most of the panel at a symposium on how movies and television depict the legal profession ignored the fact that fewer than 150 of the 500 seats were filled in the Great Hall of the New York City Bar Association.
But in his speech at the concluding session on Thursday, EDWIN SHERIN, an executive producer of "Law and Order," the hit television series, confronted the situation head-on.


Resurrecting Patriots, and Their Park; Shrine to Revolution's Martyrs Is Part of Fort Greene Renewal
Richie Williamson, a blacksmith, helped force open the bronze door of the crypt at Fort Greene Park in Brooklyn.
In the dim light, on the nearest shelf, he could see a human jawbone, more than 200 years old, covered with blackened cobwebs.
He made the sign of the cross over his heart and prayed for the souls of 11,500 American heroes, men who died on prison ships in New York Harbor during the Revolutionary War.
Some were within sight of their homes and farms in Brooklyn and Manhattan, but they refused to switch their allegiance to the King of England in exchange for their freedom.


Americans Would Never Trade Cars for Trains; Safer Than Highways
To the Editor:
Far more should be said about the demise of Amtrak's Broadway limited run to Chicago on Sept. 9, and many other passenger train routes, with more "deaths" to come.


S.E.C. Says 3 Rigged Stock In Football Star's Company
One of Lawrence Taylor's greatest hits was a rig, the Securities and Exchange Commission charged yesterday.
Mr.
Taylor, the former all-pro linebacker, appears to have suffered a substantial financial setback as a result.
The S.E.C. filed administrative proceedings against the former president and two traders of Hanover Sterling, the brokerage firm, no longer in business, that brought public Mr.
Taylor's company, All-Pro Products, in 1993.
The filing accused the men of manipulating the price of the company's stock.


Corrections
A picture in Weekend yesterday showing a light sculpture, with a review of works by Dan Flavin at the Guggenheim Museum SoHo, was inadvertently reproduced sideways.
What appeared to be a wall at the left of the sculpture was actually the floor.


The Wrong Message to Pakistan
In an unfortunate reversal, the Senate voted on Thursday to lift some of the military sanctions that were imposed on Pakistan five years ago.
Pakistan has made no concessions to American requests that it cap its secret nuclear weapons program, and until it does so, and allows verification, it should not be the beneficiary of American military aid or be allowed to buy American military hardware.
South Asia has long been considered one of the most dangerous regions in the world for nuclear proliferation.
India has tested a nuclear bomb and Pakistan wants to match its capability.


A Disapproving Family And a Grim Childhood
In the first scene of Geraldine Aron's "Same Old Moon," at the Irish Repertory Theater, Brenda Barnes (Madeleine Potter), an Irish-born woman in her early 40's, returns from Australia to the tiny, genteel London flat shared by her widowed mother and her maiden aunt.
The two older women disapproved of Brenda when she took off 20 years earlier, the bride of a Jewish businessman, and disapprove now, when she is making her way as a playwright.
They wish she would write something funny, and not wash her family's dirty linen in public.
Brenda is overwhelmed by bitter flashbacks.
They return in the neatly chronological order that suggests we're seeing the play Brenda will be writing when the lights go down at the end of the performance: She is 9 years old in Dublin, being punished by her father for stealing his candy.
When her dad and her mum go off to London, Brenda is sent to live with her puritanical granny in Galway and to attend a convent school.
Life is equally grim when she joins her parents in England.
Dad, who spends too much time at the track, spurns her because she's not a boy.
Mum, who worships her husband, follows his lead.


Official Quits At Hospital Amid Inquiry
In the midst of a State Health Department investigation of anesthesiology and surgical services at the Long Island Jewish Medical Center, the chairman of the hospital's embattled department of anesthesia has resigned.
The chairman, Dr.
Philip Lebowitz, was hired by the hospital six years ago when it decided to oust a group of highly paid private anesthesiologists and replace them with lower-paid salaried physicians.
Dr.
Lebowitz presided over this difficult conversion, which was marked by conflict and left behind questions about whether quality declined because of the changeover, in part because the physicians he hired were far less experienced than their predecessors.


CHRONICLE
Every day for months, DAN LOWENSTEIN, the chief of staff for State Senator Catherine M. Abate, had been asking WENDI PASTER, the New York chief of staff for Assemblyman Richard N. Gottfried, "When are we ever going to get married?"
The couple, who had been engaged since February, had decided to marry in September and, in fact, got a marriage license in August.


Cable Design Technologies (CDTC,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to July 31


'Evita' Reaches Zimbabwe And Finds Resonance
Twenty-one years after its London premiere, "Evita" has opened here with a splash, but it wasn't the only drama on the stage.
Prince Edward, here on a state visit, dropped by on opening night.
Reviewers called it "the theater event of the year." What the local reviewers did not note -- could not, perhaps -- were the Zimbabwean dramas, one about racism and one about the President's wife, that shared the stage.


Premier Industrial Corp.(PRE,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Aug 31


Awacs Jet Crashes; No Known Survivors
An Air Force surveillance plane taking off from a base in Alaska yesterday crashed in a forest and exploded in a ball of fire.
Officials said that there were no known survivors among the 24 people who were aboard the four-engine Boeing jet, called an Awacs plane.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CARGILL INC., Minneapolis, announced plans to close down its 17-million- to-18-million-bushel-capacity grain terminal in south Chicago this fall for business and economic reasons.
ROTECH MEDICAL CORP., Orlando, Fla., a medical laboratories concern, has signed a letter of intent to buy the assets of Revco Home Health Care Centers, the home health care products subsidiary of Revco D.S.
Inc., Twinsburg, Ohio.
Terms of the acquisition were not disclosed.


Bracknell Corp. reports earnings for 3d qtr to July 31


Arafat-Peres Talks Fail to Reach Finish Line
Despite confident predictions through the morning that they would finish their marathon bargaining session today, the Israeli Foreign Minister, Shimon Peres, and the Palestinian leader, Yasir Arafat, failed to seal a pact on expanding Palestinian self-rule before a siren proclaimed sundown and the Jewish Sabbath.
That forced the talks into a 24-hour suspension.
Both sides left insisting that about three hours more separated them from agreement.


A Fever, Once in Retreat, Surges in Latin America
After being virtually eradicated in the Western Hemisphere, dengue fever, a debilitating tropical disease transmitted by mosquitoes, is re-emerging with such force that it has now reached epidemic proportions in Central America and is bearing down on the United States.
The resurgence, health experts say, is largely the result of rapid urban population growth in Latin America and the Caribbean, which has led to lax sanitation procedures, overcrowding and poverty.
While dengue fever does not pose as large a threat to the United States, experts at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention warn that states like Texas and Florida face the risk of an outbreak.


Muslims Return Home To War-Ravaged Town
At dusk on Marshal Tito Street, Djamila Saric and Dursaum Medic stood in front of the charred remains of the two-story homes and peered into each other's plastic bags.
"Bread," said Mrs.
Medic, 58 years old, displaying the results of a day's scavenging.
"Half a loaf!"


The Irish Have Holtz To Guide Their Way
Eleven days after undergoing spinal surgery, Lou Holtz will be back at Notre Dame Stadium on Saturday.
The coach of the Fighting Irish plans to be in the press box, helping to direct his team against the Texas Longhorns.
"Not because I'm indispensable," Holtz said this afternoon.
"Not because I'm needed. But because that's where I want to be."
The Irish, still recovering from the emotionally jolting opening-day loss to Northwestern, will enter the segment of their schedule that will determine whether their first game was a one-time stumble or a confirmation of serious flaws.


200 Fireboxes Are Shut Off, With 3,800 to Go
After months of emotional public debate, political wrangling and court challenges, the Giuliani administration yesterday started turning off fire alarm boxes for a 45-day trial period.
In the pilot program, which started in East New York, Brooklyn, the Fire Department will deactivate about 25 percent of the city's 16,300 fire alarm boxes and see what effect that has on false alarms and fire response time in those neighborhoods.


Ryder Cup Rookies Get U.S. Started on Right Foot
The conventional wisdom coming into the Ryder Cup matches held that Europe's lone advantage over the United States might be its experience.
The thinking was that the American team, with five rookies, could be susceptible to Europe's collection of frayed but crafty veterans.
Well, so much for conventional wisdom.


Mother Wants a Safer Park As Tribute to Slain Daughter
In the V.I.P. lounge at Rio de Janeiro's international airport, Lidia Pinto Machado seemed calm and determined, far younger than her 65 years.
As the plane rose for the 11-hour flight to New York -- where she would claim her daughter's body, confront the political maelstrom her killing in Central Park had caused, and clean out her apartment -- she raised her hands before her, in a gesture more of surrender than entreaty.
"God be with us," she whispered.
Twenty-four hours later, Ms.
Machado, sleepless and dazed, left her daughter's apartment on West 56th Street with a shopping bag on her arm.
Her daughter-in-law, Martha Molnar, was bleary-eyed from going through Maria Isabel Pinto Monteiro Alves's belongings, including the books overturned on the bed, the family photos.
After a dizzying day of talking with the Mayor, the press, the Police Commissioner, the Governor's office and the Brazilian consul general, both women seemed to have grown old overnight.


Longings, Painful Memories and Pensive Reassurance
As Cesaria Evora began her set on Thursday night at the Bottom Line, her voice sounded rich and placid.
She stated melodies almost unadorned, lingering with vibrato at the end of a phrase and sometimes languidly sliding down to a note.
And within a song or two, her simplicity began to reveal depths of emotion.
In her tranquil contralto, there were painful memories and unsatisfied longings, a sense of pensive reassurance and of inconsolable loss.
She never had to raise her voice.
Miss Evora, who is 54, sings mornas, songs from the Cape Verde Islands, off the coast of Senegal.
The islands gained independence from Portugal in 1975; Miss Evora lived there until the 1980's, when she moved to Paris and began her recording career.
Her fifth album, "Cesaria Evora," has just been released in the United States by Nonesuch.


Manor Care Inc.(MNR,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Aug 31


Crimes Against Teachers Are Reported Down
For the first time since 1987, crimes against teachers in New York City public schools showed a small decline in the school year that ended last June, according to a report made public yesterday by the United Federation of Teachers.
While the total number of incidents of crime or violence involving a teacher declined less than one percent -- to 4,760 from 4,791 -- the number of physical assaults against teachers dropped by more than 23 percent.


Ex-Dow Corning Executive Faults Company's Ethics on Implants
In a new book, a former Dow Corning executive has accused the company of unethical conduct in its handling of the dispute over silicone breast implants.
In the book, "Informed Consent," John E. Swanson, who managed Dow Corning's internal communications and sat on its ethics committee for more than 15 years, depicts himself as viewing the dispute from two sides: as an insider at meetings where company officials decided how to handle the crisis, and as an outsider whose wife, Colleen, received implants, then sued the company after years of illness.


Protecting Charity
To the Editor:
Re your Sept. 17 report on New Jersey's study of how charitable contributions are spent: Many nonprofits do not understand what constitutes a reasonable fee, or that there are many reputable fund-raising firms that provide quality services at a fraction of what those you mention charge.


Acting Prosecutor Is Appointed
Attorney General Deborah T. Poritz appointed Edward M. Neafsey, 44, an Assistant Attorney General and chief of the state's Environmental Crimes Bureau since 1992, as the Acting Prosecutor for Union County yesterday.
Mr.
Neafsey, who was once a public defender, succeeds Andrew K. Ruotolo Jr., who died of cancer on Thursday.
As an Assistant Attorney General, Mr.
Neafsey was involved with several major environmental criminal trials and headed the grand jury investigation that led to the first successful criminal air-pollution prosecution in New Jersey.


Pataki Is Off to Europe, Recalling Roots to Voters at Home
For decades, New York politicians have made a tradition of traveling overseas, ostensibly to encourage tourism and trade.
But there has often been a less openly acknowledged goal: old-fashioned appeals to ethnic voters.
Today, Gov.
George E. Pataki -- a suburban Republican who remains best known for having unseated the state's three-term Italian Governor -- followed firmly in his predecessors' footsteps by embarking on a one-week, privately financed trip to Hungary and Italy.


Parking Rules
Because of Rosh ha-Shanah, alternate-side street cleaning regulations will be suspended in New York City on Monday and Tuesday.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Journal; Go to Cleveland
Here is news you may not be dying to hear: You must go to Cleveland.
I can understand your skepticism.
When I told friends in New York that I was going to begin my vacation there, they first thought I was joking, then assumed I was from Cleveland and trapped in some unspeakable family obligation.
When I confessed I was going by choice, they laughed and changed the subject.
The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Museum sounded like a joke in those days just before its Sept. 1 opening, and who cared if the Indians won their first pennant since 1954, anyway?


Man Arrested in Shooting
One suspect was in custody and a second was being sought last night after a shooting when a state trooper confronted the two on Route 80 yesterday afternoon.
Sgt.
Daniel Cosgrove, a spokesman for the state police, said the shooting occurred at 2:45 P.M.
Neither the officer nor the suspect under arrest was injured.
As the investigation continued, the police would not say how many shots were fired, by whom or whether the man who fled had been shot.
JOE SHARKEY


Coleman and Reed 'Have a Conversation'
In an effort to resolve his situation with the Nets, DERRICK COLEMAN met yesterday with General Manager WILLIS REED at the club's offices in East Rutherford, N.J.


Clinton Acts to Save Los Angeles Clinics
President Clinton today announced a $364 million Federal bailout of the beleaguered Los Angeles public health system, a move that will save one of the largest medical complexes in the country and could enhance Mr.
Clinton's chances of winning re-election.
During his 20th Presidential visit to the nation's most politically important state, Mr.
Clinton said at a news conference here this morning that last-minute "critical consultations" on Thursday in Washington with California officials had produced a rescue package that would prevent the financial collapse of the huge county care system.
The county system mainly serves the poor but has been hard squeezed to provide services in recent years because of soaring costs and major cutbacks in Federal, state and local aid.


Morgan Stanley Manages to Sell $2 Billion in Mitsubishi Bonds
Despite gloomy headlines about the financial stability of Japanese banks, Morgan Stanley &amp; Company managed the sale yesterday of $2 billion of convertible bonds for Mi tsubishi Bank Ltd., which is scheduled to become the world's largest bank when it merges with the Bank of Tokyo next spring.
The sale was the largest international convertible bond offering on record, and in comes despite a crisis in much of Japanese banking.


APPLE COMPUTER RESUMES SALES OF POWERBOOK
The Apple Computer Inc. said yesterday that it had once again begun shipping its Powerbook 5300 portable computer, but this time with a nickel metal hydride battery, replacing the lithium ion battery that led to a product recall on Sept. 14.
The machines, announced in August, had just begun shipping when Apple said it had halted deliveries because several computers being used by Apple employees had caught fire when a battery malfuntioned.
The computer maker said that it was still investigating the nature of the lithium ion battery problem and that it would not make these batteries, which offer longer life, available until it was certain it had identified the problem.
The computer maker said it was reducing the cost of its computers by about $100 across the product line, which ranges from $2,099 to $6,399.
It said the machines would begin showing up on dealers' shelves immediately.


Biomet Inc.(BMET,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Aug 31


Infinity to Buy Alliance, Gaining 7 Radio Outlets
The Infinity Broadcasting Corporation, already the nation's largest radio broadcasting company, agreed yesterday to pay $275 million for the seven stations, all in major markets, owned by Alliance Broadcasting Inc.
Three of the stations are in San Francisco, giving Infinity an entree in the only big market where the company had no toehold.


Harding's Bodyguard Gets Out of Prison
SHAWN ECKARDT, the bodyguard for the figure skater TONYA HARDING, walked out of prison yesterday morning in Salem, Ore., the last of those involved in the attack in January 1994 on NANCY KERRIGAN to be set free.
His first priority?
"Go get something to eat," he said.
"Get some real food."


Washerwoman Travels First Class
Oseola McCarty did not ask for anything when she donated her life savings of $150,000 to the University of Southern Mississippi for black scholarship students.
But when the White House invited the 87-year-old washerwoman to join President Clinton at a dinner of the Congressional Black Caucus on Saturday night, she needed something simple: a train ticket for the 24-hour journey from Hattiesburg, Miss., to Washington.


Gramm, on Stump, Invokes the Second Coming of Christ
Politicians like to salt their speeches with religious language, hoping for the approval of a pious public.
President Clinton cites Scripture, and Speaker Newt Gingrich declares the value of faith.
But Senator Phil Gramm of Texas has gone further, embracing a particular sectarian doctrine in his run for the Republican Presidential nomination.
In campaign speeches and mass-mailed letters, Mr.
Gramm says he expects the Second Coming of Jesus Christ, and he says so in a way that appears intended to appeal to the beliefs of many religious conservatives.


Hopes of a Breakthrough Wither in Murder Inquiry
In what was first considered a potential lead in the search for the killer of a female jogger in Central Park, the police tracked down a man yesterday who gave a detailed account of overhearing a homeless man pushing a cart down Fifth Avenue mumbling to himself about the woman's slaying.
But initial hopes were mostly dashed 20 hours later when the witness told the police that a homeless man they were holding as a possible suspect was not the man he had overheard, police officials said last night.


Players' Union Pledges To Play World Series
If there was any question that the 1995 World Series would suffer the same fate as the 1994 World Series, the players association dispelled those doubts yesterday.
Despite the continued absence of an agreement with the owners, Donald Fehr, the union's executive director, issued a statement saying that fans "should have no doubt that this season will be completed and a new World Series champion crowned."


Bradlees Inc.(BLE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Aug 12


Herald of a New Year


Corrections
A chart in Business Day yesterday about changes in the telecommunications industry since the 1984 breakup of the AT&amp;T Corporation reversed the date labels in comparing the costs of a five-minute telephone call between New York City and Los Angeles in 1984 and in 1994.
The call cost $2.70 in 1984 and $1.40 in 1994.


The Sound of Broadway Music
You can pay as much as $75 to see a Broadway musical spectacular these days, or nothing at all for great Broadway music without all the trappings.
On a recent Sunday, in the middle of Times Square, Matthew Broderick and the cast of "How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying" did their rollicking "Brotherhood of Man" for an audience of thousands, stretching three blocks up Broadway, curb to curb, standing room only.
That was just one of more than a dozen numbers from current and incoming shows, in an annual one-performance-only promotion for Broadway theater called "Broadway on Broadway." May it run forever.


Diluting the Quality of Life
The latest state budget makes a tiny change in court procedure that is expected to save the state $1 million.
In the process, it threatens New York City's ability to combat littering, urinating on the sidewalk, public drinking and other quality-of-life offenses.
The city's interests have fallen victim to Albany budget cutters before, but seldom has it lost so much for so little.


Bright Prospects on Georgia Farm
Bob McLendon is in high cotton at the moment, literally and figuratively.
For one thing, the price of cotton is nearly twice its value as loan collateral.
For another, a vote by the House Agriculture Committee this week stymied efforts to scrap the system of farm subsidies that Mr.
McLendon and thousands of other growers of cotton, rice, and sugar say not only provides a safety net in their risky business but also stabilizes prices and supply.


Dow Off 3.25, to 4,764.15, In a Day of Erratic Trading
Stock prices slipped yesterday in the same kind of erratic trading that the market had endured for much of the week.
Turmoil in foreign currency markets caused stocks to decline drastically at the opening.
However, for much of the day, the trend was upward, and at the close the three key market indicators were each down less than one-half of 1 percent.


Americans Would Never Trade Cars for Trains; On the Fast Track
To the Editor:
You're on the right track when you suggest that an investment in Amtrak is in the national interest (editorial, Sept. 16).
If proof of the efficiency of rail service is needed, one need only look at two of our greatest economic competitors, Germany and Japan, where fast, dependable trains are an integral part of the economy and are taken for granted.


The New Math of the Man Who Would Be Chancellor
How old is Leon M. Goldstein?
Asked his age during an interview on Wednesday, Mr.
Goldstein, the Mayor's leading choice for the job of schools chancellor, answered: "60."


Dr. Melvin Peterson, 66, Leader In Explorations of Ocean Floor
Dr.
Melvin N. A. Peterson, who led a deep-sea drilling program at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography that advanced understanding of the ocean floors and the slow waltz of the continents, died on Wednesday while on a fishing trip in Mexico.
He was 66 and lived in Del Mar, Calif.
The cause was a heart attack, according to the oceanography institution, part of the University of California at San Diego.


Religion Journal; A Church Breaks Ranks on Role of Women Ministers
Almost a quarter century after some major Protestant denominations began ordaining women as clergy members, the presence of a woman serving as a pastor of a Protestant church has become progressively less remarkable.
Yet barriers to women in the clergy remain. Some are firmly fixed, some more symbolic.


Prosecutor Sums Up Terror Conspiracy Case Vs. Muslim Cleric and 9 Others
In final declarations ending eight months of arguments and testimony, a Federal prosecutor called yesterday for the conviction of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman because he said the Muslim cleric had placed himself "above the rule of law" and led a terrorist conspiracy that included bombing and assassination plots.
To a jury that could begin deliberating the fate of Mr.
Abdel Rahman, the fundamentalist cleric, and nine codefendants this afternoon in Federal District Court in Manhattan, the prosecutor, Andrew C. McCarthy, said that religious motivations could not justify criminal acts.


To Choose, if We Can, The Hour of Our Death
To the Editor:
Wesley J. Smith states in "Depressed? Don't Go See Dr. Kevorkian" (Op-Ed, Sept. 16) that "If we want to alleviate suffering in ill and dying people, then we should not legalize assisted suicide." While he makes some good points on better pain management by physicians, he seems to miss the point made by Esther Cohan, Marjorie Wantz and others who sought the assistance of Jack Kevorkian.


Barros Follows Road Home to the Celtics
Point guard DANA BARROS, a Boston native and the career scoring leader at Boston College, returned home yesterday as a member of the Boston Celtics.
During a news conference at the National Basketball Association team's headquarters, the Celtics announced that Barros, a free agent, had signed.
The six-year deal is reportedly worth $22 million.


Reducing Power of the Purse
One way to reduce influence peddling at the State House is to strip legislative leaders of their powerful finance committees, which are paid for with money from corporations and special-interest groups, two Senators told an Election Law Enforcement Commission hearing yesterday.
The committees give leaders "special fund-raising privileges" by allowing them to distribute contribution money to legislative candidates, said Senator William E. Schluter, a Republican of Pennington.
"Is anyone naive enough to believe that special interests do not get value in return for their contributions?"


Federal Court Finds Bias In Village's Zoning Rules
A Federal appeals court in Manhattan has ruled that a Rockland County village violated the First Amendment and housing rights of Orthodox Jews by banning the establishment of small synagogues in private homes.
In a strongly worded decision that both sides said would influence similar zoning battles throughout the country, a three-judge panel reversed a ruling by a lower District Court judge, Gerard L. Goettel, and reinstated a jury verdict against the Village of Airmont.


Americans Would Never Trade Cars for Trains
To the Editor:
"A Future for Amtrak" (editorial, Sept. 16) urges Congress to support a permanent Amtrak trust fund to save intercity rail passenger service from oblivion.
To its credit, the House Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure, under the able chairmanship of Bud Shuster, is balking.


'Medicare Plus' or 'Medicare Choice,' the Essence Is All the Same
Senate Republicans today unveiled a proposal to redesign Medicare in ways that are remarkably similar to the huge changes contemplated by Speaker Newt Gingrich and other House Republicans.
Both proposals seek to hold down costs in the Federal health program for the elderly by encouraging beneficiaries to shift into private health plans and by curbing payments to doctors and hospitals.
And both would raise costs to beneficiaries, the Senate's proposal a little more so than the House's.


Ted Turner Nonchalant About Not Being the Chief
For more than 30 years, no matter what the ship, if Ted Turner was on board, he was the captain -- until yesterday.
At the news conference yesterday announcing the merger of Turner Broadcasting System and Time Warner Inc., Mr.
Turner was introduced as "the new vice chairman of Time Warner Turner." As Gerald M. Levin, chairman and chief executive of Time Warner, made that introduction, Mr.
Turner grinned.


A $7.5 BILLION DEAL
Ending a tumultuous five-week courtship, Time Warner Inc. and Turner Broadcasting System said yesterday that they would merge their sprawling operations, reinforcing Time Warner's position as the world's largest communications company.
Time Warner said it would buy the 82 percent of Turner it did not already own in a stock deal worth roughly $7.5 billion.
Ted Turner, the maverick founder of the Cable News Network and the chairman of Turner Broadcasting, is to become vice chairman of Time Warner.


Sports of The Times; The Boss's Last Exit From Bronx
HEAVY morning rains didn't dampen the pace around 161st Street and River Avenue.
A handful of joggers ran in Joe Yancey Park as the owners of tiny tobacco stores and variety shops lifted rickety security gates and elevated trains rumbled overhead.
Presiding like the regal nerve center was Yankee Stadium, the crown jewel of the beleaguered South Bronx.


Sampras and Agassi Team to Give U.S. the Lead
With a wall of high-rise casinos in the background and a high desert sun providing the backlighting, everything came up aces today for Andre Agassi, who dressed like a recruit for the nearby Treasure Island pirate show, and Pete Sampras, whose level of tennis matched the high altitude of a town gone temporarily crazy for Davis Cup tennis.
What else could the disparate but dynamic American duo do but reward the 12,400 spectators who allowed themselves to be lured away from the spectacle of the gaming tables and risked a sunburn for the chance to wax patriotic?


THE 104th CONGRESS: THE DEMOCRATS; Capitol Lawn Is the Stage as Democrats Play Outsiders' Role
Since January, the Democrats have been out of power in Congress.
Today, they showed just how far out of it they are.
They staged a hearing on the front lawn of the Capitol to demonstrate explicitly how the Republicans are shutting them out of one of the biggest undertakings of the new majority -- revamping Medicare, the nation's health-care system for the elderly.


Universal Language Of High Exasperation
"An Italian Straw Hat," the 1851 comedy by Eugene Labiche and Marc Michel, was originally written in French, but that is not its primary language.
This prototypical story of a runaway wedding speaks elemental farce, a mostly physical language of exasperation.
Words exist principally to be misunderstood, and the fact that one of its characters, an old man named Vezinet, is hard of hearing doesn't necessarily mean that he's any more confused than the other people in the play.


Cherry Corp.(CHERA,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Aug 31


Transactions
Football  National Football League
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Waived Lance Brown, defensive back.
Signed Corey Holliday, wide receiver, from their practice squad.
General
MADISON SQUARE GARDEN -- Named Joe Cohen executive vice president.


Clinton Is Faulted on Debt Remark
Congress completed work on the first 2 of 13 spending bills today, the least contentious of the lot, and prepared to send them to the White House.
By a 94-to-4 vote, the Senate approved a $2.2 billion bill to finance the operations of Congress for the 1996 fiscal year.
It is a $200 million cut from the current budget.
In another vote, the Senate approved an $11.2 billion spending bill for military construction that is $2.4 billion more than current spending.


Vintage Warplanes on a Special Mission


Fretter Inc.(FTTR,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to July 31


FAULT LINES: The Big One: Washington's Political Earthquake; The Social Engineers Let Welfare Go Unfixed
EIGHTY-SEVEN of the Congress's 100 Senators voted last week to abandon 30 years of Federal welfare policy for an untested and drastically different alternative, a stampede that would be historic enough were it all that happened.
It wasn't.
Three of every four Democrats, 33 in all, joined in scrapping a system their party had invented, nurtured, expanded -- and declined to reform as recently as last year.
That opportunity lost, they have now acceded to what had been unthinkable: the end of the very entitlement that guarantees Federal aid to the poor.
So begins the final journey of the Great Society, with Lyndon Johnson's political progeny clambering aboard a bandwagon they could have steered but chose not to.
It is unlikely to be a one-time event.
Republicans will reap the credit or blame


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: Men's Fashions/Magazine Part 2


Soweto's a Long Way From Levittown
To the Editor:
"Seeing South Africa as the U.S.A., 1954" (Week in Review, Sept. 17) shows some of the pitfalls of trying to explain foreign experiences by using American points of reference.


Artists and Pirates
To the Editor:
Regarding your review of Gale E. Christianson's "Edwin Hubble" (Sept. 3), I know nothing about astronomy and cannot judge the worth of Hubble's work.
I've read that Henri Matisse was a dreadful egotist and boring company, but his work delights.
As does that of Robert Frost, who was allegedly not a nice person.
And who would invite Emily Dickinson to dinner?
She was not, I gather, a famous conversationalist.


Abigail Spangler, J. D. Nuechterlein
Abigail Riggs Spangler, a Ph.D. candidate in political science at Columbia University, was married yesterday to Dr.
Jeffrey Donald Nuechterlein, a senior counsel to Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative in Washington.
The Rev.
Stephen Elkins-Williams, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at the Chapel of the Cross in Chapel Hill, N.C.
The bride, 30, graduated from Wellesley College and received a master's degree and a master's of philosophy in political science from Columbia.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
C.
D.
Spangler Jr. of Chapel Hill.
Her father is the president of the University of North Carolina.
Her mother, Meredith R. Spangler, is a trustee at Wellesley College.


Muslim Sites in Israel
An 80-page guide to Muslim tourist sites in Israel is now available from the Israel Ministry of Tourism.
The guide, in English and Arabic, is published by Israel Travel News Ltd.
For a copy, call (800) 596-1199.
JOSEPH SIANO


Correction
An article on Sept. 10 about the exhibition "Beat Culture and the New America: 1950-1965," which is to open at the Whitney Museum of American Art on Nov. 9, misidentified the writer who said of Jack Kerouac's fiction, "That's not writing; that's typing." He was Truman Capote, not Gore Vidal.


Correction
A table last Sunday listing the biggest percentage losers on the American Stock Exchange for the trading week ended Sept. 15 reflected an erroneous figure from Tribune Media Services for the performance of Organogenesis Inc. (The price was also misstated in the listings of all American Stock Exchange Issues.) Adjusted for a 5-for-4 split effective the previous week, the stock rose 95 cents, to $17.25.


Officer Breaks Neck in Chelsea Squad Car Crash
Racing to respond to a false call of shots being fired, a police car collided with a postal van in Chelsea yesterday morning, critically injuring one officer.
The officer, David Willis, 29, of the 10th Precinct, broke his neck when he was ejected through a window of the patrol car.


Beach Restoration Backed, But Some Challenge the Poll
A poll commissioned by a group that lobbies for shore-development interests found that New Jerseyans overwhelmingly think the state should pay to pump new sand onto vanishing beaches.
According to the Jersey Shore Partnership's poll, released on Tuesday, 81 percent of those polled agree that the state should finance beach restoration efforts.
"The poll's findings should provide important support for our members of Congress and state legislators who are asked to vote for budgets which include shore protection funding," said Thomas Gagliano, the president of the partnership.


Consider the Cabbies
The arrival of a new taxi czar in New York City is generally followed by a promise that cab drivers will start to behave better.
Christopher Lynn, the latest chairman of the Taxi and Limousine Commission, has taken a more practical approach.
Under his watch, he promises, cab drivers will start to be paid better.
The taxi fleet owners are petitioning the city for a fare increase.
Mr.
Lynn wisely says he will not support any rise unless the bulk of the money goes directly to the drivers, instead of the owners of the 11,787 taxi medallions and their middlemen.


Bookshelf
THE MIDWIFE'S APPRENTICE.
By Karen Cushman.
Clarion. $10.95. (Ages 12 and up) Jane the midwife comes across an orphan girl in a dung heap and takes her on as a helper at the beginning of this companion to the author's first novel with a medieval setting, "Catherine, Called Birdy." Country life in early-14th-century England is described here from the perspective of the midwife and the girl, first called Brat and later Alyce.
LITTLE KIT: Or, The Industrious Flea Circus Girl.
Written and illustrated by Emily Arnold McCully.
Dial. $14.99. (Ages 5 to 8) It's London in the 19th century and Little Kit is an orphan living in the alleys.
Professor Malefetta takes her on as a helper, managing his flea circus.
Ultimately she escapes and liberates the performers.


BOOKS IN BRIEF: FICTION
TROUBLE NO MORE  Stories.
By Anthony Grooms.
La Questa Press, 555 Hamilton Avenue, Palo Alto, Calif., 94301.
Paper, $11.
Anthony Grooms's first collection of stories takes place mostly in the South of the 1960's, a time when the "colored" sign at a fast-food restaurant may have been removed, but "still people knew which line was which." What his upwardly mobile black characters don't know, just yet, is where to draw their own personal lines.
And the talk that animates these vignettes -- from lunch counters to juke joints to family dinner tables -- is an affecting reminder of the quiet courage, ingrained wariness and rueful humor with which such individual decisions reshaped an uncertain community.
ALIDA BECKER


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
SHOT IN THE HEART By Mikal Gilmore. Anchor/Doubleday, $14.95.
In this memoir the author's story is inextricably linked to that of his brother Gary, notorious for both killing and being killed: a murderer executed in 1977, he was the first American put to death in more than a decade.
Mikal Gilmore, the youngest of the family's four sons, reflects on their heritage of rage and violence.
The result is "a brave and honest book . . . whose courage resonates," Kathyrn Harrison said here last year.


No Headline
"These people are playing hardball and dirty pool at the same time, and I'm not going to cave in. But all the President has got to do is say, 'Senator, let's talk,' and we'll talk. It'll end on the day the President says we'll make a deal and we bust up that little fairyland." -- SENATOR JESSE HELMS, on his refusal to approve 30 ambassadorships.  [ 1:4. ]


Susan L. Peters, Robert K. Eng
Susan Leigh Peters, the daughter of Selma and Lawrence W. Peters of Massapequa, L.I., is to be married today to Robert Kwan Eng, a son of Lai Wah and Chee Sam Eng of Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Robert Scholz is to officiate at St.
David's Lutheran Church in Massapequa Park.
The bride, 26, teaches science and mathematics at the Lawrence Woodmere Academy in Woodmere, L.I.
She graduated from Muhlenberg College.
Her father retired as the senior executive vice president of the Long Island Savings Bank in Melville.


Car Rentals
To the Editor:
We read with great interest Betsy Wade's article "Credit Cards and Rental Cars" (Practical Traveler, July 30).
Our experience with American Express may help other travelers.


Other Memories of Queens . . . And Readers' Thoughts on Psychotherapy, Marijuana, and More; Marijuana as a Medicine Is Still Just a Walk Away
To the Editor:
Your tale of the New York Buyers Club ('Marijuana Cure: Rx for Arrest," Sept. 10), which supplies AIDS victims and others seriously ill with marijuana at cost, recalled for me the terminal illness of my wife in 1978.


Teen Angel
ONLY THE GOOD TIMES  By Bruce-Novoa. 286 pp. Houston: Arte Publico Press. Paper, $9.95.


90's Obsession Finds a Home in Old Forms
TRAGEDY Tomorrow, comedy tonight, said Stephen Sondheim, and would that this were true outside the confines of a theater.
For most of us, life is melodrama tonight and comedy tomorrow.
The wit (and the will) to make fun of our grief is always -- minimally -- a day away.
In "The Food Chain," by Nicky Silver, which is playing at the Westside Theater, melodrama and comedy nearly devour each other.
"I'm telling everyone to see this play," said a French friend.
"It's like a Feydeau farce." And he's right.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
SOHO  $478,000
473 Broome Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 2,400-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; elevator, 12-ft. ceilings, decorative columns, large windows, h/w floors, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,380, no tax deduction, listed at $499,000, 34 weeks on market (Brokers: Meisel; Douglas Elliman)  UPPER EAST SIDE  $548,000
170 East 87th Street  (Gotham)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,530-sq.-ft. condo in a newly constructed building; 24-hr. doormen, concierge, dining room, balcony, pool and health club; common charge $763, taxes $3,444, listed at $581,000, 22 weeks on market (Broker: Corcoran Group)  WEST SIDE  $270,000
140 West End Avenue
(Lincoln Towers)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,285-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doormen, dining area, remodeled kitchen and baths, terrace, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,136, 58% tax-deductible, listed at $290,000, 1 week on market (Broker: Residence Resources Ltd.)  WEST VILLAGE  $327,500
222 West 14th Street  (Sequoia)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft. condo in a 9-year-old building; 24-hr. doormen, concierge, dining area, north exposure; common charge $387, taxes $6,833, listed at $345,000, 8 weeks on market (Broker: Patton Young Properties)  BRONX
KINGSBRIDGE  $197,500
3253 Kingsbridge Avenue  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 84-year-old 2 1/2-story house; hardwood floors, finished basement, 5 garages, 50- by 100-ft. corner property with additional 50- by 50-ft. lot; taxes $1,523, listed at $295,000, 38 weeks on market (Broker: Trebach)  BROOKLYN
BOERUM HILL  $160,000
320 State Street  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath co-op in a brownstone; spiral staircase, 400-sq.-ft. recreation room, private garden; maintenance $481, 45% tax-deductible, listed at $170,000, 1 week on market (Broker: Cobble Heights)  BROOKLYN HEIGHTS  $720,000
12 Middagh Street  5-bedroom, 4-bath, detached 130-year-old carriage house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, fireplace, 1-car garage, Manhattan skyline view; taxes $3,682, listed at $760,000, 17 weeks on market (Broker: Joan Natale)  PARK SLOPE  $425,000
88 Garfield Place  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 3-story attached brownstone; dining room, triple parlor, eat-in kitchen, original moldings and woodwork, rear garden; taxes $1,300, listed at $449,000, 36 weeks on market (Broker: Rita Knox)  QUEENS  FOREST HILLS  $460,000
112-16 71st Road  6-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 45-year-old detached brick colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, c/a, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $2,950, listed at $509,000, 2 weeks on market (Broker: Madeleine)  FOREST HILLS GARDENS  $524,000
148 Whitson Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 70-year-old detached center-hall colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, solarium, powder room, c/a; taxes $3,200, listed at $575,000, 15 weeks on market (Broker: Terrace)  STATEN ISLAND
ELTINGVILLE  $167,250
393 Retford Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, fireplace, 1-car garage; taxes $1,300, listed at $174,900, 5 weeks on market (Brokers: Vitali-Sunshine; Newhouse)  GREAT KILLS  $265,000
115 Highland Road  2-family, new semi-attached colonial; 4 bedrooms, 3 1/2 baths, dining room, eat-in kitchen in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 2 baths in other; 1-car garage, 30- by 150-ft. lot; taxes $500, listed at $265,000, 2 weeks on market (Broker: Linda Nasta)  WESTCHESTER
ARMONK  $485,000
18 Pond Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 33-year-old ranch; screened porch, dining room, fireplace, eat-in kitchen, 1.7 acres; taxes $7,398, listed at $525,000, 41 weeks on market (Brokers: Houlihan/Lawrence; Merritt Associates)  NEW ROCHELLE  $483,000
25 Croft Terrace  6-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 72-year-old Tudor; entry foyer, sunroom, fireplace, pantry, terrace, 2-car garage; 1/2 acre; taxes $9,550, listed at $539,000, 44 weeks on market (Brokers: Century 21 King David; Julia B. Fee)  PELHAM  $322,000
790 Colonial Avenue  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 75-year-old English stone house; family room, fireplace, walled garden, attached 1-car garage; taxes $9,509, listed at $339,900, 17 weeks on market (Brokers: The Prudential Stiefvater)  WHITE PLAINS  $395,000
22 Carrigan Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 56-year-old Cape Cod; modern eat-in kitchen, cathedral ceiling, marble bath, office, Palladian windows; .43 acre; taxes $4,222, listed at $399,000, 9 weeks on market (Broker: Century 21 Wolff)
CONNECTICUT
COLCHESTER  $150,900
102 Pine Brook Road  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 9-year-old raised ranch; dining room, family room, cathedral ceilings, hot tub, 2-car garage, 4.39 acres; taxes $3,250, listed at $155,900, 4 weeks on market (Brokers: Beazley; Monarch)  COS COB  $737,500
19 Frontier Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 28-year-old colonial ranch; family room, 2 fireplaces, 1.29-acre lot; taxes $5,551, listed at $769,000, 12 weeks on market (Broker: William Raveis; Coldwell Banker/Schlott)  GREENWICH  $2.35 million
206 Round Hill Road  5-bedroom, 4-bath, 26-year-old contemporary; dining room, library, eat-in kitchen, c/a, terrace, balcony, pool, 3-car garage, 4.35 acres; taxes $14,449, listed at $2.9 million (Broker: Preferred Properties)  WESTPORT  $465,000
4 Terhune Drive  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 36-year-old split-level; vaulted-ceilings, Florida room, remodeled baths, c/a, 2-car garage, 1.05-acre lot; taxes $5,103, listed at $499,000, 16 weeks on market (Broker: William Pitt)  LONG ISLAND
EAST MEADOW  $170,000
2164 Irma Drive  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 45-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, partly finished basement, 1-car attached garage; taxes $5,400, listed at $174,990, 6 weeks on market (Brokers: Coldwell Banker Sammis; Augusto Paiva)  GREAT NECK  $345,000
26 Ravine Road  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 35-year-old high ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den with fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $6,400, listed at $399,000, 21 weeks on market (Broker: Great Neck Better Homes and Gardens)  MASSAPEQUA PARK  $292,000
3 Williams Drive, 4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 30-year-old split-level ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, basement, 2-car garage; taxes $7,900, listed at $350,000, 2 weeks on market (Brokers: Fitzgerald Properties; Prudential Long Island)  WILLISTON PARK $235,000
184 Center Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 45-year-old Cape Cod; new eat-in kitchen, patio, 1-car attached garage; taxes $4,800, listed at $249,000, 3 weeks on market (Brokers: ERA Caputo; Atanas)  NEW JERSEY
HILLSDALE  $440,000
16 Sierra Court  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 24-year-old ranch; 2-car garage, c/a, finished basement, fireplace; taxes $9,343, listed at $459,000, 4 weeks on market (Brokers: Coldwell Banker Schlott; Prudential Higgins)  OCEAN CITY  $63,750
1212 Bay Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 50 year-old colonial; 1-car garage, fully furnished, new appliances and carpeting; taxes $1,393, listed at $74,900, 7 months on market (Broker: The Richards Agency)  RANDOLPH  $350,000
31 Wilkinson Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 10-year-old colonial; deck, fireplace, c/a, hot tub; taxes $6,948, listed at $359,000, 2 weeks on market (Broker: Weichert)
SAYREVILLE  $224,900
21 Orchard Street  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 35-year-old colonial; eat-in-kitchen, 2-car garage, walk-in closets, outdoor lighting; taxes $3,841, listed at $224,900, 21 weeks on market (Broker: Prudential New Jersey)


A Rising Star Shines Brighter on His Book Tour
Nick Pappas, a veterinarian from Chesterton, Ind., does not agree with Gen.
Colin L. Powell on every issue.
In fact, he does not know where the general stands on most issues, but he does not care.
He admires General Powell for qualities that transcend something as mutable as Government policy and respects the general all the more for ignoring what voters like himself may think.
"We want a leader in the White House," he said.
"We don't want a pollster. And I really don't think we've had a leader since Harry Truman."


Dublin
Even wandering down the pretty, peaceful paths in St.
Stephen's Green, the 22-acre park at Dublin's heart, it's hard not to feel that the sharp edge of Irish history is lurking just around the corner.
And in a way, it is.
There in the park's northeast corner, just across the street from the luxurious Shelbourne Hotel, are two bronze statues by Edward Delaney erected in 1967.
The first, "Famine," a haunting work, marks the tragedy that took such a toll on Ireland in the 19th century.
It sits behind Delaney's monument to Theobald Wolfe Tone, who in the 1790's led a long series of bloody nationalist uprisings seeking independence from Britain.


Lure of Cuba Draws Some Aging Exiles
The narrow street lined with guava and mango trees and cactus-plant fences was deserted as the taxi came to a halt and Gilberto Zaldivar got out.
To his right was the house where his sister was born and where he grew up until he was a teen-ager.
Across from it, the family bodega was gone and a house had taken its place next to the shed where his father used to store beans and other grains.


The Forest Primeval Isn't What It Used to Be
TO travelers zooming along the highways of the northeastern United States in search of the first fall foliage, the deciduous woodlands that decorate the landscape like a blanket of fluffy, colorful cumulus clouds might look like a sign of improving environmental health.
Surely, this is the way things were before Europeans set foot on these shores.
Or is it?
It is true that the Northeastern woodlands have refilled much of the space once taken up by farms, that the trees are growing bigger and that animals like black bears, beavers, wild turkeys and even moose have returned.
But does this mean that the forests have recovered from two centuries of destruction, or that they ever will?


The Conversos' World
To the Editor:
Richard L. Kagan's review of B. Netanyahu's "Origins of the Inquisition in Fifteenth Century Spain" (Aug. 27) is a betrayal of a reviewer's responsibility.
A splendid big book, an exemplary work of scholarship and exquisite writing, fell into the hands of a reviewer who gave it short shrift and thus deprived your readers of an appreciation of what this stunning work is about.
Mr.
Kagan is free to agree or disagree with Mr.
Netanyahu's main conclusions.
But surely he owes the craft and his readers the elementary responsibility of coming to terms with the worth of the book he was assigned.


The Swedes Stay Alive By Surging In Doubles
Undone by a Swedish gamble, the United States Davis Cup team's dreams of clinching its semifinal against Sweden today evaporated into the desert haze right along with the red, white and blue balloons that were released just before Stefan Edberg and Jonas Bjorkman came to the rescue of their national cause.
On the brink of Davis Cup extinction, Edberg and Bjorkman proved a virtually impermeable team in defeating Todd Martin and Jonathan Stark, 6-3, 6-4, 6-4.


Late Scores Help Irish Continue Comeback
With each passing week, the Fighting Irish of Notre Dame are reassembling the pieces of a season once considered shattered.
With Lou Holtz, their coach, watching from a booth near the top of Notre Dame Stadium -- "I could be accused of calling plays," he said -- the Irish took advantage of five Texas turnovers in a 55-27 victory that emphatically reaffirmed a positive state of mind.
The Irish (3-1) scored 28 fourth-quarter points, including three touchdowns by the fullback Marc Edwards, to prevent the Longhorns from producing the kind of nationally significant victory that has been missing in John Mackovic's four seasons as coach.


Corrections
The Practical Traveler column on Aug. 20, about discounts for students and the elderly, misstated a blackout period for using United Airlines senior coupons for trips to Hawaii.
A reader's letter dated Aug. 22 points out that it is Dec. 15 to Jan. 10, not to Jan. 15.
This correction was delayed because the letter was addressed to a vacationing writer.


Other Memories of Queens . . . And Readers' Thoughts on Psychotherapy, Marijuana, and More; Sorting Out Differences Among Psychotherapists
To the Editor:
Your article omitted the two most important issues that mislead and befuddle consumers.


'The Cottage' in Mamaroneck
NINA ANDREWS is a piece of work.
In "The Cottage,' a new play by Julie Gilbert at the Emelin Theater, the character is compared with Eve Harrington, among the lethal women of fiction. Even Nina's therapist calls her "a gobbler" -- and her therapist knows for sure. At 35, Nina is the bad seed come of age.
An archetypal revenge tale with a psychological, not a genetic base under the influence of Stephen King, "The Cottage" is shamelessly programmed for predictability, yet calculated to make one feel rotten about giving it away.
Ms.
Gilbert is that crafty about covering her tracks.


Bookless Abroad
To the Editor:
As an inveterate reader of cereal boxes, I can sympathize with Gloria Hunter's plight on being caught in Spain without English-language reading material.
But there's a solution.
Assuming she had a traveler's dictionary and phrase book, she could have tried reading something in Spanish.
Many front-page headlines and the first paragraphs of articles are decipherable to anyone with the merest smattering of the language and a knowledge of current events.
With a dictionary, you can work your way through an article.


Parents Boo, and Lose
Angry over budget cuts, parents at School District 15 weighed in Wednesday, denouncing, hissing and booing a temporary school board of three trustees who passed a budget that the elected board would not.
School Board 15 was superseded after it defied Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines's order on Sept. 14 to pass its budget, cuts and all.


Just a Few of Their Favorite Things
THEY call themselves peddlers, recyclers.
They started a year ago, or 5, or 10, when they were laid off, fired, downsized, or simply needed extra money.
They looked around, took the suggestions of friends and relatives, used their work experience and ended up being their own employers.
They often work the outskirts of commercial districts, along industrial streets in Queens and Brooklyn, where there are no stores and the parking is easy.
Some scavenge for their product.
Others buy it from flea markets or wholesalers.
They find their market: used pants appeal to passers-by, discarded mattresses go to refurbishers.


Johanna K. Simon, Michael W. Morris
Johanna Katrina Simon and Michael Walter Morris, both 28, grew up in rural New Vernon, N.J. -- he on his family's 200-year-old hay, pumpkin and corn farm and she in a hilltop stone house surrounded by horse stables and rolling hayfields.
They met in kindergarten at the Harding Township School, and while they attended different schools after that, their paths, like the horse trails in New Vernon, crossed and re-crossed many times.
But there was never a spark between them until they saw each other last fall at an engagement party for a mutual friend.
By then, their lives were very different.


A Trump Vision For a Golf Course
IN this northern section of Westchester, where property owners like Mariah Carey, E. G. Marshall and Ralph Lauren live quietly amid rolling hills and horse pastures, few would raise an eyebrow on hearing news that Donald Trump spent $7.5 million last month to buy an estate in their neighborhood.
But the billionaire developer wants to convert the 200-acre Seven Springs Estate -- which straddles town lines here and in New Castle and North Castle -- into an exclusive spa and golf course.
Municipal officials say that could be a very tough sell, indeed, in a part of the county where the rich and famous have paid dearly for a rural way of life.


Acquire, Merge or Get Out of the Way
Just do it.
Don't just stand there, do something.
It's easier to get forgiveness than  permission.
Change or die.
Carpe diem.
THEY are T-shirt slogans, marketing tools and exhortations from the self-help industry, and many Americans live by them.
Corporate executives do, too, although they tend more toward jargon like "a bias toward action."


A Freak Streak
To the Sports Editor:
The fuss over Cal Ripken's 2,131-consecutive-game playing streak proves Woody Allen's old maxim true: "Half of life is just showing up." It seems to me that Cal Ripken is a statistical freak.
Besides, during his 13-year streak, didn't he participate in a strike . . . or two . . . or three?
THOMAS A. DENES  Kensington, Md.


NEWS AND TOPICS


Plumber's License Opposed By Con Ed
A PROPOSAL to create the first uniform licensing procedure for plumbers in Westchester County ran into strong opposition from Con Edison at a recent public hearing before the County Board of Legislators.
At present, 37 municipalities in the county require plumbers to obtain a license in order to work within their boundaries.


Commercial Property/Contingency Auditors and Leases; Tenants Using Specialists to Check Up on Landlords
ALAN J. POMERANTZ, the real-estate specialist at the law firm Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges, has a client who wants to renegotiate his lease.
Mr.
Pomerantz hired a lease auditor to scour the lease and the rent bills for discrepancies.
While the tenant would, of course, welcome a refund, money is not the audit's raison d'etre.
"The more we find, the more leverage we have with the landlord," Mr.
Pomerantz said.
"And if the problems affect other tenants, he has even more incentive to settle with us before our claim becomes public."


From Cult Hero to Renaissance Man
FOR A DECADE, THE Irish actor Gabriel Byrne has had a journeyman's record in the film industry, always earning respectful notices whether he took big roles in small movies or small roles in big ones.
With the exception of the Coen brothers' film "Miller's Crossing," in 1990, however, any trace of Mr.
Byrne's work seemed to evaporate after the first weekend's pitiful grosses.
Even his highly regarded "Into the West" flopped at the box office in 1993, the apparent victim of a misbegotten marketing strategy.
Still, throughout the years, Mr.
Byrne, whose dark, Byronic features seem to radiate a mournful intelligence, has been gathering a cult following as the thinking woman's poster boy -- a reputation made only more glamorous by his marriage to the actress Ellen Barkin.
In last year's "Little Women," he was tapped for the small but pivotal role of Professor Bhaer, the man who finds his way to Jo March's heart by way of her mind.


Q and A
Pilgrimage to Poland
Q.
My husband and I hope to travel to Poland next spring to visit my father's village, Suchova, which is about 30 miles north of Bialystok.
Will we be able to hire an English-speaking driver in Warsaw, spend the night in Bialystok, go from there to Suchova for a few hours and then back to Warsaw? -- Bette Coleman Slutsky, Skokie, Ill.


Children's Books
THE BIGGEST BOY  By Kevin Henkes.
Illustrated by Nancy Tafuri.
Unpaged.
New York: Greenwillow Books. $15. (Ages 3 and up)  BIG BOY  By Tololwa M. Mollel.
Illustrated by E. B. Lewis. 27 pp.
New York: Clarion Books. $14.95. (Ages 3 to 8)


Deirdre McCorry and Kenneth Mazer
Deirdre Marie Ella McCorry, the daughter of Maureen and Terence M. McCorry of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last evening to Kenneth Lee Mazer, the son of Lois M. Mazer of Harrison, N.Y., and Richard H. Mazer of Greenwich, Conn.
Rabbi Roy Rosenberg performed the ceremony at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden, and the Rev.
Giles Spoonhour, a Catholic priest, participated.
Mrs.
Mazer, 27, is the manager of Elizabeth Locke Jewels in New York.
She graduated from Fordham University.
Her father is the assistant chief of protection for the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.


Squirrel Feeders
To the Editor:
The article on Crater Lake in Oregon (Aug. 6) was accompanied by a picture that demonstrates and perhaps encourages the destruction of the pure wilderness in America's national parks.
While one person feeding one cute little ground squirrel may seem trivial, it is symbolic of America's disregard for the natural order; actions like these can take the "wild" out of "wilderness."


BEHIND THE WHEEL/Audi A6; Look What's Marked Down At a German Garage Sale
NEW and improved: you've heard that one before. But cheaper?
It is hard to imagine finding a real bargain among rock-solid European sedans.
Yet that is just what Audi is offering in the A6 Quattro, one prong of the company's strategy for regaining a respectable share of the fiercely competitive American market for "near luxury" cars.


Rising Young Stars and the Old and the New
FOR many years, Caramoor contented itself with being the jewel in Westchester's summer festival crown.
Nowadays, events in Katonah stretch throughout the year, and indeed the Fall Concert Series -- "filled to the brim with wonderful and unusual offerings," as the brochure puts it -- begins next weekend in the Music Room.
If you could attend the rehearsals and coaching sessions over the next five days, you would hear nine outstanding young musicians working intensively under the guidance of Caramoor's artistic adviser, Andre Previn, and two of his distinguished colleagues, Peter Oundjian, first violinist of the Tokyo Quartet, and Anne Martindale-Williams, principal cellist of the Pittsburgh Symphony.


Willis N. Mills, 88, A Civic Architect
Willis N. Mills, an architect who designed churches, a library, veterans' housing and college buildings in New England, died on Thursday at Liberty Commons Nursing Home in Chatham, Mass.
He was 88.
Mr.
Mills, a founding partner of Sherwood, Mills &amp; Smith, an architectural firm in Stamford, Conn., designed the St.
Mark's Episcopal Church in New Canaan, Conn., the Burndy Library in Norwalk, Conn., an addition to St.
Christopher's Episcopal Church in Chatham and numerous college buildings.


Other Memories of Queens . . . And Readers' Thoughts on Psychotherapy, Marijuana, and More; Behind Downtown 'Scene,' Real Work Is Getting Done
To the Editor:
The article about Manhattan's emerging high-tech area ("The Buzz in Silicon Alley," Sept. 10) made some pertinent observations, but these became lost in the attention paid to the "downtown scene" that the new-media industry seems to have created.


Too Polite for Words
A JAPANESE Colleague the other day was recounting a meeting with a man whom she abruptly described using the English word "jerk." I thought she was toning down her Japanese for my benefit, so I asked her how to say "jerk" in Japanese.
"There's no such word," she answered helplessly. "We have to use 'jerk.' "


Miss Wainwright, Mr. Sowanick
Christine Wainwright, the daughter of Mrs.
Nicholas Biddle Wainwright of Gladwyn, Pa., and the late Mr.
Wainwright, was married yesterday to Thomas John Sowanick, the son of Marie Sowanick of Alexandria, Va., and the late John Sowanick.
The Rev.
Robert E. Jones performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Colony Club in New York.
The bride, 38, was until recently a managing director in the taxable fixed-income department at Lehman Brothers in New York.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father was the director emeritus of the Historical Society of Pennsylvania and the editor of The Pennsylvania Magazine of History and Biography, in Philadelphia.


Parking Rules
Because of Rosh ha-Shanah, alternate-side street cleaning regulations will be suspended in New York City tomorrow and on Tuesday.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Victoria C. Demos, Thomas A. Cawley
Dr.
Victoria Camille Demos, a psychologist in New York, was married yesterday to Thomas Andrew Cawley, a crisis management consultant.
The Rev.
Dr.
J.
Barrie Shepherd performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in New York.
Dr.
Demos, 36, who is keeping her name, is also an assistant professor of psychology at Marymount College in Tarrytown, N.Y., and an associate professor of clinical psychology at Columbia University and Adelphi University, both in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Bucknell University and received her Ph.D. in clinical psychology from Hahnemann University.


Worship, in the Humblest of Settings
Seven days a week, James Moore is up before the sun and off to work at a junkyard on the city's South Side.
On Sunday mornings, he also attends church there.
For the last four years, Mr.
Moore, about a dozen other worshipers and their 81-year-old pastor have held nondenominational services at the junkyard.
They gather under open sky, on an unpaved sidewalk alongside the junkyard that is littered with shattered glass, dirt and broken dreams.
The makeshift congregation also includes a skinny junkyard dog that moves to the back when the singing starts.


Books in Brief; New York in the Hoof
The New York style of walking is antivisual; it's fast and competitive, and eyes tend to stay focused on the fellow pedestrian just ahead or on the patch of concrete straight down.
ARTWALKS IN NEW YORK (Michael Kesend Publishing, paper, $14.95) tries to do something about this.
In 26 walks, covering all five boroughs, Marina Harrison and Lucy D. Rosenfeld, who previously wrote "A Walker's Guidebook" and "Art on Site," ask readers to slow down and take a good look at works like "Civic Fame," the gold-clad heroine atop the Municipal Building; the Hans Hofmann mosaic in the lobby of 711 Third Avenue, or the 350 sculptures by Isamu Noguchi at the Noguchi Museum and Sculpture Garden in Astoria, Queens.
There are excursions to restaurants, artists' studios, office building lobbies and galleries and the often overlooked international cultural centers like the Swiss Institute and Goethe House.
The authors are diligent and nonpartisan, limiting themselves to clear descriptions of the work and relying heavily on the word "interesting." They are snoopers and burrowers, with a sharp eye for art in unexpected corners.
They cannot leave the Chanin Building lobby without mentioning the jeweled clocks and bas-reliefs by Rene Chambellan, as well as the bronze gateways that conceal the fire hoses.
The authors do cheat a bit, however, by extending the definition of "art" to include the botanical gardens of the Bronx, Brooklyn and Staten Island.
However, "Artwalks in New York" is bouncy, well written and filled with good tips.
It gives 26 good reasons to slow down and take a look.
WILLIAM GRIMES


Connecticut Q&amp;A: Eugene C. Gavin; A Second Tax Amnesty, Tough Love
EUGENE C. GAVIN, who was the Republican State Representative from Westport in 1993 and 1994, was appointed Commissioner of the Department of Revenue Services this year, responsible for 900 employees and a $47 million budget.
In his new job, Mr.
Gavin is overseeing Connecticut's tax amnesty program, which seeks to raise $31 million in back taxes from people who have not filed returns, or have hidden income.


Hope G. Henchey, Kevin M. Scully
Hope Gardiner Henchey, a daughter of Winifred S. Ward of Jefferson, N.H., and C. Bickford Henchey of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday to Kevin Matthew Scully, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Scully of White Plains.
The Rev.
Terence L. Elsberry performed the ceremony at St.
Matthew's Episcopal Church in Bedford, N.Y.
Mrs.
Scully, 29, is a store planner at Federated Department Stores in New York.
She graduated from the University of Connecticut and received a master's degree in interior design from Pratt Institute.
Her father is the president of ECM Group, a career management company in White Plains.
Her mother is a landscape designer in Jefferson.


A Family On the Run
Elizabeth Morales was in her living room when she heard the beating.
She ran to the window and saw Paqualito, a leader of the Wild Cowboys, pistol-whipping her son Tito four floors below.
She started to scream. She thought for sure Tito was going to die.


San Gennaro's Officials Outearn Charity
A Long Island man described by a Federal grand jury as having helped the mob run the Feast of San Gennaro was paid a salary of $30,000 for his services last year, more than three times the amount the festival paid to charities.
The man, Louis Zacchia, 70, of Merrick, received the money as treasurer for the Society of San Gennaro, which stages the event each year.
At the same time, records show, the nonprofit organization donated $7,697 to various charities.


Futuristic Thinking
To the Sports Editor:
We enjoyed Barbara Lloyd's "Futuristic Catamaran to Set Sail," (The Times, Aug. 20) and the plans to race our C Class catamaran in Australia.
Our group is called the Cogito Project, after the 17th century philosopher Rene Descartes's "cogito ergo sum," which translates to "I think therefore I am." The Latin word "cognito" means "I understand," which is the next link along the chain, following and subservient to thinking.
The essence of the C Class catamaran is to lead the way in the most innovative thinking on yacht design and building, limited only by the simplest of class rules.
C Class catamarans are the fastest course-racing sailboats in the world.
Winning the International Catamaran Challenge Trophy must be regarded as the top honor in sailing.
STEPHEN H. CLARK  Warren, R.I.
The writer is chairman of the Cogito Project.


A Yard? Not in My Backyard
Who says good fences make good neighbors?
Certainly not the residents of the brownstones that honeycomb two blocks in the West Village.
For 70 years, people who have lived in the brownstones, on 11th and Perry Streets between Waverly Place and West Fourth Street, have shared a communal garden, maintained by St.
John's Episcopal Church, instead of having individual fenced-in backyards.
Now, faced with the prospect of having the garden subdivided, few, if any, residents seem to covet seclusion.


It's High Drama This Year at the Birdbath
THIS summer's long drought in the Northeast has underscored just how important water is to life.
And not just plant life, but also the creatures attracted by the flowers and seeds a gardener nourishes.
Birds, that is.
A particular delight in the garden has always been the birdbath where various visitors congregate for cleanliness, a song and a sip.


Let There Be a Light Everyone Likes
In the grand scheme of the $380 million reconstruction of 4 1/2 miles of the West Side Highway, choosing lampposts might seem a minor detail.
But West Siders are not known for unanimity.
Sure enough, a debate over rival pole designs is generating more heat than street light.
"Never in a million years did we expect this to be such a controversial and contentious issue," said Art Strickler, until recently the State Transportation Department's community liaison for the highway project.
The lights will line the highway and the adjoining Hudson River Park from the Battery to 59th Street.


The Perilous Times of an East Village Symbol


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-17  POLITICAL FIGHT OVER ENVOYS  Senator Jesse helms is continuing to hold up 30 ambassadorial appointments and a series of treaties to try to force the Clinton Administration to revamp its foreign policy bureaucracy.  1


Raymond Letourneau Jr., Robin Sias
Robin Elizabeth Sias, a researcher in New York for "Day and Date," a CBS news program, was married yesterday to Raymond George Letourneau Jr., an equities trader at J. P. Morgan Securities in New York.
The Rev.
Judy McKay, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony in the Trail Creek Meadow at Sun Valley, Idaho.
The couple, both 26, graduated from Yale University, she cum laude.


This Season's Most Valuable Players, Pro and Con
The issues raised by the candidates for the most valuable player awards might be more interesting than the awards themselves.
Some of the issues are old, some new.
Though they are not the only candidates, the players who prompt discussion and dissection of their chances for the awards, as voted by members of the Baseball Writers Association, are Dante Bichette of Colorado, Edgar Martinez of Seattle, Albert Belle of Cleveland, Jose Mesa of Cleveland and the entry of Gary Gaetti of Kansas City, Craig Biggio of Houston and Sammy Sosa of the Chicago Cubs.


How to Succeed in Show Business by Really Singing
IN OPERA A CONSENSUS EXISTS, more or less, about what constitutes good singing.
But in the field of musical theater there is no such consensus.
Since the early days of the American musical, songwriters have championed singers of wildly diverse vocal resources.
George Gershwin adored the brassy singing of Ethel Merman, the Birgit Nilsson of Broadway, as well as the stylish crooning of Fred Astaire, whose voice barely reached the balcony.
Richard Rodgers wrote the role of Billy Bigelow, in "Carousel," for John Raitt, who could have had a successful career as a Verdi baritone.
On the other hand, Stephen Sondheim composed his most famous song, "Send In the Clowns," for an actress with virtually no voice, Glynis Johns, and few genuine singers have performed it as effectively.


Pavin Chip Shot Falls, and Europe's Chances Drop
Just when it seemed that there could be no more heroics, no more electrifying shots, no more transcendent golf, Corey Pavin raised the level of the Ryder Cup today.
He did it again, as he has so often in the past, with a sense of timing and theater that only the great ones have.
With the difference of two points hanging in the balance, on a green encircled by all his teammates from the United States and his opponents' teammates from Europe, Pavin shocked everyone with a chip-in birdie from 18 feet that defeated Nick Faldo and Bernhard Langer, 1 up, and catapulted the United States team back into a commanding position entering the final day of the competition.


BELTWAY WARRIOR
As soon as I saw your editorializing photo of Colin Powell, I knew some trashing was about to take place ("Beltway Warrior," by Michael R. Gordon and Bernard E. Trainor, Aug. 27).
Has anyone ever looked good in a close-up so extreme that the skin pores show?


Other Memories of Queens . . . And Readers' Thoughts on Psychotherapy, Marijuana, and More; In Old Queens, Blizzards, Trolleys and a World's Fair
To the Editor:
I want to call your attention to a mistake in your article on Queens.
Forest Hills Gardens does have restrictive covenants concerning architecture and zoning, but there has never been anything in these covenants that, as you wrote, "permitted occupancy only by white Christians." Nowhere in the covenants is there any reference to who could or could not purchase a home.
RICHARD W. SEELER  Forest Hills The writer is president of the Forest Hills Gardens Taxpayers Association.


Yes, This Is the City That Never Sleeps. Blame Road Repair.
York Avenue has returned to what seems to have been its natural state for the last two years: torn up for construction.
But this time there is a new annoyance.
The work is being done at night.
"Those jackhammers keep me up all night," said Steve Feldman, a member of Community Board 8 who lives on York.
"I can't stand it. It doesn't matter if you keep your windows opened or closed. Even when you fall asleep briefly, you hear them even louder at five in the morning."


BENEFITS
Antiques Show Opening  WEDNESDAY -- A preview of the Fall Antiques Show at the Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue at 66th Street, will benefit the programs of the Museum of American Folk Art.
A cocktail reception and viewing of the exhibits will take place from 6 to 9 P.M.
The show opens to the public on Thursday and runs through Oct. 1.
Tickets, $175, or $75 for those 30 and younger, from (212) 977-7170.
Fete de Famille  WEDNESDAY -- The AIDS Care Center of New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center will hold its 10th annual "Fete de Famille" from 6 to 9 P.M. at Mortimer's, Lexington Avenue at 75th Street.
The party -- both inside the restaurant and outside, in a tent -- will feature a sale of donated items.
Tickets, $250, or $125 for those 35 and younger, from (212) 685-1095.
For Promesa  WEDNESDAY -- A black-tie dinner at the Marriott Marquis will benefit Promesa, an organization that renovates low- and middle-income housing and provides drug treatment, day care and other social services in the South Bronx.
Peter Yarrow, of Peter, Paul and Mary, will perform, and the emcees will be Roz Abrams, the television anchor, and Borough President Fernando Ferrer of the Bronx.
Cocktails at 6 P.M. will be followed by dinner at 7 and an awards ceremony at 9.
Tickets, $350, from (718) 991-5516, extension 313.
Autumn Wine Tasting  THURSDAY -- Hartley House, a settlement house at 413 West 46th Street, will hold a wine-tasting party from 6 to 8 P.M. to benefit its programs for children.
Tickets, $75, or $50 for those 30 and younger, from (212) 246-9885.
St.
Vincent's Awards  THURSDAY -- St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center will hold its eighth annual Angelus Awards Gala at the Waldorf-Astoria.
Richard J. Boyle, a vice chairman of the Chase Manhattan Bank, will be one of the honorees.
The black-tie event begins with a cocktail reception at 6:30 P.M., followed by dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 604-2654.
Dinner, Dance and Airlift  SATURDAY -- Americares, a private relief agency, will hold its eighth annual Airlift Dinner Dance at the UST hangar at the Westchester County Airport in White Plains.
Proceeds will benefit the organization's programs.
Cocktails at 6:30 will be followed by dinner and dancing at 8.
At 10, about 50 guests will board a plane loaded with medicines and hospital supplies and fly to Haiti, where they will tour Americares facilities and help distribute supplies.
Tickets, $200, from (203) 972-5519.
Pediatric AIDS Fair  NEXT SUNDAY -- The third annual Kids for Kids carnival to benefit the Pediatric AIDS Foundation will run from 3 to 6 P.M. at Industria Superstudio, 775 Washington Street, near West 12th Street.
Carnival booths will be run by celebrities including Richard Gere, Tom Brokaw, Kathleen Turner, Mariel Hemingway and Mary Stuart Masterson.
Tickets, $600, or $1,600 for a family of four, from (212) 431-0550.
For the Hebrew Home  NEXT SUNDAY -- The Hebrew Home for the Aged in Riverdale, the Bronx, will hold its 78th annual dinner-dance at the Waldorf-Astoria.
Robert S. Strauss, a former Ambassador to the Soviet Union, will be honored, and Henry A. Kissinger is to speak.
Cocktail reception at 6 P.M.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (718) 549-8700, extension 252.


The Vienna Opera, At Full Volume Again
THE 30-odd participants in one of the frequent guided tours of the State Opera, a prime sightseeing attraction in Vienna, had trooped across the stage, the size of two basketball courts, seen the frescoed lobbies, settled down in dress-circle seats in the empty theater, and now had many questions.
"Where are the horses?" a middle-aged man asked in English.
The polyglot guide, Eva Dintsis, politely explained that the State Opera, or Staatsoper, had nothing to do with the Spanish Court Riding School, whose white Lippizaner stallions go through their paces in the ring of the former imperial palace, the Hofburg, nearby.


I.P.O.'s Usually Have Faster Starts . . . and Then They Stumble
SPORTS sunglasses!
Managed dental care!
Software to navigate the Internet!
One reason investors scramble for new stock offerings is to snare that world-beating concept that will put them at the forefront of the free market.
If so, investors reason, the newly public company will take off and bring great profits.
That certainly seems like a solid strategy for this hot stock year.
Through Sept. 20, 1995's new issues have soared, gaining on average 23 percent in their first four weeks of trading, according to the Securities Data Company.
The S.&amp; P. 500 returned an average of just 2.5 percent over the same periods.


Couplings
THE SUMMER WAGS marked the moment by drawing mouse ears on Peter Jennings's head.
Disney's purchase of Cap Cities/ABC, they reckoned, will trivialize television news.
The more appropriate response would have drawn Donaldson, Downs, Brinkley, Sawyer, Walters, Koppel and Jennings as Seven Shrinking Dwarfs.
The animation and cartooning of television news has been under way for decades.
It wasn't Disney that impelled the vaunted Edward R. Murrow to visit "Person to Person" with Marilyn Monroe or that sent Diane Sawyer shuttling from Robert McNamara to Michael Jackson.
The moment is noteworthy only because the latest corporate couplings may mark the final step in the evolution of television news into entertainment.
The folks at Disney have been pining to own a network not to enlighten but to entertain on a truly global scale.
They paid handsomely for the yearning and may gain added promotional power to move audiences from home to theater to theme park and home again.
Their acquisition makes ABC's news department an even smaller appendage of a burgeoning enterprise.
Sooner or later it will be the target of still more of the "efficiencies" that have steadily diminished all the networks' devotion to serious news.


Managed Care Myopia
To the Editor:
Lloyd Krieger naively asserts that the country suffers from an oversupply of specialists.
There are no reliable data to support this assertion; in fact, no one knows the optimal specialist/generalist ratio for our aging society.


Great College Teachers Build Lasting Bonds; Student Evaluations
To the Editor:
Re "Power to the Pedagogues" (Op-Ed, Sept. 17), by Christopher Winship and Mark Ratner: Teaching quality is difficult to evaluate accurately, but the largest component is student evaluation.


Maybe Late-Night Success Is About The Smile
Lauren Hutton, the original supermodel, has been saying it like a mantra: There is room for two gaps on late-night television.
"An orthodontist's dream," she says, talking about talk-show hosts with distinctive front-and-center spaces between their incisors.
One of the two, of course, is David Letterman.
She has just become the other, with "Lauren Hutton and . . . ," a syndicated 30-minute nightly program that has the makings of a hipper version of the old NBC program "Later With Bob Costas." (In New York, "Lauren Hutton and . . . " follows Mr. Letterman's "Late Show" and Tom Snyder's "Late Late Show" on WCBS-TV, at 1:37 A.M.)
There also seems to be room for at least one gap in prime time: Ms.
Hutton is a regular on "C.P.W.," the new hourlong drama on CBS.
Which raises the inevitable impossible-schedule question.
"You're saying, how mean can I get for lack of sleep?" she said.
"I'm learning to do with much less. I realize I led a very coddled existence. When I was a model, I would model for two months and I'd be running out of smiles and I'd go off to Africa for two months and come back and next time, Malaysia. Well, them days are over."
But she did not trade in her six-months-on, six-months-off schedule for a traditional desk-and-couch format.
For one thing, she is a woman in a field long dominated by hosts who are men.
For another, "Lauren Hutton and . . . " is not videotaped, as Mr.
Costas's show was, but filmed, on 16-millimeter film, by the fashion photographer Luca Babini.
Ms.
Hutton says there has never been a talk show produced on film; she works in 12-minute segments, which lets the camera operators reload during commercial breaks.
No wonder Ms.
Hutton's set is more like a movie set than a television studio, with softer lighting, tighter shots and stylish editing.
"We've created an atmosphere to relax guests and create a chemistry so we can go beyond small talk," Ms.
Hutton said.
She has completed 108 episodes, interviewing everyone from Kathleen Turner, who talked about her first kiss (but Ms. Hutton managed to say more about hers), to the rap star LL Cool J to the marine biologist Sylvia Earle to the anthropologist James Shreeve.
Mr.
Babini, a former choreographer and director of visual art at the Gomma Gutta Fine Art Academy in Genoa, Italy, first encountered Ms.
Hutton while making a documentary that quickly became a kind of pilot for "Lauren Hutton and . . . " Eventually they sent it to Pat Mitchell, the president of Turner Original Productions, a unit of Ted Turner's empire.
Ms.
Mitchell gave it to Jane Fonda, who gave it to Mr.
Turner and said, "This is going to revolutionize talking heads," said Ms.
Hutton.
"And Miss Jane knows her films," she added.
"We figured they'd come back and ask for, you know, maybe four documentaries over a year. They came back and asked for 180, and before we knew it, it's like stepping in this noose that you drew yourself and suddenly we're hanging upside down from a tree."
But Ms.
Hutton is not hanging alone.
On her staff are veterans of the talk-show wars like her supervising producer, Lora Wiley, a former producer and investigative reporter with "Geraldo" who coordinated interviews with the likes of Mary Jo Buttafuoco.
But in contrast to many other late-night hosts, Ms.
Hutton does not do pre-interviews.
"For me, that was the least pleasant of anything," she said.
"Who knows what you're going to feel like talking about weeks from now when you go on? And besides, this is less of a talk show and more of a conversation show. If something interesting comes up, I jump on it and follow it down that tributary."


BOOKS IN BRIEF: NONFICTION
AMBUSH AT RUBY RIDGE How Government Agents Set Randy Weaver Up and Took His Family Down.
By Alan W. Bock.
Dickens Press, $22.
The by now familiar story of the botched 1992 Government operation against the avowed white separatist Randy Weaver is comprehensively recounted in "Ambush at Ruby Ridge," Alan W. Bock's chronicle of the events before, during and after the siege of the Weaver cabin in northern Idaho.
Mr.
Bock, a columnist at The Orange County (Calif.) Register, has more on his mind than an evenhanded examination of what was, by all accounts, an egregious abuse of Government power.
He lashes out at a number of targets, especially the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms; his final chapter lists other instances of abuse as he not-so-subtly makes his argument that Government has run amok.
The Weaver case, he argues, was an abomination; the Government demonized Randy Weaver in the same fashion that he demonized it.
Several high-ranking officials of the Federal Bureau of Investigation have been suspended and others disciplined for their roles in the affair, and the Government has agreed to pay $3.1 million to the Weaver family.
But wise though it is to be wary of Big Brother, to err in the other direction, as Mr.
Bock seemingly would have us do, most certainly runs the risk of anarchy.
CHARLES SALZBERG


Foreign Affairs; In Defense of Peace
The Jewish New Year begins tonight, but my friend Abraham Foxman won't be in his regular seat at his Orthodox synagogue in Bergen County, N.J., where he was a member for 20 years.
Mr.
Foxman, director of the Anti-Defamation League, quit his synagogue after his rabbi wrote articles accusing Israel's Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, of leading the Jewish people on a Holocaust-like death march, because of his willingness to trade land for peace with the Palestinians.
Says Mr.
Foxman, himself a Holocaust survivor: "I could not tolerate belonging to a synagogue where the rabbi treats anyone who supports the peace process as a sinner."
Unfortunately, Mr.
Foxman's experience is not unique.
Some of the Orthodox Jewish press these days reads like Al Ahram in the 1950's, with weekly diatribes against Israel's leaders.
What is encouraging is that a mainstream Jewish leader like Mr.
Foxman has stepped forward to challenge this view.
Polls show that two-thirds of American Jews support Mr.
Rabin, but you would never know it listening to the tepid support he gets from some weak-kneed mainstream groups, like the Conference of Presidents.


A Referendum on the Police May Disclose the Obvious
In a city where the crime rate has long been among the highest in the nation, where stores in the rundown areas sometimes charge for matches because so many crack addicts ask for them, it would probably not take a platoon of pollsters to find out what residents think about the police.
Even most members of the Newark City Council acknowledge that the Police Department has stumbled in recent years, failing to put enough officers on the streets and to overcome mismanagement and corruption.
But the Council is reacting to such missteps with an unusual move that is puzzling some people here: It is scheduling a nonbinding referendum for the November elections to determine whether the public approves of the police.


The Art of the Entourage
EVEN in publicity, fashions come and go.
And the publicity trend of the moment?
The entourage.
Mimicking royal courts of the 16th century, the entourage -- a traveling retinue -- was invented as a publicity tool by movie studios in the 1930's, when stars were simply advertising vehicles.
The mogul Louis B. Mayer went so far as to send out lists of people stars could and should be seen with.


Great College Teachers Build Lasting Bonds; Dartmouth Practice
To the Editor:
"Power to the Pedagogues" (Op-Ed, Sept. 17) states the Dartmouth faculty "refuses to permit student evaluations," to avoid mere popularity contests.
Far from refusing to permit student evaluations, most faculty members at Dartmouth themselves give out teaching evaluations at the end of term.
JAMES WRIGHT  Dean of Faculty, Dartmouth College Hanover, N.H., Sept. 20, 1995


Prague Cabdrivers Are Bilking Tourists
Taking a taxi can be an expensive and unpleasant experience in Prague.
With more than 100 million visitors pouring into the Czech Republic last year, taxi drivers in the capital have been charging tourists exorbitant prices, and often insisting on payment with insults and even punches.
There have been reports of tourists being charged more than 10 times the $20 that a ride from the airport to the city should cost.
So far there have been no published reports of unwitting riders being given the electric shock treatment that some drivers, according to a report in Mlada Fronta Dnes, a Czech newspaper, threatened to install in their cars.
"Metal wires are stuck into the upholstery and when a button is pushed, the circuit is connected and there's an electric shock," Antonin Zemlicka, a member of the drivers' guild, said earlier this year.
The idea, he explained, was to force passengers to pay the fare on the meter, whether it was correct or not.


Summer Tours in Winter, Down Under
The natural exotica of New Zealand and Australia is the focus of two tours planned for late fall through winter.
The Palm Springs Desert Museum, in conjunction with Learned Journeys, a Santa Barbara travel company, is offering a 20-day excursion through Australia and New Zealand.
The tour, which will be accompanied by James W. Cornett, curator of natural science at the museum, leaves Los Angeles on Oct. 29.


Learning at Home
Home schooling is growing more popular among parents who wish to control the content or pace of their children's education.
What do you think?
Second Thoughts
I taught my son for first and second grades.
We are not home-schooling currently, because our children believed that they wanted to go to school.
Now they find the tedium of rote learning excrutiating, and we are dismayed by the back sass, lack of respect for adults, headlong plunge into superficiality with the attention span of a gerbil.
We are reconsidering home schooling.
JEANNE WELSH Berlin Adapt for the Future
I think that we should not cut off our children from society; rather, we should return the state of education back to what it was at its prime in the 1950's and early 60's.
It's no wonder parents want their kids out of the liberal, anti-family, anti-values, anti-morals, anti-teaching basics schools.
KEN J. WOLFE Perrineville Preparing for Life
Our children are going to have to encounter all sorts of people in life.
How do we prepare them for this if we send them to a school that has people from only their ethnic group or socioeconomic group?
MARK BALTIN South Orange Surviving School
If I ever have children I would like to teach them at home.
As a young girl in school, I experienced a lot of things that are awful about kids.
I don't blame the teaching, because I am fortunate to have very good teachers, but I can't stand interacting with some of the other students.
MARY GRIGONIS Clark Real Experience
Home-schooled children learn to socialize with others of all ages.
They learn about shopping, banking and dealing with the people in everyday life.
They learn early how to run a home.
We are teaching them how to become independent adults.
JULIE CAMPAGNA Bergenfield Poor Preparation
Home schooling is based on putting self-esteem before competitiveness.
It is poor training for the real world of work.
It is also based on the idea that anyone can teach.
I wonder how many of us would allow ourselves to be operated on by a surgeon who just had home schooling.
ROBERT J. POHL Lockport, N.Y.
Lacking Qualifications
I have met a number of parents involved in home schooling.
Since none of them were qualified to teach, the prospect of growing numbers involved in this process is frightening to me.
SYLVIA R. SCHLAEGER


WHO WILL FACE THE MUSIC?
In her article, Kolbert says that Congress has refused even to acknowledge the growing "generational inequity" in Federal programs for the elderly, particularly Social Security and Medicare.
In the 1980's Social Security was made subject to income tax for the first time and the taxable amount was raised in the 1990's.
As affluent retirees, my wife and I pay $4,000 in taxes on annual Social Security benefits of $16,600.
That's a 24 percent reduction in benefits.
THOMAS A. FLOOD JR.
Latham, N.Y.


British Trains
To the Editor:
Although I was happy to read that J. H. Kotel enjoyed her experience on Britain's railways ("Little Engines That Still Can," July 9), I disagree with her advice to purchase restricted tickets in Britain rather than a rail pass in the United States for flexible, convenient rail travel in Britain.


Lending a Hand to Fellow New Yorkers
The following is a list of some organizations around the five boroughs that can use your help.
THE MAYOR'S VOLUNTARY ACTION CENTER 61 Chambers Street, Manhattan.
The center is a volunteer clearinghouse, which uses a database that lists more than 2,000 volunteer jobs in the five boroughs to match people with agencies that could most use their help.
Call Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M., for an appointment. (212) 788-7550.


Graphics: Back Big Time
X-GIRL, a shop at 248 Lafayette Street that sells clothes for indy-rockers, has a mural of a girl's face that looms so large you could miss it.
The word "hello"in giant letters and in 16 languages blurts across the fitting room wall.
"I wanted a 70's-U.N. vibe, like a social studies textbook," said Mike Mills, 29, the SoHo store's graphic designer.
Supergraphics like these are yet another style to rebound from the 1960's and 70's.
"Supergraphics is nothing more than using typography and flat form at another scale," said Ivan Chermayeff, 64, who designed the pop landmark "9"that stands on the sidewalk in front of 9 West 57th Street.


WHO WILL FACE THE MUSIC?
When the Social Security system was founded in 1935, pensions began at age 65.
But the life expectancy for men in those days was just 59.9 years, and for women 63.9.
So we offered benefits to people, many of whom had been dead for half a decade.
Comparable Social Security today would require people to retire in their late 70's.
LAWRENCE BROWN Boulder, Colo.


THE OLD WORLD'S NEWEST PLACES
London  Hampton Court garden, as William III saw it
For the last few years, gardeners and historians have been poring over the original design of the Privy Garden of King William III at Hampton Court Palace, 15 miles west of London on the Thames, seeking to recreate it as it was when completed in 1702.
They studied drawings, paintings and tradesmen's bills, and unearthed roots of the original shrubs and trees.


Other Memories of Queens . . . And Readers' Thoughts on Psychotherapy, Marijuana, and More; Sorting Out Differences Among Psychotherapists
To the Editor:
The article on psychotherapy should have given particular attention to interpersonal psychotherapy and cognitive behavioral therapy inasmuch as they are proven treatments for depression and other disorders.
The article notes that "many believe" that other kinds of therapies work; but only these two have actually been tested in clinical trials for specific disorders and have demonstrated their efficacy.
This grounding in empirical data -- rather than simply in therapists' belief -- is a key to why such short-term, symptom-focused therapies are "the darlings of the managed-care industry."


Unity Under Fire Makes Woodbine Street a Block Apart
Many Woodbine Street residents remember how quickly their neighborhood, Bushwick, fell apart.
The breweries and knitting mills left in the 1960's.
Unscrupulous real-estate agents used racist tactics to frighten white homeowners into cheap sales.
Then came fire: whether arson or not, Bushwick had 500 blazes a year in the 1970's.
The power blackout of July 13, 1977, was a profound blow.
Riots, looting, and arson swept through Bushwick as nowhere else.
When power and calm were restored, many shops remained closed and more blocks were burned out.


Playing It Straight
To the Sports Editor:
The articles I've read about Cal Ripken Jr. have failed to mention his revolutionary batting technique.


Liberals Had to Fight For a Juster Society
To the Editor:
Re "Blame History, Not the Liberals" (Op-Ed, Sept. 19): John Kenneth Galbraith's attempt to defend liberal reforms by depicting their proponents as the mere agents of broader historical forces could not be more wrongheaded.


Emotion: St. Mary's Has It and Columbia Does Not
As Mike Rasmussen, the football coach at St.
Mary's College of California, said, "This was really a business trip." A successful one, too.
The Galloping Gaels took a red-eye flight Friday morning, rolled to a 34-14 victory over Columbia yesterday afternoon and flew home at 6:45 P.M. last night.
For St.
Mary's, there was no sightseeing, just a sound running game that got better as the day went on.
It broke open a 14-14 game in the third quarter with two touchdowns in 50 seconds and an additional touchdown less than five minutes later.
Bonner Cunnings made four touchdown runs (for 4, 1, 4 and 1 yards), tying the school record.


The Bohemian Side of Munich
MUNICH, like any Central European city worthy of the name, is a fairly contradictory place.
The cultural capital of German-speaking Europe before 1914 and by many standards after 1945, Munich has often been at the cutting edge, home of the Jugendstil and the Blue Rider School of Richard Wagner and Thomas Mann, of the BMW and Rainer Werner Fassbinder.
After World War I, though, and in contrast to virtually every other large German city, it was a bulwark of reaction, the so-called capital of the National Socialist movement, the city that gave its name to the Munich Accords.
Schwabing, the district north of the city's old medieval center and a traditional stomping ground of students, artists and assorted hangers-on, has often been thought of as Munich's other half, artistic rather than bourgeois, cosmopolitan rather than Bavarian.
In the 60's, after a well-publicized riot, it was considered downright radical. (Even in the 20's, it led the way, so to speak, becoming a Nazi stronghold before the rest of Catholic, conservative Munich.)


Katherine Cestar And Caleb Epstein
Katherine Anne Cestar, a daughter of Marcia and Victor E. Cestar of Bloomfield Hills, Mich., was married yesterday to Caleb Adam Epstein, a son of Ruth Epstein and Mike Epstein, both of Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Richard Ringenwald performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Manchester Village, Vt.


FAULT LINES: The Big One: Washington's Political Earthquake; Seismic Shift In the Parties Reflects View On Business
AS Newt Gingrich's army of anti-regulatory troops tore through the Capitol last week, terminating bureaucracy and welfare benefits with extreme prejudice, and even threatening to default on United States bonds if that's what it takes to force the Clinton Administration to cut the budget their way, there was a temptation to stick familiar labels on the combatants.
Certainly liberals are among those appalled at the depth of cuts in Medicare, and conservatives are happily at work opening up Federal lands to loggers and slicing the Commerce Department into a half-dozen pieces.
But using the old labels obscures a newer fault line running through Washington.
More than ever the struggles between Democrats and Republicans -- and some of those between Republicans and Republicans -- have far more to do with the divergent interests of big and small business.


Sara M. Shea, Michael Christian
Sara Markey Shea, a daughter of Barbara S. Shea of Rowayton, Conn., and Thomas G. Shea of Greenwich, Conn., is to be married today to Michael Rusk Christian, a son of Susan Christian and John R. Christian, both of Phoenix.
The Rev.
Avery C. Manchester is to perform the Methodist ceremony at the First Church of Round Hill in Greenwich.
The couple graduated from Northwestern University.
The bride, 29, will keep her name.
She is the senior project manager for the Hollywood Community Housing Corporation, a nonprofit developer in Hollywood, Calif.
She received a master's degree in urban planning from the University of California at Los Angeles.
Her mother is a lawyer in Rowayton.
Her father is a director in the equity department of Wasserstein Perella Securities, the New York investment bank.


Looks as if This Gas Station Is Running on Empty
For 10 years, the Gas Station, with its towering sculpture built from discards ranging from a 1970 Plymouth Valiant to department store mannequins to television sets, has been a symbol of the Lower East Side's Bohemian ways and artistic resolve.
The alternative studio, gallery and performance space at Second Street and Avenue B had been an abandoned gas station and then a shooting gallery for heroin users before five local artists routed the junkies, swept away a carpet of used hypodermic needles and erected the sculpture and a one-of-a-kind fence made of scrap metal.


James F. Baldwin 3d, Katheryn Reed
Katheryn Martha Reed, the daughter of Katheryn Joiner Reed of Athens, Ga., and the late Timothy Reed, was married yesterday on Martha's Vineyard to James French Baldwin 3d, the son of Frederika Baldwin of Westport, Conn., and Mr.
Baldwin Jr. of Withington, England, and Annapolis, Md.
The Rev.
Walter Witte, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Baldwin family house in East Chop.
Mrs.
Baldwin, 24, is an administrative coordinator at Furman Selz, an investment bank, in San Francisco.
She is a student at Golden Gate University.
Her mother is the administrative director of Birchmore Inc., an interior and exterior design company in Athens.


Kathleen Howley, Peter W. Maloney
Kathleen Margaret Howley, a daughter of Patricia and James J. Howley of Port Jefferson Station, L.I., was married yesterday to Peter Widmann Maloney, a son of Ann W. McEnerney of Lawrenceville, N.J., and John A. Maloney of Wyndmoor, Pa.
The Rev.
Philip Reehil performed the ceremony at St.
James Roman Catholic Church in Setauket, L.I.
Mrs.
Maloney is an information-services sales representative in the New York office of the Bloomberg financial information service.
She graduated from Fordham University.
Her father teaches math at Centereach (L.I.) High School.
Her mother works in Farmingdale as the director of the Long Island Forum for Technology, which provides assistance to various companies.
The bride's grandfather Michael J. Murphy of Smithtown, L.I., is a former police commissioner of New York City.


Flatiron District: The New Elegance
AJA **  (212) 473-8388; 937 Broadway, at 22d Street; $$$; all major credit cards
An eclectic setting combining Victorian, Shaker and Art Moderne elements with open ducts, chandeliers and Art Deco fixtures is the backdrop for some of the most compelling Asian-American cooking in the Flatiron District.
For starters, there is a spicy tuna tartare in a small tower of crisp rice cakes and flavored with sesame oil, cilantro and lime juice; lobster rolls come with shiso oil and chili-garlic dipping sauce, and curried steamed mussels with jasmine-infused rice.
Main courses include grilled salmon in a rich crab broth with asparagus, black mushrooms and buckwheat noodles; grilled leg of lamb marinated with Indian spices, with coriander chutney, and roasted honey-glazed chicken with butternut squash dumplings and oyster mushrooms. (Review: 1/13/95)  ALVA *  (212) 228-4399; 36 East 22d Street; $$; all major credit cards
The young Alva is a friendly neighborhood spot intended for late-night owls, a dark space with lightbulbs popping out of the obscurity and a cozy bar with a chalkboard menu featuring a mix of bistro dishes.
Starters include roast beets and warm goat cheese; a salad of rock shrimp, calamari and artichokes; shrimp cocktail; corn and seafood fritters, and oysters on the half shell.
Main courses include grilled salmon with a riesling-mustard sauce; grilled filet of lamb nicoise with shoestring potatoes; garlic-roasted chicken with mashed potatoes, and spinach and artichoke ravioli in a sage broth. (Review: 6/30/95)  BOLO **  (212) 228-2200; 23 East 22d Street; $$$; all major credit cards
A gutsy interpretation of the cuisine of Spain is matched by the upbeat Spanish-accented setting, from bold graphic collages on the walls to Gaudi-style tiles around the oven.
Starters are tiny clams steamed in a broth with green onions; fried squid with anchovy vinaigrette and parsley pesto; shrimp and potato croquettes with a sauce of roasted yellow pepper and black pepper; baked eggplant and manchengo (a mild cheese) with a balsamic vinegar glaze, and roasted fricassee of wild mushrooms with goat cheese and seasoned with chili oil.
Main courses are squid ink risotto with grilled prawns and crab salad; striped bass, roasted whole, with a red-pepper-paprika sauce and a tarragon-scented wheat salad, and roast cod in an almond crust with an orange vinaigrette and fried potato pancakes. (Review: 1/7/94)  CAMPAGNA **  (212) 460-0900; 24 East 21st Street; $$$; all major credit cards
Its dishes may not be authentic, but the cooking is assertive, and that, combined with a rustic ambiance explains the popularity of this congenial restaurant.
The menu includes starters of seafood fritto misto with mushrooms; homemade sausage with broccoli rabe; crostini with sauteed chicken liver in sage sauce; beef carpaccio over arugula with mushrooms, shaved Parmesan and lemon, and a salad of grilled squid and octopus with red onion, scallions and hot pepper dressed in a vinegar glaze.
Pastas and entrees include spaghetti with sweet baby clams; rigatoni with peas and sausage in a light tomato sauce; grilled rib-eye steak with mashed potatoes and spinach; spicy paillard of chicken with rosemary, garlic and red pepper, and rabbit stew with white wine, olives, onions and rosemary, served with polenta. (Review: 8/26/94)  MESA GRILL **  (212) 807-7400; 102 Fifth Avenue, near 15th Street; $$$; all major credit cards
Southwestern cooking is a steady lure at this loftlike space, painted green and yellow and outfitted with red-vinyl banquettes with a cowboy-and-cactus motif and blowups of black-and-white photos.
Starters include tomato-and-tortilla soup topped with Cheddar cheese, avocado and cilantro; grilled lamb skewers with tortillas and a spicy yogurt sauce; barbecued duck in a blue corn pancake with a chili sauce, and a salad of grilled squid and Vidalia onion with a smoked-tomato-green-chili vinaigrette.
Entrees include barbecued salmon with chipotle butter and a salad of potato and roast corn; veal chop with a spiced maple glaze, with red onion marmalade; smoked tenderloin of pork with a serrano chili and dried apricot sauce, and tuna steak in a red pepper crust. (Review: 3/29/91; revisited: 3/3/95)  PATRIA **  (212) 777-6211; 250 Park Avenue South, at 20th Street; $$$; all major credit cards
An engaging cooking style was added to the city over a year ago, when Douglas Rodriguez, former owner of the Yuca in Coral Gables, Fla., opened Patria.
His "nuevo Latino" cuisine borrows from the Caribbean and South America.
Starters include cod empanada in a sweet corn crust with goat cheese and tomato; cold terrine of crab and potato with an escabeche of shrimp and calamari; sweet corn cake with foie gras, with stewed cod, and shredded beef with marinated mushrooms and shavings of Manchego cheese.
Entrees include escabeche of chicken on a bed of greens with goat cheese; grilled swordfish with horseradish cream, oyster croquettes and a banana-lentil salad, and roast loin of tuna in a coconut glaze served with malanga puree (a tarolike tuber) and chayote (a pear-shape squash). (Review: 4/8/94)  UNION SQUARE CAFE ***  (212) 243-4020; 21 East 16th Street; $$$; all major credit cards
For refined dining and top-notch service in a friendly ambiance, few in the neighborhood rival this Union Square institution.
The menu includes starters of fried calamari with spicy anchovy mayonnaise; spaghettini with sun-dried tuna roe in garlic and olive oil; zucchini and squash blossom risotto with fresh marjoram and Parmesan Reggiano, and portobello and spinach salad with fennel and Parmesan in balsamic vinaigrette.
This year-old restaurant on Irving Place is pretty and romantic, and the kitchen turns out an appealing roster of American fare.
One might begin with a ceviche of sea scallops with avocado, flavored with cilantro, or seared tuna garnished with cracked wheat, cucumber and tomatillo with mint.
Main courses include seared snapper with a ragout of turnips, carrots, white beans and roast garlic infused with basil; roast chicken breast with corn souffle, and grilled sliced loin of lamb with red lentils and tomato chutney. (Review: 11/25/94) Summaries of reviews use the star system; others are culled from articles (indicated by +), the $25 and Under column (++) and Diner's Journal (


THE SUIT RECHARGED
THE CLASSIC TAILORED SUIT HAS BEEN reshaped and recharged for fall, with broad shoulders, a tapered waist and a refreshing sense of masculine elegance.
This new, more streamlined suit recalls the mid-1930's, a golden age of men's style, when the Hollywood glamour of Cary Grant and Gary Cooper set the standard.
It was a time of imposing structures, be they shouldered suits or public works.
Hence, the Hoover Dam -- a machine age wonder completed in 1936 -- seemed the perfect backdrop.
In keeping with this more formal silhouette, suit styles, fabrics and accessories tend to be more elegant.
For instance, the traditional double-breasted suit that buttons in the middle looks fresh again, as does the sharp single-breasted peaked-lapel model -- or any suit with a vest.
Stripes, from beaded to chalk, dominate fabrics, while ties in classic polka dots, checks, stripes and sophisticated solids are set off by crisp white spread-collar shirts.


Temple May Follow Its Flock to the Suburbs
The Jewish High Holy Days of Rosh ha-Shanah and Yom Kippur, which begin this week, are always a time of reflection and atonement.
But at the storied Temple Emanuel of North Jersey, this year's holidays are likely to include prayers for the temple itself.
Next Sunday, members of Paterson's last major synagogue are to vote on whether to go forward with a proposal to move the congregation to Franklin Lakes.


After 0-3 Start, Lions' Fontes May Not Avoid the Firing Line
It seems as if Lions Coach Wayne Fontes has been on the hot seat in Detroit since he took the job in 1989.
With the Lions off to a 0-3 start, and playing San Francisco on Monday night, Fontes is back on the firing line.
Several teams, including the Giants, Jets, Eagles, Cardinals and Cowboys, have had two coaches since the Lions hired Fontes.


Two Rabbis, One Household and Two Kinds of Holy Days
With the High Holidays almost upon her, Rabbi Sheryl K. Nosan had one of those sudden housekeeping flashes.
"Is your robe clean?" she asked her husband, Rabbi Claudio N. Kupchik.


Inquiry Will See Whether Geese Caused Radar Plane to Crash
An Air Force board of inquiry yesterday began searching for the cause of a crash that left one of the world's most advanced surveillance planes in bits, scattered like confetti in an Alaskan forest.
Officials said they were considering the possibility that geese had been sucked into one of the plane's four engines.
All 24 crew members -- 22 Americans and 2 Canadians -- were killed when the $180 million, E-3B Advanced Warning and Control System, or Awacs, jet burst into a fireball on Friday as it plowed into a forest moments after takeoff at Elmendorf Air Force Base, just north of Anchorage.


The Marquee Is the Message
ON FILM, A MOVIE Marquee sometimes peeks out of the background, then quickly disappears.
But audiences should be paying attention.
When film characters go to the movies, or even pass a movie theater, the title on the marquee usually embodies a message.
It can be a subtle commentary, a foreshadowing or merely an act of whimsy.
During the first moments of "Devil in a Blue Dress," a period thriller opening on Friday that stars Denzel Washington, the director Carl Franklin pays homage to one of his idols with a marquee that announces "The Betrayal." The film was made by Oscar Micheaux, the pre-eminent black film maker of the 1920's and 30's.


Luc Faucheux and Victoria Shaw
Victoria Shaw, a James S. McDonnell Foundation postdoctoral fellow at Columbia University, was married last evening to Luc Faucheux, a researcher at DKB Financial Products, an investment banking concern in New York.
Brian Black, a Roman Catholic deacon, officiated at the Cranbrook Academy of Art Museum in Bloomfield Hills, Mich.
Rabbi Sherwin Wein took part in the ceremony.
The couple received Ph.D.'s from Princeton University, she in psychology and he in physics.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


BUSINESS NOTES
Bookstore Finally Finds First Manhattan Site
A yearlong search by Borders Books and Music has yielded a site for the Michigan-based company's first Manhattan store.
Last week, Borders signed a lease for 37,000 square feet over three levels at 5 World Trade Center.


all about EASE
IT ALL started in Silicon Valley.
Prompted by California informality and relaxed software-industry attitudes, men began dressing for comfort rather than status.
As the custom spread to other professions, with dress-down Fridays, the question arose: What is appropriate casual attire?
The rules are based on common sense.
Different professions have different standards.
A lawyer might wear a soft suit and a shirt with a knit tie and sweater vest, while someone at an ad agency could probably get away with a sport jacket, polo shirt and jeans.
Also, the higher up an executive is, the more formal his dress-down look should be.
And men who deal directly with clients -- sales people, for example -- should dress up more than those who stay behind the scenes.


Diane R. Ford, Sean D. Toole
Diane Renee Ford, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Larry J. Ford of Greenwich, Conn., and Minnetonka, Minn., was married last evening to Sean David Toole, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Toole of Saratoga Springs, N.Y.
The Rev.
Rolfe Lawson, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony in the Reid Hall Castle at Manhattanville College in Purchase, N.Y.
Mrs.
Toole, 28, is an information systems manager in the consumer products division of the Walt Disney Company in New York.
She graduated from Denison University.
Her father is the president of Information Advantage, a software company in Edina, Minn.


Sexism and Famous Spouses
To the Editor:  M. G. Lord's article  [ "Lee Krasner, Before and After the Ball Was Over," Aug. 27 ]  is another example of the sexism that surrounds great women artists married to famous men artists.
It is insulting to suggest that she was "an exploitative comer -- snaring first her genius husband, then her artistic recognition."


Co-ops: How to Refinance
THERE are few things more frustrating than being unable to refinance a high-interest mortgage at a time when interest rates are slipping into the mid-single digits.
Over the last 10 years or so, hundreds of co-op boards, seeking to refinance the underlying mortgages for their buildings, have found themselves faced with such a scenario.
And a fair number, it seems, burdened either by the aftershock of a sponsor default or saddled with high numbers of sponsor-held apartments, have found it difficult if not impossible to obtain reasonably priced long-term fixed-rate loans to refinance their underlying mortgages.


Linking Technology and Health Groups to Find Best Cure
A group that includes some of the nation's largest employers is pushing health maintenance organizations to feed massive databases of patient records into powerful computers to determine for the first time the most effective treatments for a broad range of major illnesses.
The employers contend that without such information it is impossible for them or consumers to determine whether the health groups are providing high-quality care and whether some are providing better care than others.


Case of Sheik And 9 Others Is Delivered To the Jury
After more than 200 witnesses and a mind-fogging flood of secretly recorded conversations, a jury yesterday began deliberating the fate of 10 men charged with a terror-bombing and assassination conspiracy in and around New York City.
Near the end of an eight-month trial in Federal District Court in Manhattan, the jury is to decide not only whether Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, a prominent Muslim cleric, and his nine co-defendants plotted both individual killings and mass murder, but also whether the purported crimes were part of a single four-year-long conspiracy fueled by fundamentalist fanaticism.


Buckley vs. Vidal
To the Editor:
In response to Gore Vidal's letter (Sept. 17), the record shows (1) that Mr.
Vidal's suit against me was dismissed by the Federal courts, mine against him sustained; (2) that I never attempted to abort publication of the issue of Esquire in which Mr.
Vidal wrote about me; and (3) that my "little" magazine has the largest circulation of any journal of opinion in America.


FOOTBALL'S FINEST FAILURE
There were no game-stopping ceremonies for Walker as there were last year for Jerry Rice of the San Francisco 49ers, when he set the new N.F.L. career touchdown mark.
There was no media circus of the kind that attended Cal Ripken Jr. when he surpassed Lou Gehrig's record for consecutive games played.
No one even remembered to take the ball out of the game and save it for him.


Israeli Accord With Arafat Seen at Hand
Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization capped months of tense and arduous negotiations early today with a final drive for an agreement detailing Israeli withdrawal from much of the West Bank during the next six months.
Foreign Minister Shimon Peres of Israel and Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. leader, said they expected to initial the document before the night was out.
They have spent the last week bargaining face-to-face through every night save for the Jewish Sabbath at the Egyptian Red Sea resort of Taba.


Pollyanna Doesn't Live Here Anymore
"AS you can see," said Ed Gallagher, wheeling to the front of a classroom at the Technical Career Institutes on 31st Street off Eighth Avenue.
"I messed up very badly. Ten years ago, I gave in to some bad emotions. All of us are in wheelchairs, just some of them are more visible than others."
The cinderblock basement room was filled mostly with women in their early 20's, and they stirred as Mr.
Gallagher's big, ruddy handsome, bearded face bobbed in front of them.


THE OLD WORLD'S NEWEST PLACES
Berlin  Near Alexanderplatz, a palace of leisure
Of the countless projects changing the face of eastern Berlin, none promises more fun than Hackesche Hofe.
At the foot of Oranienburger Strasse, near the Hackesche Markt subway stop, the Hackesche Hofe complex is made up of eight buildings that were built near Alexanderplatz 90 years ago.
At a cost of $30 million, they have been turned into an eclectic shopping-and-amusement mall that is also a center for artistic and musical experimentation.


For Kaufmann Fund, Is Down the Only Place to Go?
THOUGH mutual fund advertising has generally faded this year, one fund seems ubiquitous -- the Kaufmann Fund.
Kaufmann has good reason to plaster its performance all over train stations and newspapers.
It has gained nearly 37 percent so far in 1995, ahead of the average for all aggressive growth funds.
Even more impressive was its 9 percent return last year, when its peers lost 2 percent.
And if you go back to the fund's rebirth in 1986, Kaufmann has topped its group by nearly four percentage points a year on average.


Jean H. Weinberg, Jeffrey T. Rose
Jean Helen Weinberg, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Livingston Weinberg of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Jeffrey Thomas Rose, the son of Frederick W. Rose of Rumson, N.J., and the stepson of Judith A. Rose.
The Rev.
Foster C. Wilson, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the home of the bride's parents.
Cantor Dr.
Raymond Smolover participated.
Mrs.
Rose was until recently an associate product manager at Clairol Inc. in New York.
She graduated from Princeton University and received an M.B.A from Harvard University.
Her father is a senior chairman of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, the New York investment bank.


Driving, Buying, Reading and Remembering Route 66
On most mornings, the talk at the "Liar's Table" -- a daily confluence of old-timers in overalls at Pop Hicks's Restaurant on Route 66 -- centers on who can tell the biggest whopper and get away with it, and whether the Red Tornadoes are going to win the high school football game the next Friday night.
But this week at Pop Hicks's, an institution since 1936, where the coffee was as muddy as a creek bottom and laughter ricocheted off the walls, the talk was about the opening today of the splashy pink neon and tail-finned Oklahoma Route 66 Museum, the first museum officially dedicated to the legendary stretch of road.
Route 66 launched a mass migration of Dust Bowl families in the 1930's, a jazz classic in the 1940's, a popular television show in the 1960's and now a cult following.


Toy Building Blocks With a Grown-up Appeal
LIKE MOST COLLECTORS, Paul Neuman is acquisitive, curious and compulsive.
But what he has assembled over the last 10 years is far from usual: his collection of 250 sets of toy building blocks, produced between 1850 and 1960, is one of the largest of its kind.
Mr.
Neuman, a 41-year-old Manhattan caterer, has created a fantasy townscape on a wall in his apartment on the Upper East Side.
The melange of castles, pagodas, cathedrals, schoolhouses, mansions, factories, gazebos and bridges alongside well-known structures like the Capitol and the Empire State Building is a disarming array of architectural styles.
The mix of Gothic, neo-classical, Baroque, rococo and modern styles and the miniature scale of the assemblage give it a zany charm.


The Clash of American Dreams
WITH the wisdom that hindsight affords, Richard Hellesen has written a play about a Midwestern couple who try to stop their terrifyingly gung-ho son from going off to Vietnam.
It's July 20, 1969, and Ellen and Jack's younger son, Jeff, is obsessing over a history-making moon walk.
Meanwhile, their older son, Mark, has returned from boot camp and is all revved up for active duty.


White House Considers Toughening Its Anti-Emissions Program
Acknowledging that its program of largely voluntary antipollution measures is falling short of its goal, the Clinton Administration is considering tougher steps to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide and other gases that cause global warming.
When the Administration established the current program in 1993, it said the provisions would reduce emissions of greenhouse gases to 1990 levels by the year 2000.
That would have kept the pledge made by the United States and other industrial nations when they signed the Rio de Janeiro treaty on global warming in 1992.


Why Rip Ripken?
To the Sports Editor:
Robert Lipsyte's first column (I refer, of course, to the one in which he argued for Ripken not breaking Gehrig's record) was the worst idea I've read in 40-plus years as a baseball fan, and it was terribly mean-spirited to boot.
The Times's readership was quite properly outraged.
The only bare excuse was that sports columnists are supposed to be controversial.


POP BRIEF
Emmylou Harris: 'Wrecking Ball'  Asylum
Emmylou Harris's voice is an alloy of crystal and steel, and this mixture of delicacy and resilience lends her the aura of an idealized frontier woman.
As Ms.
Harris has matured, the yearning ingenue side of her singing has largely evaporated and been replaced by a broken-but-unbowed quality.
This is the side that the producer Daniel Lanois brings out in "Wrecking Ball," a beautiful, eerie album that could be described as alternative country.
Mr.
Lanois, who has worked with U2, Bob Dylan and Peter Gabriel, is a sound-effects wizard with the sensibility of a North American landscape painter whose canvases tend toward Abstract Expressionism.
His diffuse, echoey musical settings, layered but spare, quietly conjure up primal images.
In a typical setting, acoustic and electric guitars are blended with chiming bell-like textures and pumped up with hand-beaten drums that suggest Indian tribal ceremonies.


It's High Drama This Year at the Birdbath
THIS summer's long drought in the Northeast has underscored just how important water is to life.
And not just plant life, but also the creatures attracted by the flowers and seeds a gardener nourishes.
Birds, that is.
A particular delight in the garden has always been the birdbath where various visitors congregate for cleanliness, a song and a sip.


Checking the Pulse of the Tabloid Tradition
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN The New York Times and the tabloid world of The Daily News for me comes down to three words: "Stop the presses!"
In the late 1960's, I was a copy boy for The Times during a college vacation.
One evening, just moments after the first edition had gone to press, a wire-service bulletin announced the settlement of a nationwide airline strike.
The presiding news editor, Lewis Jordan, unflinchingly grabbed a telephone that was a direct line to the pressroom and with calm authority ordered, "Stop the presses for a replate of page 1."


Imperial Failings
THE AGE OF HIROHITO  In Search of Modern Japan.
By Daikichi Irokawa.
Translated by Mikiso Hane and John K. Urda. 163 pp.
New York: The Free Press.


Strokes of Genius, or Flailings in the Dark?
I DON'T PAINT FOR A LIVING; I paint to live.
That's how I live," Willem de Kooning often said to a visitor who periodically dropped in at his East Hampton studio during the 1970's and 80's. By the Easter he turned 83, in 1987, it was literally true.
On that Sunday morning, de Kooning's attention was focused only briefly on the business of his habitual courtly greeting or the startling purple coordinates in which his wife, Elaine de Kooning, had costumed herself.


Other Memories of Queens . . . And Readers' Thoughts on Psychotherapy, Marijuana, and More; Marijuana as a Medicine Is Still Just a Walk Away
To the Editor:
Your tale of the New York Buyers Club ('Marijuana Cure: Rx for Arrest," Sept. 10), which supplies AIDS victims and others seriously ill with marijuana at cost, recalled for me the terminal illness of my wife in 1978.


Colorful Ways to Enjoy Wild Mushrooms
LAST year, according to the Department of Agriculture, sales of specialty mushrooms nearly doubled.
Shiitake, portobello, cremini, enoki and oyster mushrooms, once hard to get, are now available in supermarkets, and varieties that were once found only by mushroom hunters can be ordered by mail.
Now chanterelles, which look like bright orange feathery trumpets, are at their peak.
An unusual recipe for these mushrooms, served with red peppers and salmon, is given in "A Cook's Book of Mushrooms" (Artisan) by Jack Czarnecki, proprietor of Joe's restaurant in Reading, Pa.


Managed Care Myopia
To the Editor:
Dr.
Lloyd Krieger tells us that our traditional health care system doesn't follow the laws of economics, causing waste and inefficiency ("How Managed Health Care Will Allow Market Forces to Solve the Problems," Viewpoint, Aug. 13).


State Inquiry Prompts Censure Of Jing Fong
An investigation by the State Attorney General's Office into the labor practices of Jing Fong Restaurant at 20 Elizabeth Street has found that the restaurant, Chinatown's largest, violated minimum wage and overtime laws, illegally appropriated workers' tips, kept phony payroll records and illegally discharged at least one worker.
Attorney General Dennis C. Vacco offered Jing Fong an opportunity to pay the workers back wages totaling more than $1.1 million dollars.


Mommy Direst
SIGHTS UNSEEN  By Kaye Gibbons. 209 pp. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons. $19.95.


Robert W. Meserve, 86, Legal Ethics Champion
Robert W. Meserve, a former president of the American Bar Association who championed stronger ethics rules for lawyers, died Thursday at New England Medical Center in Boston.
He was 86.
As president of the bar association from 1972 to 1973, during the height of Watergate, Mr.
Meserve was deeply troubled by the parade of Government lawyers into Federal prisons and by what he saw as a lack of public outrage against the manipulations of the legal system during Watergate.


Unhappily Ever After
WHEN THE WORLD WAS STEADY  By Claire Messud. 270 pp. New York: Granta Books.


Winning Owners Over to the Landmarking System
BUYERS have begun moving into nine formerly derelict houses in the Bronx that have been restored with city financing under the eye of the Landmarks Preservation Commission to something like their original glory.
The buyers are presumably pleased, and so are the supporters of the Longwood Historic District, in which these buildings on Hewitt Place and Beck, Kelly and Dawson Streets are now handsome architectural specimens.


Owners Hope History Can Save Cottages
FORMER Surgeon General C. Everett Koop wrote in his autobiography that he remembered spending childhood summers with his family in Stony Brook.
They lived in one of a string of cottages that dot Trustees Road on a one-mile-long peninsula called West Meadow Beach at the mouth of Stony Brook Harbor.
Albert Einstein supposedly spent a summer or two in one of the cottages, although there is no documentation, said Richard Confoy, president of the West Meadow Beach Cottage Owners Association.


Notes on Affirmative Action
One week into the rolling soldier's 1995 tour, it is possible to make a hopeful if tentative judgment about its impact on the national mood.
Colin Powell, for the moment at least, is having a calming effect on the national discussion of "hot button" issues.
We admit to pleasant surprise that General Powell's qualified endorsements of affirmative action, gun control and abortion rights for women and his sensible opposition to mandatory school prayer prompted little opposition, even from the fundamentalist fund-raisers and professional zealots who make their livings on those issues.
At any rate, Mr.
Powell is to be thanked for the vapor trail of sanity that seems to be following him, especially on the issue of affirmative action.
President Clinton, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson and a few others have stood bravely against those who want to use anecdotes of white disadvantage to justify a Federal chokehold on minority opportunities in politics, education and jobs.
But our sense is that Mr.
Powell's personal example and his qualified defense of affirmative action have done more than Mr.
Clinton's commendable speech to refresh national thinking.
The country needed Mr.
Powell's reminder that the creation of special opportunity for the victims of historic discrimination is both economically sound and morally worthy.


Silence Is No Longer Golden for Former Presidents of Mexico
After Miguel de la Madrid, one of Mexico's four living ex-Presidents, made a rare public appearance on Friday, journalists mobbed him with questions about whether a power struggle had broken out in the country's governing party.
But he waved them off.
"I don't comment on current politics," said Mr. de la Madrid, who was President from 1982 to 1988.
"That's just a norm that I follow."


Bookless Abroad
To the Editor:
Gloria Hunter's "And Not a Word to Read" (Aug. 13) brought back memories of my own print deprivation on a trip to the former Soviet Union.
Because it was my first trip in three years without a child, I seriously underestimated my available reading time and took far too few books.
Halfway through the tour I had read not only all my material but also every piece of paper I could scrounge from anyone who looked even slightly literate.


Let There Be Music
The New York Philharmonic's opening night at Lincoln Center raised $1.4 million, Sept. 20.


ON THE TOWNS
An opinionated guide to cultural and recreational goings-on around the state this week.
To submit items for consideration, write to On the Towns, Sunday New Jersey Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036, or send a fax to (212) 556-7219.
MUSIC


Report Shows Political Skills Of Contender
If Leon M. Goldstein, the Mayor's leading choice to be the next New York City Schools Chancellor, is best known for his political savvy, it has served him well in the often-fractious City University system.
As the 25-year president of Kingsborough Community College in Brooklyn, he has paved a path of access into the corridors of City Hall and Albany -- and has been criticized for offering patronage jobs to some of those he met.
But inside the system, he has also demonstrated skills as a mediator and negotiator that were perhaps on no greater display than two years ago, when he pushed through a controversial report that informally came to bear his name.


Sandra T. Bell, David Nathanson
Sandra Thompson Bell, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter R. Bell of Strafford, Pa., was married last evening to David Nathanson, the son of Joan S. Nathanson of Rosemont, Pa., and Maxwell Nathanson of Philadelphia.
Rabbi Judie Greenberg officiated in the garden of the Philadelphia Country Club in Gladwyne, Pa.
The Rev.
Rudolph Moore, an Episcopal minister, took part.


Brimming With Black
Passers-by have been heard to remark time and again, "Who died?" -- everyone in New York seems to be wearing all black.
To some it signals the end of the age of eye-catching fashion, replaced by a rigid simplicity that relies on a less-exaggerated feminine cut.
Slim black trousers and knee-length skirts offer an austere imagery that reflects the simplified style of a new generation of women who refuse to let their lives be ruled by fashion that attracts unwanted attention.
The style of self-discipline was set in motion by the designers Jil Sander, Prada and Calvin Klein.


Farm Stay
To the Editor:
"Unwinding on a Normandy Farm" by Susan Herrmann Loomis (June 18) had a familiar ring to it.
While farm vacations abroad may appeal to the world traveler, Pennsylvania farm vacations offer a similar bucolic atmosphere without the need to renew your passport, exchange your dollars or take a Berlitz course in French.


Free Seats Are Offered for Rosh ha-Shanah
CALL it a resurgence of Jewish feeling.
Call it an urge to try a different synagogue, a growing hunger for spirituality or simply delight in a free giveaway.
Whatever the impetus, Temple Emanu-El here is expecting to greet more than 1,250 people at its Rosh ha-Shanah services tonight, nearly three times the usual number of congregants in recent years.


Pollyanna Doesn't Live Here Anymore
"AS you can see," said Ed Gallagher, wheeling to the front of a classroom at the Technical Career Institutes on 31st Street off Eighth Avenue.
"I messed up very badly. Ten years ago, I gave in to some bad emotions. All of us are in wheelchairs, just some of them are more visible than others."
The cinderblock basement room was filled mostly with women in their early 20's, and they stirred as Mr.
Gallagher's big, ruddy handsome, bearded face bobbed in front of them.


THE OLD WORLD'S NEWEST PLACES
Brussels  In a city of diplomats, new restaurants abound
One of the great charms of Brussels is that so much is so old.
Strolling across the Grand' Place on a Sunday morning in the shadow of the Gothic buildings as vendors sell canaries and other songbirds, or wandering through the tiny pedestrian alleyways late at night past the myriad of restaurants displaying their fresh fish offerings on beds of shaved ice.


It's High Drama This Year at the Birdbath
THIS summer's long drought in the Northeast has underscored just how important water is to life.
And not just plant life, but also the creatures attracted by the flowers and seeds a gardener nourishes.
Birds, that is.
A particular delight in the garden has always been the birdbath where various visitors congregate for cleanliness, a song and a sip.


The Perfect Compliment
To the Editor:
Ruth White, an actress who made her mark in Samuel Beckett plays in the 60's and 70's, would have enjoyed Alan Bennett's "Dare a Visitor Backstage Reveal the Awful Truth?"  [ Sept. 3 ]  She had a collection of visitors' remarks and comments: "I heard every word," "You didn't make any mistakes, not even one," "Well, you've done it again!"


Ellen M. French, Philip J. Bafundo
Ellen Maria French, a daughter of Julianne and William E. French of Berkeley Heights, N.J., was married yesterday to Philip Joseph Bafundo, a son of Ann and Joseph J. Bafundo of Franklin, Tenn.
The Rev.
John Perricone performed the ceremony at St.
Jean Baptiste Roman Catholic Church in New York.


Deadline Nears On Fund Waiver For Westway
Westway, the $2 billion superhighway proposed in 1974, provoked a classic New York power struggle and was finally killed a decade ago.
But one bitter Westway dispute is still unresolved after all these years, and the deadline for a decision is Saturday.
Public officials and community groups are fighting over whether the state and city should repay the Federal Government the $80 million it advanced in 1981 to buy Westway's right-of-way: 264 acres in the Hudson River and 66 acres along its bank.
The state has until Saturday to seek a Federal waiver that would cancel the debt.


Sports of The Times; 'I Couldn't Breathe Or Swallow'
ALL the other Ryder Cup singles matches had ended.
Only Hale Irwin and Bernhard Langer were out there, out there on the 18th tee as the slanting sun gilded Kiawah Island's sand dunes in 1991, out there together but each so alone.
Irwin had just missed an eight-foot par putt on the 17th green that, had he made it to stay 1 up, would have assured the United States team of recapturing the cup.
But if he were to lose this 438-yard 18th hole, Europe would keep the cup it had held since 1985.
Now, as he stood on the 18th tee, his caddie, Jim Strickland, tried to calm him.


Hope for Amazon Rain Forest: New Fruit
Scientists working to save the Amazon rain forest are beginning to market fruits remarkably high in vitamins and protein, along with scores of others that offer exotic flavors found almost nowhere else in the world.
While products made from the green and red cherries called acerola are now staples of health food stores for their vitamin C content -- three cherries, weighing a half ounce, contain more vitamin C than a pound of oranges -- acerola pales next to the camu camu, another small fruit of the guava family with double the vitamin C.


Symphony Players Tuning Up Again
THE orchestral season has begun again around the state.
The Stamford Symphony, which last night celebrated Roger Nierenberg's 15th anniversary as music director, repeats a program of Mendelssohn, Kodaly and Brahms at the Palace Theater today at 3.
A three-day American Music Festival opens the Waterbury Symphony's new season, although opera is the 8 P.M.
Friday attraction at the Thomaston Opera House: the world premiere of "The Padrone" by the early 20th-century composer George Chadwick.
The group's music director, Leif Bjaland, conducts, the orchestra joined by six solo singers, Connecticut Choral Artists and members of three other local ensembles -- the Waterbury Chorale, Naugatuck Valley Community College Chorus and Connecticut Choral Society.


Chamber Plan Finances Small Business Loans
IN one of the first programs of its kind in the country, the Westchester County Chamber of Commerce this month began a $4.2 million privately capitalized loan program intended to help small businesses with start-up and expansion costs.
Initially, the program is being run in conjunction with seven banks but is expected to expand, said Harold E. Vogt, the chamber's president.
He said he was receiving inquiries daily from other interested lending institutions.


They Just Want a Little Respect
CHRISTMAS has arrived early, very early, at the Creative Artists Agency, the most powerful talent agency in town.
Bonuses to agents are being dispensed now, the end of the fiscal year, ranging from bundles of $100,000 to, in a few cases, some worth more than $1 million.


3 One-Act Works at Belmont Playhouse Festival
LOP off the first of three in the Belmont Italian-American Playhouse's festival of one-act plays and what have you got?
One that entertains mildly and one that sustains, truly.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
'$130,000 Cup of Sugar'
IF you owned a $100,000 Ferrari would you lend it to Mario Andretti to race?
Owners of speedy cars and boats have probably fantasized about having their prized possessions compete under the skillful hands of one of the world's best racers.
But given the chance, would they lend them?
Larry Anderson of Sea Cliff recently faced such a question.
Each year the Knickerbocker Yacht Club in Port Washington is host to a sailboat race like no other.
The world's best sailors travel to the club to compete in a regatta where the boats are supplied to them.
But where to find the boats?
"Sometimes we get them from the boat builders," a skipper, Ed Baird of St.
Petersburg, Fla., said.
And sometimes owners of boats that are already in the water are asked to donate.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
In David Ramus's first novel, THIEF OF LIGHT (HarperCollins, $23), we are plunged into the world of art forgery.
An artist with a particular kind of genius is sadistically murdered by a pair of thugs just as he has finished a "Monet." His dealer promised the painting to a Japanese Mafioso.
Dire things happen to everybody.
Mr.
Ramus, a former art dealer, knows what he is writing about.
He presents a none too flattering picture of the dirty things that go on behind the scenes in the New York art world, and he illustrates the shallowness of many of the dealers and so-called experts.
More important, Mr.
Ramus loves great art.
He is able to get us into the mind of, say, Monet, because his description of the mental and physical processes in painting rings true for both the forger and the creator.


Political Memo; G.O.P. Candidates Feel The Gen. Powell Blues
The Republicans who are running for President must wish that Gen.
Colin L. Powell would just go away.
Only a week into his Presidential tease tour, General Powell has already found opportunities to lambaste Senator Phil Gramm's record on welfare and Senator Bob Dole and Gov.
Pete Wilson for their stands on affirmative action.
He has stolen the attention from the even lesser-known contenders who have been slogging along with the single digits in the polls for months and are desperate to make a name for themselves and draw financial support.
And General Powell has been bad news for another noncandidate: he helped knock Speaker Newt Gingrich off the top of the best-seller list.


Starting From Scratch
A few pages into Ginny Ruffner's 1989 sketchbook is a small, hasty drawing of a woman's head in profile.
Inside the head stands a Doric column that has been cut so a wafer of stone floats just above where the middle of the brain should be.
The artist's scribbled note beside the drawing reads, "3 D wire head w/broken column."
The rest of the sketchbook, which Ruffner recently donated to the Metropolitan Museum of Art, is a yeasty jumble of thoughts, titles and diagrams for the elaborate, intellectually playful glass sculptures for which she is best known.
There are also notes on where to eat in Hong Kong, sketches for projected paintings, a recipe for gold leaf and a magazine clipping that cites the George Bernard Shaw epigram "Next to torture, art persuades most." Like Ruffner's sculpture, the book is a witty amalgam of the domestic and the abstract.
Stuck between the pages is a family photograph: amid a large, handsome clan, smiling diligently at the Polaroid, sits the artist.
Her usually flamboyant clothes are toned down for the visit home, her hair is a mass of dirty-blond curls, her face is soft, almost girlish.


Still Hanging in the 'Hood; Rappers Who Stay Say Their Strength Is From the Streets
The young men blend together on the Staten Island street corner, a blur of baggy T-shirts and blue jeans.
They smoke and laugh like any neighborhood crew.
But under one baseball cap, you'll find a rap star.
"I could leave, move out of the neighborhood, but the neighborhood is still in me," said Jason Hunter, the rapper, better known as Inspektah Deck of the platinum-selling rap group Wu-Tang Clan.
"I stay in my neighborhood because the people there, they keep me in touch with where I'm from. Park Hill is like my bloodstream."


IN SEARCH OF...Water: Needing It, Finding It, Doing Without; Tuning In Underground
There really is water around, according to Leroy Bull; it's just a matter of finding it.
And that's where he comes in.
Mr.
Bull, a Federal meat inspector who lives in Doylestown, Pa., is a dowser.
That means he can take a V-shaped plastic divining rod, hold it above the ground and, by tuning into the energy of Mother Earth, locate underground water sources.


A Family On the Run
Elizabeth Morales was in her living room when she heard the beating.
She ran to the window and saw Paqualito, a leader of the Wild Cowboys, pistol-whipping her son Tito four floors below.
She started to scream. She thought for sure Tito was going to die.


Another Exhumation in Cologne
IT MUST BE SOMETHING IN the beer in Cologne.
Almost any recording of early music that emanates from that German city is worth hearing, and more than a few fairly light up the ears with their verve and vivid imagination.
Here is another of those: a recording of four symphonies of Antonio Rosetti by Concerto Koln (Teldec 4509-98420-2; CD) that performs for this obscure composer a service comparable to that rendered on behalf of Johann David Heinichen two years ago by Musica Antiqua Koln in an Archiv set.
Not incidentally, three members of Concerto Koln -- Werner Ehrhardt, the concertmaster; Claudia Steeb, a violist, and Renee Allen, a horn player -- also performed on the Heinichen disks.


Lessons of a Garage Sale: Thrift, Recycling, Sharing
To the Editor:
Yes, sometimes there are abuses of garage sales ("The Garage Sale: Loud and Tacky, or Suburban Imperative?," Sept. 3).
But they have so many other advantages that municipalities should be trying to encourage them, not shut them down.
In my old neighborhood in Scotch Plains, we organized a yearly garage sale.
Rather than fill up dwindling landfill space, we recycled our old items.
The bikes our children outgrew were enjoyed by a new generation.
Tables we didn't have time to salvage were bought and refinished by someone with time and talent.


Habitats/169 Manhattan Avenue; 2 Bedrooms, $750 a Month
BEHIND the bubble-gum-pink door in the lobby, a Whitney Houston love ballad blares, and a young woman's raspy voice sings along, deliciously out of tune.
Down the hall is the elevator, the mauve-colored trim of its door scarred with graffiti; inside the elevator, the vertical strips of shiny black formica have been chipped away, exposing the fiberboard beneath.


In Ohio, the Breakup of AT&amp;T Spells 1,300 Lost Jobs
Roxetta Stepp has had more cheerful meals than her lunch Thursday at Flanagan's Pub with co-workers from one of the offices of AT&amp;T Global Information Systems, which is across the street from the pub.
AT&amp;T said Wednesday that it would sharply scale back the computer subsidiary, which is based here.
As part of that overhaul, many workers had already been laid off and Mrs.
Stepp knew that in a few hours her supervisor would dismiss her, too.


Terminal City
HUDDLE FEVER  Living in the Immigrant City.
By Jeanne Schinto. 302 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf.


Yes, This Is the City That Never Sleeps. Blame Road Repair.
York Avenue has returned to what seems to have been its natural state for the last two years: torn up for construction.
But this time there is a new annoyance.
The work is being done at night.
"Those jackhammers keep me up all night," said Steve Feldman, a member of Community Board 8 who lives on York.
"I can't stand it. It doesn't matter if you keep your windows opened or closed. Even when you fall asleep briefly, you hear them even louder at five in the morning."


A Note on Magnus Hirschfeld
To the Editor:  In his piece on Franz Schreker  [ "Dastardly Doings In Elysium, Lavishly Scored," Sept. 3 ] , Jamie James refers to Magnus Hirschfeld as "a famous psychiatrist of the day" in the context of noting that a Nazi poster had slanderously called Schreker "the Magnus Hirschfeld of opera composers."


A Question For: The Santa Barbara Police
Q: What's it for?
A: The whole reason is to open up communication with the State Street cruisers, the low riders and street "rods" who cruise up and down the street on the weekends.


Great College Teachers Build Lasting Bonds
To the Editor:
Re "Power to the Pedagogues" (Op-Ed, Sept. 17): Christopher Winship and Mark Ratner are correct that popular college rankings, such as those of U.S.
News &amp; World Report, should put greater effort into rating an institution's teachers.


Peggy LeClerc, Edward Bonanno
Peggy Ann LeClerc, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence LeClerc of Norwalk, Conn., was married there yesterday to Edward Robert Bonanno, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Peter Bonanno of Tenafly, N.J.
The Rev.
Eugene J. O'Brien officiated at St.
Matthew's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
LeClerc Bonanno graduated from the College of New Rochelle.
She is a sales representative in the financial markets division of the Bloomberg financial information service in New York.


Cricket Telesco, Richard Burns
Cricket Telesco, a daughter of Marilyn Vecchiotti of Greenwich, Conn., and Dominick Telesco of Ridgefield, Conn., was married yesterday to Richard Burns, a son of Mary Burns of Naples, Fla., and the late John V. Burns.
The Rev.
George Mazzocchia, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Catherine of Siena Church in Greenwich.
Mrs.
Burns is the style and fashion director of Avenue magazine in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Georgetown University.
Her father is the president of Boxwood Associates Inc., a management consulting company in Boca Raton, Fla.
She is a stepdaughter of Susan Telesco and Vincent Vecchiotti.


Corrections
A picture caption on Sept. 10 with an article about sightseeing by day in Chicago located the Clarence Buckingham Fountain incorrectly.
It is in Grant Park, not at Navy Pier.


To Fight a Crash, Funds Buttress Their Cash
AS the bull market in stocks charges ahead, mutual fund managers are putting as much money to work there as possible, keeping less cash on hand than at anytime in nearly two decades.
Month after month, the big fund companies have insisted that this is no cause for concern.
Even if the market tumbles headlong, they say, they have enough cash in reserve to handle redemptions from investors who might suddenly want to sell.
Now, though, some cracks are appearing in the industry's facade.
T.
Rowe Price Associates, the fund company in Baltimore, recently sought clearance from the Securities and Exchange Commission to secure emergency sources of cash should they be needed "to meet unanticipated or excessive redemption requests by shareholders."


At the Casinos
What's happening on stage at all the Atlantic City casinos this week.
Tickets are available through Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Bally's Park Place Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 225-5977.


Broom Brigade


Physicals Required For Schools Finalists
The Board of Education has asked three finalists in the Schools Chancellor search to undergo physical examinations and provide copies of medical records, in part because of questions raised about the health of the Mayor's favorite candidate.
A board official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the inquiry was prompted by news reports of the heart condition of Leon M. Goldstein, described as the Mayor's choice, but was extended to include two other finalists, Robert R. Spillane and Daniel A. Domenech.


Clinton Plans To Lift Public Out of 'Funk'
President Clinton, who won office talking intensely about policy details, now says that in his first two years he failed to talk enough about "the big picture" of these tempestuous times.
As he gears up for his re-election campaign, he says that anxious Americans may feel "like they're lost in the fun house" and that it is his job to "get people out of their funk about it."
Returning from a weeklong fund-raising and political trip around the nation late Friday, Mr.
Clinton made it clear in a discursive 45-minute conversation with reporters aboard Air Force One that he was long since out of his own funk about last fall's Republican electoral victory.
Now, he said, it is his responsibility to help lead people through the "tumult and upheaval" of the information-saturated 1990's.


C. H. Mortenson And Marc Murphy
Catherine Helen Mortenson, a senior public relations specialist at Universal Pictures in New York, is to be marred today to Marc Gregory Murphy, the saucier at Le Cirque restaurant.
The Rev.
Robert S. Mortenson Jr., a Presbyterian minister and a brother of the bride, is to perform the ceremony at the former Otto Kahn mansion in New York.


The World; India Repels an Invasion of Money
TO Indians reading about her in the country's newspapers and magazines, Rebecca P. Mark has hardly been presented as a friend of India.
Ms.
Mark has been widely cast here as a robber baron for her role in winning the Enron Development Corporation, a subsidiary of the Houston-based energy company, a contract to build India's largest-ever power plant.
After Enron had spent nearly $300 million, the project was canceled last month by nationalist politicians in Maharashtra state who said India didn't need the plant.
So when Ms.
Mark left her New Delhi hotel on a recent afternoon to visit the India Gate, a soldiers' memorial that is one of the capital's principal landmarks, it was a surprise to find her surrounded by well-wishers.
One man, Rakesh Aggarwal, a New Delhi lawyer sightseeing with his family, put it simply: "Personally, I think India needs power." American Assumptions
There is a lesson in this for American companies, and for all outsiders approaching India as it reaches for a new relationship with the world.
Many companies responding to India's market-based economic reforms have behaved as if they had read a standard primer on India -- a country that is desperately poor, 60 percent illiterate, but unusual among Asian nations in being a thriving democracy, having English as its common language and a proven legal system.
From this, they have assumed a congenial environment for investment.


With Lines Old or New, Actors at Work
IN the new theater season now underway, audiences can look for the traditional ("Romeo and Juliet" set in 14th-century Verona) and for the revisionist ("Uncle Tom's Cabin" retold by Topsy and company to their creator, Harriet Beecher Stowe).
Both shows are on tap at Hartford Stage where Reggie Montgomery -- who directed a smashing better-than-the-original "Spunk" last season -- will be in charge of the playwright Robert Alexander's new take on Uncle Tom.


Austenmania


THE OLD WORLD'S NEWEST PLACES
Prague  Romantic evenings near the Charles Bridge
Suddenly, Prague has become the best place to eat in Central Europe, as enterprising entrepreneurs have tried to capture the attention of tourists.
A spectacular addition to the line-up of restaurants is U Patrona, which opened in July at the Mala Strana end of the Charles Bridge.
Set on two floors, with modern decor and murals reminiscent of George Grosz, the restaurant has a sole table for two on a balcony overlooking the Charles Bridge that is the place to be for a romantic evening.
The menu is European -- trout rillette, rabbit in marjoram, quail's egg and crayfish.
Three courses about $40 for two with wine.. 4 Drazickeho nam; telephones: 531497 and 531512.


From 'Schindler's List,' a Jewish Mission
As a child, Steven Spielberg charged neighborhood children 25 cents to attend screenings of "Davy Crockett, King of the Wild Frontier," "War of the Worlds" and other movies he rented.
Then he donated the proceeds to a local charity.
Now he makes the movies, but he remains a philanthropist.
His newest philanthropic venture is the Righteous Persons Foundation, established with his earnings from the movie "Schindler's List." In Hebrew, the words for "righteous persons" and for "charity" are derived from the same root, tzedek, which means justice.


Local Show, Wider Themes
THE gallery on the ground floor of Norwalk Community-Technical College is a triangular pocket of peace and quiet situated a few steps below the level of the main corridor.
Its current attraction is "Five From Connecticut," a show organized by Judy Birke, the gallery's new director, to be on view through Nov. 2.
Ms.
Birke brings to the job experience gained not only as former director of the Munson Gallery in New Haven, but also as a dealer and consultant in her own right.
Given the chauvinism pervading the scene, a display titled "Five Not From Connecticut," might have made more of a splash, but Ms.
Birke's willingness to follow convention may have beneficial side effects.
Apart from anything else, it may prompt viewers to wonder what else is new, while at the same time encouraging them to face the fact that Connecticut artists are merely those who happen to live and work in the state.


Michael Lengel Jr., Beth Nan Lauren
Beth Nan Lauren, the director of advertising design at Polo Ralph Lauren in New York, was married last evening to Michael Lengel Jr., an actor.
Rabbi Charles Davidson performed the ceremony at the University Club in New York.
Ralph Lauren, who is an uncle of the bride, designed her dress.


Watching Your Back While Looking Ahead
The Latin root of the word "provide" is instructive for politicians.
It doesn't mean "go get it." It is from "videre," to see: look ahead, in other words, anticipate the future.
Providing is what families do when they plan ahead, and providing for the future of the state and its people is what politicians do when they put together a budget in the present that will play out over the coming 12 months.
A lot of Democrats and Republicans were trying to do a little providing last spring when they urged Governor Whitman to delay completing her tax-cut package until after the budget balancers in Congress revealed how much they were going to cut from Federal aid spending.
The Governor persuaded her fellow Republicans in the Legislature, the only people she needed to convince, that a $400 million surplus in the budget, and the tendency of things in Washington to take plenty of time to work out, would give the state room to wiggle if the crunch ever came.


Mountain Rescuers Stay Alert
An 11-year-old Canadian girl, hiking in Tuckerman Ravine in New Hampshire with her parents this summer, was struck by a falling rock about two feet in diameter and knocked off the trail.
She was seriously hurt.
She was in a difficult location, but well-rehearsed rescue procedures were started and in time the girl, Myriam Bruneau-Julien, found herself in a helicopter en route to a hospital.
A life had been saved.


Other Memories of Queens . . . And Readers' Thoughts on Psychotherapy, Marijuana, and More; Sorting Out Differences Among Psychotherapists
To the Editor:
Your article omitted the two most important issues that mislead and befuddle consumers.


Noah? Lohengrin? No, It's Art
Doansburgh Road, about 50 miles north of New York City, is an unremarkable mix of colonial-style homes, trim lawns, outdoor patios and gardens.
No wonder neighbors do not know what to make of the nice young man building a 30-foot-tall swan boat on the front lawn of the house near the corner.


Lisa Raudelunas, Peter P. Hiscano
Lisa Ann Raudelunas, the daughter of Dell and Francis Raudelunas of Plainfield, N.J., was married yesterday to Peter Peers Hiscano, a son of Margaret and Raphael Hiscano of Short Hills, N.J.
The Rev.
Joseph Barbone, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony in the Chapel of the Immaculate Conception at Mount St.
Mary Academy in Watchung, N.J.
Mrs.
Hiscano, 33, is a program manager at the World Environment Center, an organization in New York that provides urban and industrial health and safety assistance to developing countries.
She graduated from Northeastern University.
Her father, based in Plainfield, sells chemicals to the textile industry.
Her mother is the chief executive of the United Way of Union, Hunterdon and Sussex Counties in New Jersey.


From a Collector of Turkeys, A Tour of a Supermarket Zoo
MANY people spend their lives running from failure.
Robert M. McMath has made a career out of collecting the stuff.
He is the proprietor of a sprawling trove of duds, flops and turkeys -- and occasional winners -- called the New Products Showcase and Learning Center.
And though its name has a carnival ring to it, the place has become a serious stop for product managers trying to avoid the most humiliating stumbles of their predecessors and competitors.


Jersey City Exporter Honored
A Jersey City company that is America's largest exporter of magazines and books has received the nation's highest award for exporters.
The company, Worldwide Media Service Inc., received the award this month at the United Nations.
The award, accepted by the company's president, Lee Selverne, was established by the White House in 1961 to recognize exporters for their competitive achievements in world markets and their contribution to the American economy.


Congress's Science Agency Prepares to Close Its Doors
After more than 20 years of advising lawmakers on the most complex scientific and technical issues, a small Congressional agency will soon cease to exist, but it is vigorously pursuing its mission to the last.
The agency, the Office of Technology Assessment, widely praised for offering impartial advice and analysis to the senators and representatives who must make decisions on technical issues in which they have little expertise, will close on Sept. 30.


Sunny but Cold


FINE ART: Not the N.E.A.'S Fault
During the early 70's, blotter paper soaked in liquid LSD became the preferred method of distributing (and ingesting) the drug.
Images printed on the paper served as the manufacturing chemist's signature.
To Philip Cushway, proprietor of the San Francisco gallery Artrock, these pieces of blotter paper are folk art.
He's displaying "blotter acid" images like those at right of Felix the Cat, dancing test tubes and, from a later era, Beavis and Butt-head.
The blotter art now on display is undipped.


Unity Under Fire Makes Theirs a Block Apart
Many Woodbine Street residents remember how quickly their neighborhood, Bushwick, fell apart.
The breweries and knitting mills left in the 1960's.
Unscrupulous real-estate agents used racist tactics to frighten white homeowners into cheap sales.
Then came fire: whether arson or not, Bushwick had 500 blazes a year in the 1970's.
The power blackout of July 13, 1977, was a profound blow.
Riots, looting, and arson swept through Bushwick as nowhere else.
When power and calm were restored, many shops remained closed and more blocks were burned out.


Learning to Use Computers Means Learning to Type
To the Editor:
Your front-page article "Backpack, Pencil Case, Modem" (Sept. 3) gave a good overview of the state of computer education in New Jersey.
What it did not mention was that students are not learning a vital aspect of using the computer.


Green's Fate Decided, Not Divulged
Joe McIlvaine, the Mets' general manager, confirmed yesterday that he has reached a decision on whether to retain Dallas Green as the club's manager next season, but insisted he won't make that decision public until sometime next week or the end of the season.
A report in The Record of Hackensack, N.J., yesterday quoted an unidentified source as saying that Green will return next year.


Sept. 17-23: Manifesto Distributed; Times and Washington Post Yield to Bomber's Demand
The self-described anarchist known as the Unabomber had promised to end his 17-year campaign of mail-bomb murders if The Washington Post or The New York Times published his 35,000-word manifesto by today.
The Post, with the assistance of The Times, did so last week at the request of Attorney General Janet Reno and the F.B.I.
The Unabomber, who has killed 3 and wounded 23 with 16 bombs since 1978, calls in the manifesto for revolution against society's industrial- technological underpinnings.


The S.E.C. Takes a Risk for Reform
The people who run the Nasdaq stock market are grudgingly taking steps to make the market better for individual investors.
The Securities and Exchange Commission is about to try to speed up the process.
This week the S.E.C. plans to propose rules that would force all stock markets to make it easier for investors to get better prices when they buy and sell.
That may force changes at the stock exchanges as well, but it is in the Nasdaq market where the problems have been the most acute, and it is there that resistance is most likely.
At issue is nothing less than the power of the market makers, the brokers that have long dominated the market.


Syracuse Triumph Is Keyed By Return
Coaches draw up the perfect punt return on blackboards, but they seldom see one under game conditions.
Syracuse had one today, a 94-yard return by the marvelous Marvin Harrison for the first of the Orangemen's three touchdowns.
The big play, coming late in the second quarter against a difficult Minnesota team, gave Syracuse the lead at 12-10 and sent the Orangemen on their way to a 27-17 victory, their second against one loss.


Spelling Trouble
The new headquarters stands tall and tranquil, testimony to the company's long past and bright future.
The austere lobby gleams.
The visitor treads softly, his eyes drawn to the majestic, vaulted ceiling.
And then, high on the wall, he spots the inscription, painstakingly etched in marble: "Dedacated to our Founder . . . "


Feeding Your Plants 'Wasted' Water
Keep doing your rain dance, because the plants need a lot more water, and so do the reservoirs, to make up for the dry summer.
Conserve water, even if your area is not under any restrictions.
Use a dishpan and mild soap to wash dishes and then take that "gray water" out to parched shrubs and trees.
Water from your shower or bath can also be carried in buckets to plants, as well as the water used to wash vegetables or to rinse bottles.
Think of all that water you waste every day: give it to your plants.
A reader kindly reminded me of a wonderful late-blooming shrub that is amazingly drought-tolerant: caryopteris.
It is a low shrub with gray-green foliage, and from August until frost, it is a cloud of powdery blue -- or midnight blue, if you plant Dark Knight -- in the garden.
I have one as a centerpiece in a little herb garden in Maryland, and it hasn't missed a beat in the drought.


Carrie H. Cohen, R. A. Lipsey Jr.
Carrie Heather Cohen, a daughter of Linda R. Cohen of Great Neck, L.I., and the late Dr.
Richard M. Cohen, was married yesterday to Richard Alan Lipsey Jr., the son of Jill Lipsey of Hartsdale, N.Y., and Mr.
Lipsey of Princeton, N.J.
Judge Denny Chin of the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York officiated at Wave Hill in Riverdale, the Bronx.
The couple graduated from Cornell University.


Sports of The Times; Make-Believe Grass Is a Genuine Letdown
ON the first day of fall, there was no more beautiful thing to do in New York yesterday than watch Columbia University play football, or at least its Ivyfied version of football, which is to say, actual students throwing passes to actual students, who are in turn tackled by actual students.
The Lions reached a long way for an acceptable opponent, all the way to California for St.
Mary's College.
The Lions gave the Galloping Gaels a game for a half, but then weight and speed took over, and Columbia slumped to a 34-14 defeat in front of 4,260 true believers.


BEST SELLERS: September 24, 1995
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
2
"L" IS FOR LAWLESS, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $24.) Kinsey Millhone on the trail of the cash and the culprits involved in a bank heist perpetrated decades ago.
2
2
3
COMING HOME, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (Dunne/St. Martin's, $25.95.) A British woman comes of age during World War II.
3
1
THE HORSE WHISPERER, by Nicholas Evans. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A troubled woman seeks solace for herself, her daughter and their horse from a wrangler in Montana.
4
3
6
FROM POTTER'S FIELD, by Patricia Cornwell. (Scribner, $24.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta tracks a serial killer in Central Park.
5
4
11
BEACH MUSIC, by Pat Conroy. (Talese/Doubleday, $27.50.) An American living in Rome returns to South Carolina and tries to cope with his past.
6
1
MORNING, NOON, AND NIGHT, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $24.) The mysterious drowning of a respected tycoon leads to the revelation of a tangle of scandals.
7
6
82
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
8
7
2
DEAD MAN'S WALK, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $26.) The adventures of two young Texas Rangers; a prequel to "Lonesome Dove."
9
5
9
MEMNOCH THE DEVIL, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The vampire Lestat is snatched from the world by a mysterious adversary who claims to be the Devil.
10
12
2
A PLACE CALLED FREEDOM, by Ken Follett. (Crown, $25.) Two Scots, fleeing the injustices of their native land, find romance and freedom in 18th-century America.
11
9
22
THE RAINMAKER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $25.95.) A young man barely out of law school tries to expose a corporation's multibillion-dollar scam.
12
8
9
LIGHTNING, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $24.95.) The happy marriage of a lawyer and her husband is suddenly changed after she gets a routine checkup.
13
10
4
STORMY WEATHER, by Carl Hiaasen. (Knopf, $24.) A hurricane sweeping across southern Florida leaves in its wake troubled tourists and con artists.
14
14
13
ROSE MADDER, by Stephen King. (Viking, $25.95.) Fleeing an abusive husband, a woman seeks happiness in a strange city by creating her own myth.
15
65
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
3
MY POINT ...
AND I DO HAVE ONE, by Ellen DeGeneres. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life and the pursuit of happiness by the television star and stand-up comedian.
2
2
14
A GOOD WALK SPOILED, by John Feinstein. (Little, Brown, $23.95.) A sportswriter reports on the P.G.A.
Tour in 1993 and 1994. (+)
3
4
81
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
4
6
7
MY OLD MAN AND THE SEA, by David Hays and Daniel Hays. (Algonquin, $19.95.) A sailing yarn about a father-and-son voyage from Connecticut around Cape Horn.
5
3
39
SISTERS.
Essays by Carol Saline.
Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of sisters of varied callings and backgrounds.
6
8
14
NEW PASSAGES, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $25.) How changing social conditions and longer life expectancies are affecting our lives.
7
9
2
I'M ONLY ONE MAN! by Regis Philbin with Bill Zehme. (Hyperion, $22.95.) A memoir by the co-host of "Live With Regis and Kathie Lee."
8
7
11
TO RENEW AMERICA, by Newt Gingrich. (HarperCollins, $24.) The Speaker of the House describes his solutions to the country's problems. (+)
9
5
17
SPONTANEOUS HEALING, by Andrew Weil. (Knopf, $23.) A physician explains the ways in which the body heals itself. (+)
10
5
THE LIARS' CLUB, by Mary Karr. (Viking, $22.95.) A poet recalls her childhood as a member of a troubled family in East Texas during the early 1960's.
11
11
3
BUFFETT, by Roger Lowenstein. (Random House, $27.50.) The life of Warren Buffett and how he became one of the country's richest men. (+)
12
10
9
SLEEPERS, by Lorenzo Carcaterra. (Ballantine, $23.) The true story, the narrator claims, of four boys in a reformatory and the revenge they later take on one of their tormentors.
13
12
4
IN THEIR NAME, edited by Clive Irving. (Random House, $25.) The Oklahoma City bombing: the stories of those it affected, told in words and pictures.
14
14
17
DAVE BARRY'S COMPLETE GUIDE TO GUYS, by Dave Barry. (Random House, $21.) A humorist explains the strange ways of a species of males called "guys."
15
15
4
DARK SUN, by Richard Rhodes. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $32.50.) How and why the hydrogen bomb was made.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
122
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Relationships. (+)
2
2
27
THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra. (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $14.) How to "generate wealth in all its forms." (+)
3
3
6
STOP AGING NOW! by Jean Carper. (HarperCollins, $24.) Ways to combat aging and resist disease. (+)
4
16
HOW TO ARGUE AND WIN EVERY TIME, by Gerry Spence. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) A lawyer describes ways to win arguments at home and at work. (+)
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Sept. 9, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk (*) indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
A dagger (+) indicates that some bookstores report receiving bulk orders for a book.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) CITY LIFE: Urban Expectations in a New World, by Witold Rybczynski. (Scribner, $23.) Why our cities aren't like Paris, explained by a witty and subtle architect; mainly, their democratic vistas give no special focus to kings or bishops.
A CIVIL ACTION, by Jonathan Harr. (Random House, $25.) This tale of a lawsuit (Massachusetts householders vs. industrial polluters) is most disquieting when it suggests that legal quirks and personalities determine who, if anyone, is compensated.
EDWIN HUBBLE: Mariner of the Nebulae, by Gale E. Christianson. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $27.50.) A readable, entertaining life of the great astronomer whose work never interfered with his self-promotion, pretension and vanity.
EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE, by Daniel Goleman. (Bantam, $23.95.) The author, who writes for The Times on psychology, argues persuasively that self-control, zeal, persistence and self-motivation -- qualities not measured by I.Q. tests or college exams -- are in dangerously short supply in this country, but can and should be taught.
IN CONFIDENCE, by Anatoly Dobrynin. (Times Books/Random House, $30.) The Soviet Ambassador to Washington from 1962 to 1986 writes with remarkable candor, condemning as blunders much he was once obliged to defend.
MANHATTAN, WHEN I WAS YOUNG, by Mary Cantwell. (Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.) An editorial writer for The Times is an acute witness to the professional, personal and emotional lives of fashionable young New Yorkers in the 1950's.
MRS.
TED BLISS, by Stanley Elkin. (Hyperion, $22.95.) The title character of the prodigious Elkin's final novel, an elderly widow in Miami, is occupied with death, disability and a million other subjects that fill her life with activity but not action; as for plot, don't ask.
AN OBSESSION WITH ANNE FRANK: Meyer Levin and the Diary, by Lawrence Graver. (University of California, $28.) A scholar investigates the case of a writer who wrecked his life in the conviction that a conspiracy stole Anne Frank's story, which belonged to him above all others.
PRAIRIE REUNION, by Barbara J. Scot. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) This engaging, thoughtful memoir of a return to the scene of the author's Iowa childhood confirms that places and people have the power to change gracefully if they try.
SLEEPER SPY, by William Safire. (Random House, $24.) This newspaper's one-man diversified literary industry offers a cerebral thriller about a Russian agent everybody's looking for and whose real identity has become lost to the Russians themselves.
TELLTALE HEARTS: The Origins and Impact of the Vietnam Antiwar Movement, by Adam Garfinkle. (St. Martin's, $24.95.) The movement was typically American, with many precedents since abolitionism, a scholar contends; yet it did lengthen the war, and reaction against it set up the anti-elitist critiques so influential now.


You Could Look It Up
IF YOU FIND YOURSELF wondering how New Yorkers got to be so rude, now you can finally turn to a grand reference work, look under H and read an entry titled, "Hard-boiledness." The first encyclopedia devoted to New York City goes on sale this week.
It has 1,350 pages, covers more than 4,000 topics and is a bargain even if you have to pay retail.
Where else can you get 1.3 million words for $60 and discover that the city once had a magazine, The Ladies Billiard Messenger, devoted to "billiards and literature"?


A Biting Underdog, Pro Musica, Pro Drama
UPTOWN -- Michael Moore, the oversize underdog who became famous for the documentary "Roger and Me," was at the edge of the Roseland ballroom looking anxious.
About 750 guests, including Madonna, Ted Turner and Jane Fonda, were already seated at a dinner and awards ceremony on Sept. 19 to benefit the Independent Feature Project, an organization that supports independent film makers.
He was going to be the master of ceremonies in a little while.
But in the meantime, Mr.
Moore, a corporation-baiting politician-deflating Quixote who tilts not at windmills but at government and big business, wasn't in a hurry to sit down.


THE OLD WORLD'S NEWEST PLACES
Amsterdam  Finding room for a new cultural center
In Amsterdam, a city built on water, every inch of ground counts.
So it is all the more remarkable that the Dutch capital is getting a new cultural village.
The city is converting an unused industrial site on the west side of the capital into an emporium for the arts.
The complex of 21 buildings, a former gas plant known as the Westergasfabriek, is being turned into a setting for opera, chamber music, rock concerts, and exhibits and workshops in the fine arts.


L.I. Vines
Chardonnay Pellegrini Vineyards, Cutchogue, 1993. About $13.
Proper temperature is everything in appreciating this light-bodied young wine.
Fully 40 minutes are needed after uncorking it and letting it go from cold to slightly cool for its virtues to start unfolding.
It will be ready to drink sooner as it ages.


THE OLD WORLD'S NEWEST PLACES
Rome  A remodeled Eden and an alfresco Harry's
Rome likes to call itself eternal.
Which makes it all the more fun to watch the changes.


HERE THEY COME
I will use Berke's analysis throughout the campaign to bolster my status as pundit.
I credit Philip Burke's illustrations of the candidates for helping to highlight the fact that politics, and particularly elections, are fundamentally human processes that are not only unpredictable but slightly flawed.
STEVEN A. LUDSIN New York


Amid Strains, European Chiefs Reaffirm Common-Currency Goal
Facing turmoil in world currency markets and political strains among themselves, European leaders vowed today to keep trying for closer unity and a common currency by the end of the century.
Ending two days of informal talks here on this Spanish Mediterranean island, heads of the 15 European Union countries said they had dispelled doubts expressed by German officials last week that the stringent limits on deficit spending and inflation agreed on by the group in 1991 would be enough to determine which countries could qualify for monetary union by 1999.


CAM FELLA GOES UNDER THE KNIFE
I was surprised at the matter-of-fact tone in which it was reported that advanced medical equipment typically used on humans was lent free of charge, saving the horse's owners about $47,000 of a $50,000 bill.


Nina Dayton, James Boster
Cornelia Hughes Dayton and James Shilts Boster, both associate professors at the University of California at Irvine, were married yesterday at the Pilgrim's Inn in Deer Isle, Me.
The Rev.
Holly Lyman Antolini, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony.
The couple graduated from Harvard University.


Grace Under Pressure
IN AND OUT OF VOGUE  By Grace Mirabella with Judith Warner.
Illustrated. 257 pp.
New York: Doubleday. $25.


Color-Blind in the Marketplace
THE END OF RACISM  Principles for a Multiracial Society.
By Dinesh D'Souza. 724 pp.
New York:  The Free Press. $30


Time on Their Side, Saving on Their Minds
IT is one of the conundrums of investing: why don't the young do it?
After all, they are the ones who can reap the most rewards from the passage of time, and they have plenty of years to recover from mistakes.
Sure, some people in their 20's do save.
Some recent surveys suggest that more twentysomethings are saving for retirement than did their elders at a similar age.


Nature's Beauty, Brought to You By the Sewer Authority
Enjoy nature in the shadow of Bergen County's sewage treatment plant!
This is not a misprint.
It is a proposal from the Bergen County Utilities Authority to open a two-mile nature trail to the public next spring, right on the site of the authority's treatment plant in Little Ferry.


Creepy Old Men
STRANGE TRAFFIC  Stories.
By Irene Dische. 243 pp.
New York: Metropolitan Books/ Henry Holt &amp; Company.


Laura C. Lewis, John N. Lewis
Laura Crane Lewis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Alden Lewis of Bellport, L.I., was married there yesterday to John Napier Lewis, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Barbey Lewis Jr. of London.
The Rev.
John Walker performed the Episcopal ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
The bride graduated from Oberlin College and received a master's degree in museum education from George Washington University.
Her father is the president of the Conceptual Communications Group, a financial relations company in New York.
Her mother, Elizabeth Lewis, retired as a third-grade teacher at the Nightingale-Bamford School in New York.


Something New in China: Environmental Cleanup
SUZHOU CREEK is where the bodies are buried.
In Shanghai's glory days of the 1920's and 30's, when British bankers strolled along the waterfront and French chefs concocted culinary delights for the city's elite restaurants, Chinese gangsters ruled the night.
When someone got in their way, and a corpse had to be disposed of, Suzhou Creek was often the preferred dumping location.


Getting Around With a CD-ROM
Two CD-ROM's packed with information of use to travelers are becoming available in computer stores around the nation.
Precision Mapping 2.0 for Windows features a detailed map of the entire continental United States.
It includes more than 17 million streets and roads -- virtually every street in the country -- and almost 3 million miles of rivers and streams.


A 3-2 Pitch That Was No. 59
ONLY a few weeks removed from his 91st birthday, Paul Hopkins became a celebrity of sorts.
It's the result of a pitch he made 68 years ago this month.
It was big time in baseball, but garnered him little attention.
"Most of the time I feel embarrassed about it all," he said.
"If I'd had a great career it would be different, but I didn't."


Ondine Marotti, Lane McBurney
Ondine Lisa Marotti, a vice president of Cowen &amp; Company, an investment bank, was married yesterday to Frank Lane McBurney, a vice president of Paine Webber.
The Rev.
Dr.
Mark S. Anschutz performed the ceremony at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York.
The couple work in New York.


STREET GAMES
FOR THOSE COLD, GRAY WINTER WEEKENDS, THERE ARE PLENTY OF OPTIONS TO KEEP YOU WARM -- AND IN STYLE.
SKI-INSPIRED SPORTSWEAR, FROM PATTERNED SWEATERS TO PUFFY PARKAS, LOOKS AS GOOD ON GRITTY CITY STREETS AS ON PRISTINE MOUNTAIN SLOPES.
JACKETS, WHETHER FITTED AND SHORT-WAISTED OR FULL-CUT AND HOODED, ARE UPDATED WITH REFLECTIVE FABRICS, PARTICULARLY SHINY NYLON.
SWEATERS, ALWAYS AT THE HEART OF CLASSIC SKI STYLE, EVOKE AN EARLIER TIME, WITH 1940'S SNOWFLAKES AND MOCK-TURTLENECK 60'S SCANDINAVIAN STYLES, WHILE THIS SEASON'S SUBSTANTIAL SHOES RECALL THE SKI BOOTS OF THE 30'S.


Kathleen Swann, Daniel B. O'Sullivan
Kathleen Mary Swann, a daughter of Mary and Dennis Swann of Denver, was married yesterday to Daniel Brendan O'Sullivan, the son of Rosemary O'Sullivan of McLean, Va., and the late Daniel E. O'Sullivan.
The Rev.
Michael Cindrich of the Psychic Science Temple of Metaphysics performed the ceremony at the Madison, a landmark town house in New York.
Ms.
Swann, 32, is keeping her name.
She is the production manager for Chaos, a CD-ROM game that is produced by New York University and HarperCollins, the publishing company.
She graduated from Evergreen State College in Olympia, Wash., and received a master's degree in performance studies from N.Y.U.


Monique Farrell, Malcolm Guidry
Monique Gladys Farrell, the daughter of Theresa A. Farrell of White Plains and Assemblyman Herman D. Farrell Jr. of New York, was married last Sunday to Malcolm Edwards Guidry, a son of Marjorie M. LaFleur of Lafayette, La., and the late Paul O. Guidry.
Msgr.
James K. Vaughey officiated at St.
Theresa's Church in Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
Mrs.
Guidry, 36, is a freelance marketing director in Lafayette.
Her father, a Democrat, is the chairman of the Ways and Means Committee in the New York State Assembly.
Her mother is an administrative secretary at the Hebrew Home for the Aged in the Bronx.


Sept. 17-23: Mass Graves; Egypt Says Israel Shot P.O.W.'s in '67 War
A report by Egypt last week that it had discovered two mass graves in the Sinai aggravated a crisis of confidence that has been building for some time between Egypt and Israel.
The report, in the Government-owned newspaper Al Ahram, said the graves contained the remains of Egyptian prisoners of war and unarmed civilians shot by Israeli soldiers during the 1967 war.
A senior Egyptian official said that for years, Egypt had ignored evidence that as many as 800 of its prisoners had died in mass killings in both the 1956 and 1967 wars.
The reasons for looking the other way, this official said, were mostly domestic, including the fear of arousing a rebellion within the army against Egypt's peace treaty with Israel.
But, the official added in an interview, "we cannot do this anymore when the Israelis themselves reveal it."


A New Stage Is Set, Happily Not in Cement
THE MUSIC SEASON HAS opened, peaceful as an afternoon at Forest Lawn.
Grave-tending is in order: the Boston Symphony bringing fresh flowers for Tchaikovsky, the New York Philharmonic offering obeisances to Strauss and Wagner (though its programs later in the year are unusually forward-looking).
Another dead German is Carnegie Hall's focus for the season; Beethoven could probably use not a festival but a rest, but business is business.
The principal jab of stimulation up to now has been the New York City Opera's valiant attempt at Hindemith's "Mathis der Maler." Its failure will count for more than a lot of the slick successes in store for us this year.
The Metropolitan Opera, which opens with Verdi's "Otello" and "Aida," does what it does and is what it is.
We do not blame the Metropolitan Museum of Art for elaborating on what we already know, so why should we criticize the Met?
It has its place alongside like-thinking institutions.


Narrowing the U.S. Immigration Gate
Seventeen years ago, Sonya Canton, an American citizen born in the Philippines, petitioned for her sister, a banker, to join her here under the family-reunification policy that has been the basic principle of United States immigration law for 30 years.
While she was waiting, a second sister, who sold exotic seashells for a living, visited the United States as a tourist, liked the place and decided to stay on illegally with her three children.


Quietly, Ex-Soviet Jews Are Settling in Germany
In a modest and often ambiguous way, Jews are returning to the land of the Holocaust.
On this Friday evening, as a pale sun sets over a grimy street near the railroad tracks in this nondescript East German town, Remmy Stern, a cantor from Israel; Tatiana Pisyetska, a stateless person from Latvia, and Jakow Boljanski, an elderly Ukrainian, gather with about 40 other people in the synagogue at the Jewish Culture Association to recite prayers for the Sabbath.


GALLERY: They Also Serve Who Sleep and Talk on the Telephone
What to call the next big movie about jurors?
Not "Twelve Angry Men," certainly.
Not even "Twelve Sequestered People -- Plus Alternates -- With Book Deals." Maybe "Sleeping in Seattle," or New York.
The truth is that citizens called to jury duty are more likely to experience boredom than racial tension and the drama of the spotlight.
Not every potential juror hears a case, but, as the photos show, every potential juror called to the State Supreme Court (New York's grandiose name for trial courts) in Manhattan learns to wait.
People meet the challenge in different ways.
Some stretch out and nap, others tap away at their laptops, yet others face the void head-on and simply stare into space.
And the waiting room is never free of the constant one-sided chatter of people making phone calls, often on their portables.
"Waiting for Godot" would be a different play if written today.
Estragon and Vladimir wouldn't speak to each other; they'd both be on their cellular phones.


DIARY
COMMUNICATIONS  Breaking Up Is...Oh, You Know  It was certainly truth in advertising.
After AT&amp;T dropped its bombshell about breaking up, it said in a full-page ad aimed at customers, shareholders and communities it touches: "That probably means you." Yes, it's the most widely held stock -- 2.3 million Americans have some.
And it's a presence in nearly everyone's life.
So now what?
Well, for phone customers, it's nothing like the '84 breakup, which created the service mishmash we have now; it's just corporate musical chairs.
For investors, it's good news now -- the stock shot up 10 percent.
But over time, it's a question: will those fabled "widows and orphans" wind up with AT&amp;T's stronger or weaker pieces?
And oh yes, how about the company?
The equipment business, experts say, could do terrifically, could do terribly.
A global expansion might be helped, might be hurt.
The only consensus: the business world will really feel it.
MEDIA GIANTS  Time Warner Makes Its Move  Time Warner and Ted Turner finally made up their minds: Time Warner will shell out $7.5 billion in stock for the Turner empire, making it the No. 1 media company, even ahead of Disney-ABC.
For Gerald Levin, Time Warner's chairman, it's a big shift: from buying cable systems to getting things like CNN and the Cartoon Network.
And Ted Turner gets to be vice chairman, with, as he said, his "life savings" in Time Warner stock.
It's not over, though.
US West, a Time Warner partner, said the deal didn't have its consent, and Consumers Union attacked the deal, saying it would raise phone and cable rates.
Stay, as they say, tuned.
POLITICS  Welfare Overhaul, Squared  It can hurt to get your wish.
President Clinton wanted to "end welfare as we know it," and that's what the Senate gave him last week.
But it was if he asked for a banana and got a huge fruit bowl in crinkly green plastic, for the wise senators voted more to demolish than to tinker.
Block grants would go to the states, $70 billion would be cut from anti-poverty spending over seven years, and there's no expansion in education, training, or subsidized jobs.
All of which, said Senator Carol Moseley-Braun, wouldn't end welfare but "create 50 welfare systems" and could mean "real tragedy for the children." But another Democrat, Tom Daschle, called it "the best bill we are going to get." And Mr.
Clinton, having orated himself into a corner, just may have to sign whatever bill emerges.
AUTOS  Safety, Before the Law  In the wrong hands, with the wrong luck, cars are mass murderers.
Yes, they're getting safer -- with seat belts, air bags, stronger frames, high brake lights, other goodies.
And as each safety item proves itself, the lumbering regulatory process makes it mandatory -- too quickly for some, too slowly for others.
Then when cars kill anyway, auto makers can argue -- unless there's some defect -- that they've paid their legal dues.
But have they?
That was the question last week as a New Hampshire court ruled that a trial could be held to test Ford's liability in the death of a woman in a car with no air bag -- even though it was an '88 car, built before air bags were mandatory.
In other words, should car makers rush to add any safety device as soon as it exists?
AIRLINES  All the Earthly Comforts  Last week British Airways introduced snazzy new first-class compartments, or "pods," complete with armchairs that turn into beds, tables for two, video units, phones -- and privacy.
It's all designed by a specialist in yacht interiors.
Now, said a travel agent, business people "can use their time in the air as if they were in their office." But is that sameness what our souls crave, or are we nurtured by variety?
Some days, we've got the comforts of home; others, the mind expansion of travel.
They're gradually blending into one.
Oh, good news, though: the first-class New York-London fare is still only $3,367.
One way.
CANADA  New Life for Tobacco Ads  A crucial tobacco battleground is advertising: antismoking activists want it banned, saying it lures young people to smoking, while tobacco companies insist it should be legal to promote a legal product.
Smoking foes looked to Canada as a model, since in 1988 it banned nearly all tobacco ads.
But last week Canada's Supreme Court struck down that ban, saying it was unconstitutional because it violated free expression.
This stunned antismoking activists, one of whom said of the tobacco companies, "They are unmatched in terms of their resources and lack of ethics." But a tobacco industry spokesman said new ads would be aimed at "people who have already decided to smoke."  EDUCATION  When Johnny Can't Pay  The personal finance articles make it all wonderfully simple: sock away 98 percent of your income every month, and paying for college will be a breeze.
All right.
Fine.
Meanwhile, out in the real world -- the one where 2 percent of your income won't quite pay the mortgage, plus buy new shoes every week (those growth spurts!) -- parents just can't pay those scary college bills.
The result: loans are soaring.
In a report out last week, the Education Resources Institute said loans hit $23.1 billion in 1994, up from $7.9 billion a decade ago.
Federal loan programs, it said, disbursed more in the last four years than in their first 20, and half of students now graduate in debt.
POLITICS  Taking His Marbles Home  "Foreign investors will not understand what is happening here," one economist worried.
Of course they won't.
How could they be anything but mystified as our legislators try to reinvent the entire American way of life in time for tonight's cocktail hour?
But this concern had a specific cause: Newt Gingrich's threat last week to snap the congressional wallet shut and send the nation into default for the first time ever if the President refuses to dance to the Republican music.
"I don't care what the price is," Mr.
Gingrich said -- a price, by the way, that would include failure to make November Social Security payments.
VISIONARIES  Farewell, Mr.
Popcorn  Orville Redenbacher.
Hmm.
Probably some suitably homespun-looking character actor recruited to lend his name and face to overpriced popcorn.
Sorry, you're way off.
An agricultural scientist, he spent years coming up with the first real improvement in popcorn since long, long before the Pilgrims -- a fluffy wonder that expands up to 40 times its original size, not the puny 20 times of old popcorn.
He and a partner made their breakthrough in 1965, he peddled the popcorn from his station wagon until Marshall Field's introduced it in 1970, they sold out to Hunt-Wesson in 1976 -- and their popcorn became the leader in the nation's $1 billion annual market.
So raise a buttery handful to Mr.
Redenbacher, who died last week at 88.


Kitchen-Table Classrooms
WITH the unflinching candor of an 11-year-old, Elizabeth Lynch explained why school had been her prison.
Other children mocked her good grades, she said.
The teacher picked favorites.
The popular girls ignored her, and she had few friends.
"School," she said, "was a place I didn't like to go."


INSIDE
Cutting Down the Flow
Family-reunification quotas, a cornerstone of United States immigration policy, face cuts that could keep out some 2.4 million applicants who have played by the rules.
Page 18.
Lobbying for Faster Growth
American manufacturers, disagreeing with policy makers, declared that economic growth could be a robust 3.5 percent without risking high inflation.
Page 38.
A Man of Persuasion
The leading candidate for New York chancellor can be very persuasive, critics and fans agree.
Page 43.


Looks as if This Gas Station Is Running on Empty
For 10 years, the Gas Station, with its towering sculpture built from discards ranging from a 1970 Plymouth Valiant to department store mannequins to television sets, has been a symbol of the Lower East Side's Bohemian ways and artistic resolve.
The alternative studio, gallery and performance space at Second Street and Avenue B had been an abandoned gas station and then a shooting gallery for heroin users before five local artists routed the junkies, swept away a carpet of used hypodermic needles and erected the sculpture and a one-of-a-kind fence made of scrap metal.


A Vote for Making K-6 Into K-8
A parent-led effort to add seventh and eighth grades to two elementary schools won the support of the District 27 school board Thursday night, but only after a bitter debate in a district plagued by overcrowding and long divided by race.
With the nine-member board's two black members abstaining, a majority voted to allow Public School 207 in Howard Beach and P.S. 114 in Belle Harbor to adopt a K-8 organization.


A Struggle to Defend Housing Aid for Poor
A mere mile north of the Capitol, up in the Shaw neighborhood's poverty ghetto, the Rev.
Jim Dickerson wonders aloud about politicians' enviable power to find certainty in fresh hyperbole.
"They're locked in an ideological battle that's out of touch with the reality down here on the streets," said Mr.
Dickerson, a local pastor as steeped in the intricate problems of the poor as any downtown professional is in the arcana of special-interest lobbying.


Close to Home, Even After All the Seven Seas
IT may not be the QE2. And Jetskiers around the Statue of Liberty are often a hassle.
But for David Schnepp of Islip it can't get much better than being captain on a World Yacht cruise boat around lower Manhattan.


Other Memories of Queens . . . And Readers' Thoughts on Psychotherapy, Marijuana, and More; In Old Queens, Blizzards, Trolleys and a World's Fair
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 3 article "Memories of Queens" inspired these recollections of my own.


Socialists Are Sinking In Germany
Critics of Rudolf Scharping, the beleaguered leader of Germany's opposition Social Democrats, do not have to reach far for evidence to support their contention that he is better at losing friends than stroking them.
Take the umbrella incident.
Last month, Mr.
Scharping took a group of journalists with him to Bavaria on a public relations mission intended to secure a sympathetic press.
It rained.
There was only one umbrella for the dash between a meeting hall and the tour bus.
Mr.
Scharping took it.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK  2 In numbers, there is prestige: The art of the entourage.
INSIDE QUEENS 3 The final resting place of some of Jamaica's earliest settlers is neglected.


AN OLDER, WISER, HUMBLER WUNDERKIND
When Tilson Thomas conducted Beethoven's Ninth at the opening of Great Woods Center for the Performing Arts in Mansfield, Mass., his humor enabled us struggling sopranos to navigate a difficult passage with relative ease.
Bravo, M.T.T. (and good luck in San Francisco).
JEAN FENNER West Harwich, Mass.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 In numbers, there is prestige: The art of the entourage.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 Peddlers, recyclers find a niche on the edges of the economy.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 12 Stargazing in Central Park; a display of New York's hidden technology; a Leon Polk Smith retrospective at the Brooklyn Museum.
MOVIE CLOCK 13  What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
GOOD EATING 14 A tour of Flatiron and environs; the romantic Verbena; the eclectic Aja; the friendly Alva; the gutsy Bolo; the refined Union Square Cafe.
LETTERS 15 Remembering Queens.
And responses to Beyond the Couch.


Advice to the Transplanted Joffrey: Be Yourself
ONE CAN SYMPATHIZE WITH GERALD Arpino when he says, "In my next life, I'll come back as a lawyer." On Sept. 7 he became the founder and artistic director of the Joffrey Ballet of Chicago, a troupe that did not exist even on paper until this month.
But in July, the Arpino Ballet Illinois was created as a transitional entity, a bridge between the new company in Chicago and the Joffrey Ballet, which Robert Joffrey had founded with Mr.
Arpino in 1956.
The case for the Joffrey, with its unabashed mix of high art and popular appeal, remains as strong as ever -- whatever you call the company.
The Arpino Ballet, for instance, will never perform as such; it is the corporation that obtained the Joffrey name for Chicago from the Foundation for the Joffrey Ballet (the original troupe's parent unit).


The New Political Chic
It never would have occurred to me that this country needed yet another conservative periodical.
That, presumably, is why Rupert Murdoch, who hired William Kristol to edit the newly arrived Weekly Standard, owns one-third of all the newspapers in Britain, TV Guide, HarperCollins, Fox Television and various other media properties that earned more than $9 billion last year, while I preside over The Nation, which has lost money for virtually every one of its 130 years.
It also never would have occurred to me to put out a magazine about politics that boasts in its inaugural issue that it has no politics and is nonpartisan.
But that is how George, John F. Kennedy Jr.'s new bimonthly, named after our founding dad, describes itself, and George boasts 175 pages of ads in its 280-page first issue.
Modesty, not to mention our advertising director, prevents me from issuing The Nation's comparative statistics.
Suffice it to say our typical issue runs to 36 overwhelmingly editorial pages.
George, by the way, is published by another transnational media conglomerate, the Paris-based Hachette Filipacchi Magazines.


Other Memories of Queens . . . And Readers' Thoughts on Psychotherapy, Marijuana, and More; Sorting Out Differences Among Psychotherapists
To the Editor:
The article on psychotherapy should have given particular attention to interpersonal psychotherapy and cognitive behavioral therapy inasmuch as they are proven treatments for depression and other disorders.
The article notes that "many believe" that other kinds of therapies work; but only these two have actually been tested in clinical trials for specific disorders and have demonstrated their efficacy.
This grounding in empirical data -- rather than simply in therapists' belief -- is a key to why such short-term, symptom-focused therapies are "the darlings of the managed-care industry."


In the Region/Connecticut; A New Life for Old Mills, Silent for a Decade
WHEN the American Thread Company closed its plant here in 1985, it left 1.2 million square feet of vacant mill space on a 40-acre property where 2,000 people once worked.
Now, after a decade of false starts, a project that envisions a mix of offices, light industry, shops, restaurants and a museum in the complex is already attracting tenants to this northeastern Connecticut community about 30 miles east of Hartford.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
GRAVESTONES AS ART
"Colonial Gravestone Carvers of Eastern Connecticut" will be discussed today at 3 P.M. in the Torrey Life Science Building on the UConn campus at Storrs.
James A. Slater, UConn professor emeritus of ecology and evolutionary biology and author of "The Colonial Burying Grounds of Eastern Connecticut and the Men Who Made Them," will be the speaker.
"Colonial gravestones," he says, "are forms of cultural and spiritual expression, an art form that is largely indigenous, that reached a high level of abstract complexity and beauty that died away in an amazingly short period of time."


Being Curious, and Taking Her Time About It
She haunts the local coffee house most nights, playing cards or shooting the breeze.
You might spot her at a high school football game, or shopping at the mall.
She has not spent a full day in school since she was 9, but Larla Dey Maloney easily passes for other teen-agers.


Open the Library, Sure, But Do It the Right Way
To the Editor:
As a librarian, I was distressed by Joe Sharkey's column "Getting Back Into the Book Business" (Jersey, Sept. 17), about the reopening of a library branch in Woodbridge.
Mr.
Sharkey quoted Mayor James E. McGreevey of Woodbridge as saying, "This is where the tangible, physical book gets put in the hands of a child." And just how old is that book?
Library collections date very rapidly; a library is useless if the materials are too old and the information outdated.


Paris Face Lift Puts Sun King in Shade
FROM the gleaming gold dome of St.-Louis-des-Invalides to the widened granite-paved sidewalks on the Champs-Elysees, Paris has never looked more glorious.
Not even the Sun King, Louis XIV, poured as much money into the capital as Presidents Jacques Chirac and Francois Mitterrand have, and it shows.
Mr.
Mitterrand spent $1.5 billion on building the National Library alone, four 240-foot-high L-shaped skyscrapers in eastern Paris that were dedicated this spring but are still being finished inside, and $1.24 billion more over the years on renovating the Louvre -- still not completely finished.
In addition, Mr.
Mitterrand completed the giant modernistic arch of the Defense at the western approaches to Paris; built the Bastille Opera and the $200 million ultramodern complex of the Cite de la Musique at the northeast edge of the city, and much else.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
KEW GARDENS  Ghosts in the Machine That Is New York
A pedestrian on a city sidewalk feels a gust of wind swirling from the grate beneath him.
A ghost?
No, just the subway tunnel air displaced by a passing train.
Information on this and other examples of New York's hidden technology is on display in a colorful sidewalk exhibition outside Queens Borough Hall, at Queens Boulevard and Union Turnpike.


Coming to Grips With Cracow
AFTER the evaporation of the Iron Curtain, citizens of the Eastern bloc flooded the West, eager for opportunity, jobs and money.
What they got in many cases was more complicated than they bargained for and it must have occurred to them that the unbearable lightness of being can characterize capitalism as well as communism.
Streaming in the opposite direction, Western travelers larked through the Soviet Union and its former satellites, excited by the prospect of visiting places that had been forbidden zones.
But only the most obtuse among them could have ignored the troubling ambiguity of the experience.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Republicans Can't Take Blame for Doubling Medicare Premiums
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 22 front-page headline blared, "House G.O.P. Plan Doubles Premiums of Medicare Users," as if that were news.


Tyler T. Zachem, Karen S. Shedlin
Karen Stacey Shedlin, a management consultant at McKinsey &amp; Company, and Tyler Thomas Zachem, an investor for McCown DeLeeuw &amp; Company, a leveraged-buyout concern, were married last evening.
Rabbi Albert Sturmer officiated at the Fenway Golf Club in Scarsdale, N.Y., and the Rev.
Dr.
Melvin Hawthorne took part.
The couple, both 29, work in New York.
Both graduated magna cum laude, she from Cornell University and he from the University of Rochester, and both were elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
They received M.B.A.'s from Harvard University.


On the Prowl
One-month-old cheetah triplets learn the survival game and other deadly skills in "A Cheetah Family," part of a weeklong introduction -- MONDAY-FRIDAY at 8 P.M. and MIDNIGHT -- to the Discovery channel's new series WILD DISCOVERY.
HUNTERS OF THE AFRICAN PLAIN are one-hour films about a lioness among lions; hyenas and leopards in competition for prey, and on Friday, a family of cheetahs.
Mitsuagi Iwago camped in the Serengeti near the home of a female and her young.
He has filmed the mother at work securing food and safety for her cubs, and he talks about the endangered animals, which number only about 500 on the African plain because of shrinking habitat, predators, starvation and bad luck.
Suzanne O'Connor


Wanted: Large Condos In the Premier Buildings
AS the Manhattan housing market sputters along, coughing, starting and stalling like an old tin lizzie, at least one segment seems to be moving steadily: large condominiums in prime buildings.
Like a mantra, one real estate broker after another cites the apparent success of Millennium Tower, at 101 West 67th Street, where the top 12 stories of the 56-story rental/retail/condominium complex are for sale.
The tower's 93 condominium apartments command prices that average $675 a square foot, and go as high as $890 a square foot -- over $1 million for a two-bedroom apartment.
After a year of sales, the building is 90 percent sold, with the majority of the apartments sold in pairs, and combined for even bigger spaces.


POSTINGS: City Agency's Automated Information Line; It's Dialing For Buildings
The New York City Department of Buildings has inaugurated a new phone/fax system intended to save architects, builders and owners hours of subway and waiting time by providing automated information about specific buildings 24 hours a day.
Through October, the call, to (212) 312-8467, is free.
A caller can key in a building address or other information and receive back, by voice, the block and lot number, a summary of recent applications with the names of the owner and the applicant, the number of open violations (but not their substance), the building's landmark status and other details.
A voice prompt guides the caller to enter the address or the other information, such as a building permit number.


SPLIT PERSONALITY
THE SUIT, that most traditional element of men's clothing, has gained a new versatility.
No longer bound by a dress shirt and tie to formal occasions or strictly business situations, the suit can now be split apart and dressed down for casual Fridays or weekends.
For instance, you might wear a chalk-striped suit with a polo shirt for dinner at a smart restaurant . . . or just the jacket with a turtleneck and khakis for shopping the galleries on a Saturday afternoon.
Even the vest takes on a new identity when paired with jeans and a T-shirt, and the trousers become casual when combined with a crew-neck sweater.
These principles of dressing apply to everything from elegant gray flannels to sporty Donegal tweeds, making the suit a prime way to get maximum value.
Worn formally from Monday through Thursday, it can be reinterpreted at the end of the week with items like a sport shirt, a sweater vest or corduroy trousers.
Who says you need to buy an all-new wardrobe for today's casual dress codes?
Robert E. Bryan


No Turning Back
No question about it, the party season is gaining velocity.


Governor's Danube Waltz


Colleen E. Keefe, Edward D. Lyons
Colleen Elizabeth Keefe, a daughter of Mrs.
Robert Leo Murphy of Wellesley, Mass., and the late Jeremiah MacFarland Keefe, was married yesterday to Edward David Lyons, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Patrick Lyons of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Leo Gorman performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
John the Evangelist in Wellesley.
The couple graduated from Boston College.


What About Lilco Shareholders?
All of the plans, including Dr.
David Bronheim's  [ Letters, "A Plan to Buy Cheaper Electricity," Aug. 13 ] , suffer from the same illusion.
They proceed from the presumption that Lilco shareholders are invaders from outer space who arrived on Long Island to capture an electric utility and bilk Long Island's residents via exorbitant electric rates.
In fact, the backbone of Lilco shareholders are Long Island residents who invested their money in a local electric utility because they trusted the officials they elected to office.
Long Island has the highest electric rates in the nation, because New York State investor-owned utilities are burdened with the highest local and state taxes.
Dr.
Bronheim should know that Lilco investors have a binding agreement with the state in the form of a legal franchise, and Lilco owns huge tracts of land bought decades ago, and most of its equipment and transmission lines were built at costs vastly lower than they would be today.


How the Propeller Heads Stole the Electronic Future
If you want an arbitrary date for the burial of the 500-channel dream, Aug. 9, 1995, will do just fine.
On that morning, the public had its first crack at buying stock in the year-old Netscape Communications Corporation, which makes software that helps people navigate the Internet and set up "sites" that Net surfers can visit.
What happened next is already the stuff of high-tech legend.
The offering price of $28 per share shot up within minutes to a vertiginous $75 until finally settling at $58, a price that valued the as-yet-profitless company at wellover $2 billion.
A month later, it was trading at about $53.
The initial news reports focused on the instant millionaires at Netscape, including a 24-year-old computer programmer, Marc Andreessen, who emerged from the stock offering with that all-important first $58 million.
But the real significance of the event was not that another bunch of propeller heads had joined the ranks of the super-rich.
Aug. 9 marked the moment when Wall Street finally realized what had been becoming increasingly apparent to computer users: a set of highly technical but reliably standardized communications protocols known as the Internet had established itself as the real key to the electronic future.
That future would be made not by silver-haired telephone- and cable-company executives in Denver, New York and Washington, building an empire around a golden goose called pay-per-view television, but by companies like Netscape and their customers.


Rock-and-Roll Meets Modern Design
To the Editor:
It matters more that I. M. Pei designs modern architecture than how big or unmodern some of his corporate or institutional clients have been  [ "A Shrine to Rock Music With a Roll All Its Own," Sept. 3 ] .
Rock-and-roll is modern (and sometimes post-modern) music, so a modern building, slightly deconstructed, couldn't be more fitting.


Streetscapes/Public Housing; In the Beginning, New York Created First Houses
THEY demolished another high-rise housing project last month, the six giant buildings of the Lafayette Courts complex in Baltimore, providing additional evidence to support the belief of many people that the public housing vision has gone awry.
So how are things at New York's first housing project, built in 1935?
Fine thank you -- and not just because First Houses, at the southwest corner of Third Street and Avenue A, is no taller than the trees that shade its cozy courtyard.
In the 1930's the idea of government-built housing was dangerously close to socialism, almost a cuss word at the time.
But reformers drew on generations of disgust with the growing urban slums and the more recent Depression to mobilize for a new approach.
Mayor Fiorello H. LaGuardia appointed Langdon Post, a housing activist, to head the city's new Housing Authority.
Post had been head of the Tenement House Department, a city agency.


F.Y.I.
Crossing in Color Q.  I was crossing the street with my 3-year-old, taking pains to explain how red lights mean "Stop" and green ones mean "Go." Then I realized that that's only for cars: the "Walk" signs are lit by white lights, not green.
But I seem to remember that when I was a child, the "Walk" signs were green.
Is my memory erroneous, or did the city at some point change the lights from green to white, and, if so, why? (Maybe white lights are cheaper?) A.  Your memory is right.
Your theory is wrong.
"Walk" signs were lit by green lights until about 10 years ago, said Oscar Serra, spokesman for the Department of Transportation, when they were changed to white.
The reason had nothing to do with expense, however.
It has to do with the competition of neon light from storefronts and the like.
"It was easier to see the white at night when you have a background of stores," said Mr.
Serra.
Vineyard to Deli
Q.
I noticed wine for sale in a deli on Second Avenue at Ninth Street (The Village Farm) the other day.
When did delis get to start selling wine?
A.
Well, if you looked closely at the label, you'd probably see that what they were selling was a "wine product," not wine.
Delis are allowed to sell alcoholic beverages if the alcohol content is 6 percent or less, under to the state Alcoholic Beverage Control Code, which has hardly changed since its post-Prohibition passage in 1933.
Most beverages with that low of an alcoholic content are beers, but a growing number of "wine products" also fit in that category.
Some are things that didn't exist until recently, like wine coolers.
As those became more and more popular, and delis started carrying them, it was just a matter of time before delis added some other wine products with low alcohol content.
At the Village Farm, the wine is kosher, and listed at 6 percent alcohol. (Most wines are usually somewhere between 9 and 13 percent alcohol.)  High Line History
Q.
What is that raised roadway, completely overgrown with tall grass, that crosses 10th Avenue about 14th Street and runs along the avenue, through the buildings along the way?
A.
History!
The overpass and the raised viaduct that run parallel to 10th Avenue are what remain of the New York Central Railroad's High Line, a freight railway that served manufacturers along the route, according to Paul Fritz, a subway motorman and train historian.
The High Line was opened on July 2, 1934, and replaced a ground route that existed as far back as 1849.
It ran from the yards at 33d Street down through the manufacturing and meat packing districts to West Houston Street, stopping at sidings along the way to load and unload merchandise.
As manufacturing in the area slowed, southern portions of the High Line were demolished to make way for housing.
The last train ran on the tracks in 1980 -- carrying three boxcars of frozen turkeys.
In 1991, a five-block stretch along Washington Street was taken down amid protests from locals wanting to keep the High Line, and its history, intact.
The remains, which you see, are owned by Conrail.  The Flushing Flip-Flop
Q.
Where does Flushing, Queens, get its name? (P.S. I hope it has nothing to do with the verb.) A.  Follow closely.
This is confusing.
Flushing's early settlers were mainly English families who came via Vlissingen, a port city in the Netherlands.
In 1645, these folks named their community Vlissingen.
The area remained known as Vlissingen until about 1663 when the name was changed to New-Warke or Newark, according to documents from the Queens Historical Society.
In 1665, however, the name Flushing, an English version of Vlissingen, was adopted and stuck.
Why the flip-flop?
One theory: In 1661, John Bowne, a converted Quaker, built a house that was used by other Quakers as a meeting place. (The house still stands at 37-01 Bowne Street; it is the oldest structure in Queens.) This greatly displeased Gov.
Peter Stuyvesant, a Calvinist who had outlawed Quakers in 1657, and Bowne was banished to the Netherlands in 1662.
One theory has it that the change to New-Warke was meant to further divorce the town from its Quaker roots.
But in 1664, the English took control of the city from the Dutch.
William Asadorian, a researcher at the Queensborough Library, thinks that lobbying efforts may have gotten the name Vlissingen reinstated, in a more English-sounding way.
JESSE McKINLEY


Dominating Kennedy Runs Over South Shore
P.S.A.L.
KENNEDY (3-0), the Public School Athletic League's defending A champion, rushed for 438 yards and six touchdowns in its 47-6 thrashing of SOUTH SHORE (0-1-1).
Jose Blanco (7 yards for a touchdown), Ruben Vargas (57 and 30 yards), RaSean Smith (33 yards), Robert Wright (71 yards) and Terrence Willis (86 yards) each scampered for a score in the rout.


Princeton Runs Where Bucknell Can't
Princeton 20, Bucknell 3
Princeton shut down Rich Lemon yesterday, holding Bucknell's star running back to just 15 yards after he had rushed for 17 consecutive 100-yard games, and the Tigers handed Bucknell its first loss of the season, 20-3, at Palmer Stadium.


Q. &amp; A.
Deducting The Cost Of Points Q In mortgage financing, must the cost of points be spread out over the life of the mortgage to be tax deductible? . . .
Nereid Netura, the Bronx.
A Joel E. Miller, a New York City tax lawyer, said that in the case of an ordinary mortgage loan taken out to purchase or improve the taxpayer's principal residence, points are usually deductible as of the time they are paid.


Sally D. Goll, William H. Beatty
Sally Dewees Goll, a reporter for The Wall Street Journal, and William Henry Beatty, the vice president of production management for Sony Music Entertainment, were married yesterday in Quogue, L.I.
The Rev.
George Busler performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of the Atonement.
The couple work in New York.


Quick: What Do They Play at 3Com?
AS sports-trivia questions go, this is a fat one down the middle: What is the name of the San Francisco stadium that is home to the baseball Giants and the football 49'ers?
Candlestick Park, you say?


Manufacturers Challenge Economic Policy
The nation's manufacturers, restless that weak demand is restricting production and profits, declared yesterday that the United States is capable of much greater economic growth, without a sharp increase in inflation, than the Clinton Administration, the Federal Reserve and Wall Street believe is possible.
The manufacturers' declaration, in a resolution adopted unanimously by more than 100 directors of the National Association of Manufacturers, is their bluntest, strongest statement on the issue.
It came just before a Federal Reserve meeting on Tuesday to consider whether to lower interest rates to stimulate growth.


Dispatches From the Antipodes
THE CHESS GARDEN  Or, The Twilight Letters of Gustav Uyterhoeven.
By Brooks Hansen.
Illustrated by Miles Hyman. 481 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $23.


Text Came First, but Images Stand Alone
NO doubt about it: the 120-odd images filling the Hunterdon Art Center are illustrations.
Yet three out of four are oil paintings, and there are few references to the books that inspired them.
Add to this the show's half-derisive, half-defensive title, "The Fine Art of Illustration." Could it be that the curator, Milton Charles, had more in mind than an exhibition that spans the century and comes close to being a survey?
Not surprisingly, the answer is yes and no.
Mr.
Charles has just retired as the art director of Simon &amp; Schuster but continues to flourish as an artist, regularly loaded down with awards for his illustrations and designs.
He also brings to the task a background in fine art.


AN OLDER, WISER, HUMBLER WUNDERKIND
So what if Michael Tilson Thomas's own compositions sound like "movie music" to some ("An Older, Wiser, Humbler Wunderkind," by David Schiff, Aug. 20)?
Is the "Indiana Jones" theme any less striking than "Ride of the Valkyries" because one was written for film and the other for the opera house?


Attempt to Oust School Principal Drags On
An attempt to oust an elementary school principal here is dragging toward the end of its second year, with no conclusion in sight.
In the fall of 1993, the principal, Joanne Falinski, 42, was suspended with pay after the Hendrick Hudson School District charged that she had prevented children from getting special education they needed.
Dr.
Falinski's defenders say she is actually being punished for championing the whole language philosophy -- a way of teaching reading and writing that focuses on creativity rather than traditional phonics and grammar.


Overstating the Case
To the Sports Editor:
Everyone would agree that Monica Seles's knifing by a Steffi Graf fan was horrible both for her as well as tennis, but to call it "the single most awful sports crime in memory," as Robert Lipsyte did ("When You Wish Upon a Star," The Times, Aug. 18), is ridiculous.
In the Munich Olympics in 1972, 11 Israeli athletes were murdered by Palestinian terrorists.
I think everyone would agree that this is "the single most awful sports crime in memory." ELI ZUPNICK  West Hempstead, L.I.


A Historical Point


CAM FELLA GOES UNDER THE KNIFE
Cam Fella's veterinary care at the New Bolton Center looks to be first-rate, but if his owners and doctors wanted to treat his testicular cancer optimally, they should have performed a simple castration.
Instead, they have chosen to put him through numerous procedures, at great expense, so they can continue to milk him for all he's worth.
I bet he will die from metastatic testicular cancer but not before his owners collect another million or so at his expense.
TERRI MAXWELL FRELICK New Hope, Pa.


Airlines Duel Over First Class
ALL those who deride airline service as an oxymoron, take note: Somebody out there is worrying about whether your head could flop around as you snooze.
True, travelers must pay first-class fares or cash in hefty mileage awards to get this level of concern for their welfare.
And whether anyone notices or appreciates the fine points is another matter.
But one thing is certain -- airlines are churning out new ideas for the front cabin at an unusual pace of late as they compete for the loyalty of the well-heeled traveler.


Remodeling New York For the Bourgeoisie
THE RESTORATION OF BRYANT PARK, completed in 1992, is one of the nicest things New York City has done for itself in a long time.
And the park's inviting new restaurant, designed by Hardy Holzman Pfeiffer, is a fine place from which to savor the view.
With its arcadian, trellised facade, accented by the Mediterranean resort chic of white canvas umbrellas, the restaurant offers a perch from which to enjoy the trees, grass and fountains, the surrounding cityscape and, above all, the cheering prospect of people enjoying a public space without fear that something awful is going to happen.
No wonder the restaurant, which opened for business last spring, has been hailed as an urban miracle.
The true miracle, perhaps, is that the restoration has recaptured not only a place but also a time, a period before the park fell into disrepair.
When the city was prosperous enough to create parks and New Yorkers were not afraid to use them.
And yet the sensation is not purely one of nostalgia, for the restoration and the restaurant are also oddly representative of the present era in the city's history.
Though Bryant Park resembles an oasis, its revival is not an exception.
It is of a piece with many other projects that also seek to reinscribe secure middle-class values within the urban center.


Leslie Poole And Francis Petit
Leslie Ann Poole and Francis Petit, college administrators, were married yesterday at the Fordham University Church in the Bronx.
The Rev.
George McMahon, the Fordham University chaplain, performed the Roman Catholic ceremony.
The couple graduated from Fordham.


A 'Righteous Persons' List
Following are grants made by Steven Spielberg through his Righteous Persons Foundation:
American Jewish Committee (Los Angeles chapter), $67,400; Anne Frank House (Amsterdam), $250,000; Anne Frank Remembered, $150,000; B'nai B'rith Youth Organization, $75,000 per year for two years; Boy Scouts of America, $6,000; Frederic Brenner Project, $50,000;


A History Lesson
To the Sports Editor:
In an article about Ivan Pedroso's world record in the long jump being taken away because of irregularities by wind-gauge officials (The Times, Aug. 4), Jere Longman wrote, "It is believed that this is the first time a world record will not be submitted to the I.A.A.F. for ratification." This is wrong.
I broke the world record in the long jump under fair conditions in 1939, but it was not submitted to the I.A.A.F. because of a misunderstanding of the rule for ratification of the long jump world records taken from a 1939 rule.
Either a wind gauge or the written affidavits of six officials is sufficient.
During the time I jumped, the meet's one wind gauge was set on a hurdles race and it showed under the allowable limit.
Officials on site, including the meet director, were at the pit when I jumped, and said they thought the jump was legal.
PHIL SHINNICK  New York


Helene Tragos And Peter Stelian
Helene Tragos, a daughter of Lilli Margrethe Tragos and William G. Tragos of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday in Tucson, Ariz., to Peter Stelian, the son of Judy and Gabriel Stelian of King of Prussia, Pa.
Judge Nikki A. Chayet of the Tucson City Court officiated at Loews Ventana Canyon Resort.
Mrs.
Stelian, 31, is a brand manager for Kraft Foods Inc. in Glenview, Ill.
She graduated from Duke University and received an M.B.A. from Washington University in St.
Louis.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of TBWA International, the advertising agency in New York.
The bride's first marriage ended in divorce.


Sarah L. Chase, Nigel J. Dyche
Sarah Leah Chase, an author of cookbooks in Nantucket, Mass., was married yesterday to Nigel John Dyche, the president of Nantucket Off-Shore Seasonings, a manufacturer of custom-blend seasonings.
The Rev.
Allan Sandlin, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Blue Hill, Me.
Ms.
Chase, who is 39 and is keeping her name, is also a cooking instructor.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a daughter of Diana and Dr.
Raymond H. Chase of Blue Hill.
The bride's father, who is retired, was a dentist in New Britain, Conn.


Sept. 17-23; For Hindus, a Sense of Miracle


Lions' Victory Has Angry Aftermath
Rutgers never lost its determination in a frenzied game against Penn State tonight, but Coach Doug Graber lost his patience after the Nittany Lions threw a 42-yard touchdown pass with 58 seconds left in a 59-34 victory that had already been comfortably decided.
Witnesses said Graber threw down his headset on the sideline when the Penn State reserve quarterback Mike McQueary threw a touchdown pass to flanker Chris Campbell with the Nittany Lions ahead by 18 points at Giants Stadium.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Bookstore Finally Finds First Manhattan Site  A yearlong search by Borders Books and Music has yielded a site for the Michigan-based company's first Manhattan store.
Last week, Borders signed a lease for 37,000 square feet over three levels at 5 World Trade Center.
The new store is expected to open in the fall of 1996.


Some Venture Abroad But Leave Dollars at Home
JUST as a tourist visiting several countries may conceal a wallet full of American dollars, an international bond fund may maintain a healthy stash of greenbacks.
So investors who buy these funds primarily for their international currency may be disappointed.
International bond funds can provide diversity, strong returns and higher yields than their domestic counterparts.
For the three- and five-year periods ended June 30, they outperformed high-quality domestic bond funds, and their most recent 12-month yields have been nearly 30 basis points higher.
A basis point is a hundredth of a percentage point.


Annual Report Uncovers More Toxic Waste Sites
New Jersey's days as an industrial giant may be fading, but toxic spill sites showed a strong growth spurt this year.
The state Department of Environmental Protection's 1995 Known Contaminated Sites report, published on Tuesday, lists 6,970 sites, up from about 6,000 in 1994.
The list includes 2,061 newly identified sites, which more than offset the 1,161 sites either cleaned up or declared no longer a threat in the last year.
Most cases listed in the 500-page tome, available for $15 from the State Treasury Department, are minor site cleanups or underground storage tank investigations, officials said.
About 2 percent are Superfund sites, with cleanups financed by the Federal Government.


Paint, Polish And Prayers As Yonkers Awaits Pope
A flurry of industry prevailed at St.
Joseph's Seminary in Yonkers last week in keen anticipation of a visit by Pope John Paul II on Oct. 6.
The Pope will address the residents and lead them in prayer in one of the more intimate appointments on his whirlwind tour.
The honor is reflected in the seminarians' painstaking preparations.
They have restored a ceiling mural in the chapel, painted two new ones and hung doors for the Pope to bless for the seminary's 100th anniversary next year.


Susan Doctorian, Joseph Kyrillos Jr.
Susan Ann Doctorian, a governmental affairs consultant, was married yesterday to State Senator Joseph M. Kyrillos Jr. of New Jersey.
The Rev.
Samuel Doctorian, an uncle of the bride, performed the ceremony at the First Christian Church in Macon, Mo.
Mrs.
Kyrillos, 27, is a senior associate at the Princeton Public Affairs Group Inc., registered lobbyists in Trenton.
The bride is a graduate of the University of Missouri.
She is a daughter of Phyllis and David Doctorian of Macon.
Her father is a former state senator in Missouri.


Sept. 17-23: The AIDS Epidemic; Scientists Endorse Needle Exchanges
To some advocates for people with AIDS, the matter has always seemed so simple.
Provide drug users with clean needles and you can stem the onslaught of new AIDS virus infections.
But to Congress, which banned the use of Federal money for needle exchange programs, and to people who are appalled by the unending epidemic of drug abuse, the situation was murky.
If you give addicts clean needles, they asked, aren't you abetting their habit?
Won't you encourage more people to use drugs if you assure them that they will not be infected with H.I.V.?


Rockefellers Keep Faith With New York
To the Editor:
Steven R. Weisman's Sept. 14 Editorial Notebook on the Rockefeller Center saga provides perspective on the fallibility of corporate judgments amid volatile markets.
That's fair game.
What's not fair is the implication that the Rockefeller family, and David Rockefeller in particular, have acted in ways inconsistent with their commitment to New York City.


How to Make Mets' District A Miracle, Too
With the New York Mets and City Hall brokering to build a $300 million sports arena to replace Shea Stadium, a legislator has drawn up a wish list of improvements, including a new performing arts center and a cleaner Flushing River, that he says his neighborhood deserves for being host to a Major League Baseball team.
"For too long, fans coming to Shea Stadium and the National Tennis Center have had a negligible economic impact on the surrounding communities," Assemblyman Brian McLaughlin wrote in a letter to Mayor Giuliani and Gov.
George E. Pataki.
"Rather than just coming to a game, concert or other event, these fans should be encouraged to stay and discover everything Flushing has to offer."


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  House 1.
Park System: Vote on a bill to create a special commission to recommend which of the country's national parks might be closed.
Rejected 231 to 180, Sept. 19. 2.
Speed Limits: Vote on an amendment to a major highway bill that would delete a provision repealing the Federal speed limit of 55 miles per hour for all vehicles.
Rejected 313 to 112, Sept. 20. 3.
Cuba: Vote on a bill that would tighten the trade embargo against Cuba.
Approved 294 to 130, Sept. 21.
Connecticut  1.
Kennelly (D) . . .
N Y Y  2.
Gejdenson (D) . . .
A Y N  3.
DeLauro (D) . . .
N Y N  4.
Shays (R) . . .
N N Y  5.
Franks (R) . . .
Y N Y  6.
Johnson (R) . . .
Y N Y  New Jersey  1.
Andrews (D) . . .
N N Y  2.
LoBiondo (R) . . .
N N Y  3.
Saxton (R) . . .
Y N Y  4.
Smith (R) . . .
N N Y  5.
Roukema (R) . . .
Y A Y  6.
Pallone (D) . . .
N Y Y  7.
Franks (R) . . .
Y N Y  8.
Martini (R) . . .
N N Y  9.
Torricelli (D) . . .
N NY  10.
Payne (D) . . .
N Y N  11.
Frelinghuysen (R) . . .
N N Y  12.
Zimmer (R) . . .
N N Y  13.
Menendez (D) . . .
N Y Y  New York  1.
Forbes (R) . . .
N N Y  2.
Lazio (R) . . .
N N Y  3.
King (R) . . .
Y N Y  4.
Frisa (R) . . .
N N Y  5.
Ackerman (D) . . .
N N Y  6.
Flake (D) . . .
N N N  7.
Manton (D) . . .
N Y Y  8.
Nadler (D) . . .
N Y N  9.
Schumer (D) . . .
N N N  10.
Towns (D) . . .
N N N  11.
Owens (D) . . .
N Y N  12.
Velazquez (D) . . .
N Y N  13.
Molinari (D) . . .
N YY  14.
Maloney (D) . . .
N Y N  15.
Rangel (D) . . .
Y Y N  16.
Serrano (D) . . .
N Y N  17.
Engel (D) . . .
N Y Y  18.
Lowey (D) . . .
N YN  19.
Kelly (R) . . .
N N Y  20.
Gilman (R) . . .
Y Y Y  21.
McNulty (D) . . .
Y Y Y  22.
Solomon (R) . . .
N N Y  23.
Boehlert (R) . . .
YY Y  24.
McHugh (R) . . .
N N Y  25.
Walsh (R) . . .
N N Y  26.
Hinchey (D) . . .
N Y N  27.
Paxon (R) . . .
Y N Y  28.
Slaughter (D) . . .
N Y N  29.
LaFalce (D) . . .
N Y N  30.
Quinn (R) . . .
N N Y  31.
Houghton (R) . . .
Y N Y  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.
Senate 1.
Welfare: Vote on a welfare reform bill that would abolish the basic Federal guarantee of assistance for every poor family that qualifies and replace it with a block grant to the states that would give them broad discretion in the design of their programs.
Approved 87 to 12, Sept. 19. 2.
Poultry: Vote to kill a provision in an Agriculture Department appropriation bill that would block a new department rule that says chickens and turkeys cannot be sold as fresh if they have been chilled below 26 degrees.
Rejected 61 to 38, Sept. 19. 3.
Mink: Vote to kill an amendment to an Agriculture Department appropriation bill that would eliminate the Government's annual $2 million subsidy to the mink industry for overseas fashion shows.
Rejected 78 to 18, Sept. 19. 4.
Pakistan: Vote on an amendment to a foreign aid appropriation bill that would lift all economic sanctions and some important military sanctions imposed on Pakistan five years ago because of its secret nuclear weapons program.
Approved 55 to 45, Sept. 21.
Connecticut  Dodd (D) . . .
Y Y N Y  Lieberman (D) . . .
Y Y N N  New Jersey  Bradley (D) . . .
N Y N N  New Jersey (cont'd)  Lautenberg (D) . . .
N Y N N  New York  D'Amato (R) . . .
Y N N N  Moynihan (D) . . .
N Y N N  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Lori A. Feinberg, Steven C. Kany
Lori A. Feinberg and Steven C. Kany, lawyers in New York, were married on Thursday.
Rabbi Carol Davidson performed the ceremony at the Jewish Theological Seminary in New York.
The bride is an assistant general counsel at Minerals Technologies Inc., a manufacturer.
She graduated from the University of Southern California and received her law degree from Loyola Law School in Los Angeles.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sheldon Feinberg of Short HIlls, N.J.
The bride's father retired as the chairman and chief executive of Cadence Industries, a holding company in Caldwell, N.J.


At 2d Plant, Rumors Are Now Reality
For hundreds of workers at an AT&amp;T computer manufacturing plant here, the end of the line came quickly.
On Wednesday, Robert E. Allen, the chairman of the AT&amp;T Corporation, made the surprise announcement of the plan to break up the telecommunications giant.
By Friday, workers here had begun cleaning out their work areas and getting their severance pay.


New York Hotel Offers Homey Touch of Japan
The Hotel Kitano, closed in November 1991 for a $50 million reconstruction, reopened this month at 38th Street and Park Avenue as the 150-room Kitano New York.
One of the hotel's two restaurants, the Nadaman Hakubai, the only branch of Nadaman outside Asia, features the traditional, multicourse Kaiseki approach to food.
The Garden Cafe, the hotel's other restaurant, has Western dishes done in Japanese ways -- a hamburger, for example, prepared with Japanese seasonings and served with rice.
The Ryurei Lounge offers Japanese tea service.


A Coach and a Violated Trust
RICCARDO (CHICO) GODDARD became Kristy M.'s gymnastics coach when she was 9.
By the age of 12, she was practicing five or six days a week, four and a half hours a day.
Kristy, who insisted on anonymity, had little life outside the gym.
She left school early for practices, returning home only to eat dinner, complete her homework and sleep.
Weekends were spent at gymnastics meets.
Mr.
Goddard also extended control to areas of her life outside of gymnastics, dictating what Kristy should wear and eat and with whom she could socialize.
When she was 14, he began sexually abusing her.
Late last month, Mr.
Goddard, 34, was sentenced to five years' probation after pleading guilty to sodomy with the child.
For Kristy, it was the end of a long and difficult struggle.
Slowly, she accepted that her relationship with her once-revered coach was exploitative and, in fact, criminal.
For many parents, particularly those who have children deeply involved in sports activities, Mr.
Goddard's arrest and conviction may serve as a cautionary tale of how coaches who are in a position of extraordinary influence over their children can break the trust placed in them.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
FUN AT THE JAYS'
Friends of the 64-acre John Jay Homestead in Katonah are holding their third yearly Old-Fashioned Country Fair today from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M. with dozens of attractions for children and adults.
The $10-a-car admission will be used to support the historic site's educational programs.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: September 24, 1995
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
NOTHING LASTS FOREVER, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $6.99.) Three women doctors contend with lovers, betrayers and killers.
2
8
THE BODY FARM, by Patricia Cornwell. (Berkley, $6.99.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta investigates the murder of a small North Carolina girl.
3
6
INSOMNIA, by Stephen King. (Signet, $7.50.) A widower and a widow, victims of sleeplessness, behold a sinister force at work in a Maine town.
4
20
THE STONE DIARIES, by Carol Shields. (Penguin, $10.95.) The journey of a woman from childhood to motherhood through old age.
5
14
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Bantam, $6.99.) A journalist and a psychologist track down a murderer in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
6
1
WINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) A woman sets out to become a record-setting aviator in pre-World War II America.
7
13
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $7.50.) Jack Ryan vs. a Japanese plot.
8
1
A TANGLED WEB, by Judith Michael. (Pocket, $6.99.) A sequel to "Deceptions," a novel in which twin sisters swapped places.
9
5
THE LAST INNOCENT MAN, by Phillip Margolin. (Bantam, $6.50.) A lawyer defends an attorney who may have killed a vice cop.
10
4
THREE WEDDINGS AND A KISS, by Kathleen E. Woodiwiss, Catherine Anderson, Loretta Chase and Lisa Kleypas. (Avon, $5.99.) Four short historical romances.
11
1
SHOWDOWN AT CENTERPOINT, by Roger MacBride Allen. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The concluding volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
12
26
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $7.50.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing.
13
4
PRIME TIME, by Sandra Brown. (Warner Vision, $6.50.) A television reporter finds love when she tries to interview a reclusive general.
14
5
PLAYING FOR THE ASHES, by Elizabeth George. (Bantam, $6.50.) Arson, infidelity, cricket and murder in the English countryside.
15
8
THE 13TH JUROR, by John T. Lescroart. (Island/Dell, $6.50.) A lawyer defends a woman accused of murdering two husbands and a son.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
5
DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion, $5.99.) Anecdotes and meditations on life.
2
10
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Anchor/Doubleday, $6.99.) Fighting a deadly virus. (+)
3
26
REVIVING OPHELIA, by Mary Pipher. (Ballantine, $12.50.) The dangers for teen-age girls. (+)
4
89
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Daily spirituality. (+)
5
1
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $5.99.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage by the television star and comedian.
6
13
APOLLO 13, by Jim Lovell and Jeffrey Kluger. (Pocket, $6.50.) The 1970 moon mission.
7
53
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
8
620
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (+)
9
5
DANGEROUS MINDS, by LouAnne Johnson. (St. Martin's, $4.99.) A woman's experiences teaching English in an inner-city high school.
10
132
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence. (+)
11
2
TRUE NORTH, by Jill Ker Conway. (Vintage, $12.) The memoir of an Australian woman who became the president of Smith College.
12
52
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters, both over 100, reflect.
13
54
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
14
20
MOTHERLESS DAUGHTERS, by Hope Edelman. (Delta, $12.95.) The experiences of women after the deaths of their mothers.
15
3
TAO TE CHING, by Lao Tzu. (Penguin, 95.) A classic Chinese philosophical work.
16
41
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Love and relationships. (+)
17
2
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $15.) Myths, folk tales and women's psyches.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
52
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) Uplifting stories. (+)
2
21
A 2ND HELPING OF CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) One hundred more stories. (+)
3
13
TEN STUPID THINGS WOMEN DO TO MESS UP THEIR LIVES, by Laura C. Schlessinger. (Harper Perennial, $10.) Counsel by a
therapist. (+)
4
229
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success. (+)
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Sept. 9, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk (*) indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
A dagger (+) indicates that some bookstores report receiving bulk orders for a book.


Correction
CORRECTION: A report in the "Sunday" pages on Sept. 10, about distinguishing characteristics of this year's college freshmen, misidentified the last Ivy League college to become coed.
It was Columbia in 1983, not Dartmouth in 1972.


HERE THEY COME
I thought that I might sit out the '96 campaign but then I read Richard L. Berke's "Campaign '96: One Day at a Time" (Sept. 3), and I am hooked again.
I forgot how exciting this process is and, of course, that sitting it out is, well, un-American.
Politics is serious business but not deadly serious.
Berke conveys the unalloyed fun of it all, along with the mounting interest -- wonderful writing.


F.Y.I.
Crossing in Color Q.  I was crossing the street with my 3-year-old, taking pains to explain how red lights mean "Stop" and green ones mean "Go." Then I realized that that's only for cars: the "Walk" signs are lit by white lights, not green.
But I seem to remember that when I was a child, the "Walk" signs were green.
Is my memory erroneous, or did the city at some point change the lights from green to white, and, if so, why? (Maybe white lights are cheaper?) A.  Your memory is right.
Your theory is wrong.
"Walk" signs were lit by green lights until about 10 years ago, said Oscar Serra, spokesman for the Department of Transportation, when they were changed to white.
The reason had nothing to do with expense, however.
It has to do with the competition of neon light from storefronts and the like.
"It was easier to see the white at night when you have a background of stores," said Mr.
Serra.
Vineyard to Deli
Q.
I noticed wine for sale in a deli on Second Avenue at Ninth Street (The Village Farm) the other day.
When did delis get to start selling wine?
A.
Well, if you looked closely at the label, you'd probably see that what they were selling was a "wine product," not wine.
Delis are allowed to sell alcoholic beverages if the alcohol content is 6 percent or less, under to the state Alcoholic Beverage Control Code, which has hardly changed since its post-Prohibition passage in 1933.
Most beverages with that low of an alcoholic content are beers, but a growing number of "wine products" also fit in that category.
Some are things that didn't exist until recently, like wine coolers.
As those became more and more popular, and delis started carrying them, it was just a matter of time before delis added some other wine products with low alcohol content.
At the Village Farm, the wine is kosher, and listed at 6 percent alcohol. (Most wines are usually somewhere between 9 and 13 percent alcohol.)  High Line History
Q.
What is that raised roadway, completely overgrown with tall grass, that crosses 10th Avenue about 14th Street and runs along the avenue, through the buildings along the way?
A.
History!
The overpass and the raised viaduct that run parallel to 10th Avenue are what remain of the New York Central Railroad's High Line, a freight railway that served manufacturers along the route, according to Paul Fritz, a subway motorman and train historian.
The High Line was opened on July 2, 1934, and replaced a ground route that existed as far back as 1849.
It ran from the yards at 33d Street down through the manufacturing and meat packing districts to West Houston Street, stopping at sidings along the way to load and unload merchandise.
As manufacturing in the area slowed, southern portions of the High Line were demolished to make way for housing.
The last train ran on the tracks in 1980 -- carrying three boxcars of frozen turkeys.
In 1991, a five-block stretch along Washington Street was taken down amid protests from locals wanting to keep the High Line, and its history, intact.
The remains, which you see, are owned by Conrail.  The Flushing Flip-Flop
Q.
Where does Flushing, Queens, get its name? (P.S. I hope it has nothing to do with the verb.) A.  Follow closely.
This is confusing.
Flushing's early settlers were mainly English families who came via Vlissingen, a port city in the Netherlands.
In 1645, these folks named their community Vlissingen.
The area remained known as Vlissingen until about 1663 when the name was changed to New-Warke or Newark, according to documents from the Queens Historical Society.
In 1665, however, the name Flushing, an English version of Vlissingen, was adopted and stuck.
Why the flip-flop?
One theory: In 1661, John Bowne, a converted Quaker, built a house that was used by other Quakers as a meeting place. (The house still stands at 37-01 Bowne Street; it is the oldest structure in Queens.) This greatly displeased Gov.
Peter Stuyvesant, a Calvinist who had outlawed Quakers in 1657, and Bowne was banished to the Netherlands in 1662.
One theory has it that the change to New-Warke was meant to further divorce the town from its Quaker roots.
But in 1664, the English took control of the city from the Dutch.
William Asadorian, a researcher at the Queensborough Library, thinks that lobbying efforts may have gotten the name Vlissingen reinstated, in a more English-sounding way.
JESSE McKINLEY


Jennifer Jacobsen, Ethan Shenkman
Jennifer Gay Jacobsen, a daughter of Linda and Roy T. Jacobsen of McLean, Va., was married last evening to Ethan Gregory Shenkman, a son of Jerrold and Harriet Shenkman of Pound Ridge, N.Y.
Rabbi Laszlo Berkowits performed the ceremony at the River Bend Country Club in Great Falls, Va.
The couple graduated from Yale University, she cum laude and he summa cum laude.
They received law degrees from the University of Virginia.


Mary A. Winter, James M. Farrell
Mary Anne Winter, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John T. Winter of Cross River, N.Y., was married yesterday to James Michael Farrell, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. Farrell Jr. of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Mark Connolly, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Michael the Archangel in Greenwich.
Mrs.
Farrell, 24, is a registered nurse in the neonatal intensive care unit at Greenwich Hospital.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is the president of Austin &amp; Merritt, an insurance agency in Port Chester, N.Y.


The Malling Of Third Avenue
To the Editor:
Regarding your article on "The Malling of Third Avenue" on Aug. 13, Neighbors 'R' Us, a coalition of 16 community groups and its legislators, would like to clarify its opposition to a Toys 'R' Us megastore of 38,000 square feet that had been proposed for 80th Street and Third Avenue.


Elizabeth Dinsmore, C. W. P. Nolan
Elizabeth Pecce Smart Dinsmore, a financial associate at Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, and Christopher Whitbread Patrick Nolan, an associate in equity research at the Union Bank of Switzerland, were married yesterday in Concord, Mass.
The Rev.
Dean Wolfe performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Chapel at Concord Academy.
The couple, who work in New York, received M.B.A.'s from Columbia University.


The Rebels In Sri Lanka Find Allies In India
When 43 members of a Sri Lankan rebel group escaped from a fort near here in August, India was jolted.
In three years, Tamil Tiger rebels have staged at least nine other major jailbreaks in Tamil Nadu, the southeastern Indian state separated by a narrow strait from the Jaffna Peninsula in Sri Lanka, where the Tigers have their headquarters.


Correction
A brief report last Sunday in the Playing in the Neighborhood column, about an exhibition of objects from the 1964-65 New York World's Fair, misidentified the sculpture in the photograph.
It was a small model of "Rocket Thrower," by Donald De Lue, not "Aries," a bronze by Paul Manship.


Ellis Island: A Visit Cures U.S. Amnesia
NO one would mistake Ellis Island for Lourdes, but it's a place of miracle cures all the same, recommended for certain people suffering from chronic memory lapses.
Like politicians who want to slam the door on immigrants.
On Ellis Island, they can remind themselves that they hardly sprang full-blown from American soil.
As obvious as that point may be, it seems to have eluded some of them.
But they can get a quick refresher course on computer screens at the old immigration gateway, now an inspired museum.


After the Pageant: Life Goes On for a Miss Pennsylvania Who Didn't Win the Crown
TWO years ago, Denise Fabiano had every intention of becoming Miss America.
"I really, really wanted to win," said Ms.
Fabiano, a Miss Pennsylvania with extensive training in voice and dance.
"I visualized it. I saw it happening in my dreams. Becoming Miss America was to be the fulfillment of everything I had lived for up to that point."


BELTWAY WARRIOR
The Powell Doctrine is not new.
Students of strategy and policy will recognize the influence of the Prussian military theorist Carl von Clausewitz.
Clausewitz believed that policy, as determined by national interests, should direct military strategy.
Powell's emphasis on the use of overwhelming force to conduct a short, decisive war, and quick withdrawal once the objectives are achieved, reflects his correct assessment that the American public will not tolerate the loss of its soldiers in a situation where significant United States interests are not at stake.
G.
ERIC WITT Stamford, Conn.


Other Memories of Queens . . . And Readers' Thoughts on Psychotherapy, Marijuana, and More; In Old Queens, Blizzards, Trolleys and a World's Fair
To the Editor:
I moved to Jamaica with my family when I was a teen-ager in 1931 and remained until Feb. 15, 1942, when I married and moved to Forest Hills.
I have so many memories of growing up in Jamaica.


Quota Ruling Blocks Solution to Crowding, Educators Say
The scene during fourth period at Intermediate School 145 last week was typical of school life in Queens these days: two English classes met in the cafeteria and 38 students in a computer class were crammed into a room with no computers, where windowsills served as desks.
In the street, on a block cordoned off as a temporary schoolyard, a gym class ran around.
Then the bell rang and 2,100 children poured into the hallways of a school built for 1,300.


'All Great Art Is Genderless'
To the Editor:  I couldn't disagree more with Peter Galvin's assessment that gay artists are somehow dishonest unless they sing the same-sex pronoun of the one they love  [ "Boy George Crosses a New Line," Aug. 27 ] .
All great art is genderless; to chide Melissa Etheridge and K. D. Lang for singing "you" instead of "she" is ludicrous.





Let There Be a Light Everyone Likes
In the grand scheme of the $380 million reconstruction of 4 1/2 miles of the West Side Highway, choosing lampposts might seem a minor detail.
But West Siders are not known for unanimity.
Sure enough, a debate over rival pole designs is generating more heat than street light.
"Never in a million years did we expect this to be such a controversial and contentious issue," said Art Strickler, until recently the State Transportation Department's community liaison for the highway project.
The lights will line the highway and the adjoining Hudson River Park from the Battery to 59th Street.


Other Memories of Queens . . . And Readers' Thoughts on Psychotherapy, Marijuana, and More; In Old Queens, Blizzards, Trolleys and a World's Fair
To the Editor:
I want to call your attention to a mistake in your article on Queens.
Forest Hills Gardens does have restrictive covenants concerning architecture and zoning, but there has never been anything in these covenants that, as you wrote, "permitted occupancy only by white Christians." Nowhere in the covenants is there any reference to who could or could not purchase a home.
RICHARD W. SEELER  Forest Hills The writer is president of the Forest Hills Gardens Taxpayers Association.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
KEW GARDENS  Ghosts in the Machine That Is New York
A pedestrian on a city sidewalk feels a gust of wind swirling from the grate beneath him.
A ghost?
No, just the subway tunnel air displaced by a passing train.
Information on this and other examples of New York's hidden technology is on display in a colorful sidewalk exhibition outside Queens Borough Hall, at Queens Boulevard and Union Turnpike.


Can a New Third Party Emerge From the Center?
AS if we needed further proof, Colin L. Powell in the last few weeks has demonstrated just how vulnerable the two major parties are.
With no announcement of his intentions and only the barest disclosure of his views, the retired four-star general has been registering at or near the top of most Presidential polls.
That he has never registered with a party appears to be no liability; in fact, it's probably an asset.
A Fat Underbelly
Like Ross Perot before him, Mr.
Powell is frequently hailed as a standard-bearer for the disaffected middle, voters who are frustrated with the increasing polarization of the two party system and looking for what they see as common sense answers in the center.
Also like Mr.
Perot, Mr.
Powell is often viewed as a potential third-party candidate.
But the descriptions of these two men are only half accurate.
By some accounts, Mr.
Perot and Mr.
Powell may both be centrists, and the two men may give voice to the opinions of many Americans in the fat underbelly of the bell curve.
But Mr.
Perot was not a third-party candidate in 1992; he was an independent in the fullest sense of the word.
If Mr.
Powell runs for President in 1996 as neither a Republican nor a Democrat, he would be an independent, too.
There may be room at the center for a third party.
It seems Republicans and Democrats have more to fear from candidates who have no party at all.
"I think parties are useful institutions," said William Mayer, a professor of political science at Northeastern University who has studied third parties.
"Nevertheless, the future is with independents."
The time has never seemed more propitious for a third party to form than now.
Party identification with the two major parties is declining, and party loyalty has practically disappeared.
Increasingly, Americans complain that the Democrats and the Republicans have been hijacked by factions and cater to the ideological extremes.
But politicians and analysts say there are deep reasons why the wrath of the so-called "radical middle" has not and probably will not translate into a new party.
One reason is that the center is inhabited by, well, centrists.
Almost by definition they lack a galvanizing issue -- like abortion for the Right-to-Life Party -- that would unite them and spur them to build a party.
It is precisely because voters at the center tend to be less committed that the parties have drifted away from them.
Activists on both the left and the right are more likely to participate in party caucuses and primaries, thereby dominating the process.
"When have you ever seen a passionate centrist?" asked Charles Cook, publisher and chief analyst of the Cook Political Report, a Washington newsletter.
"There's very little passion or energy in the middle."
New parties, regardless of where they sit on the political spectrum, are notoriously difficult to establish.
State election laws have historically favored the Democrats and Republicans against potential challengers, and now Federal campaign financing laws do the same.
"A new party is a historical anomaly," said Senator Bill Bradley, the New Jersey Democrat, who recently announced he would not seek re-election but left open the possibility of an independent Presidential bid.
Those third parties that have maintained a consistent presence on the ballot in recent years, like the Libertarian Party, tend to have clearly focused ideologies, which points to another difficulty of forming a new party in the middle.
The center tends to be occupied by people of many different, even diverging views.
"There's enormous support for a third party," said Kevin Phillips, the Republican political analyst.
"But it always includes people who want all flavors -- pro-grape, pro-lemon, pro-lime."
Mr.
Mayer points out that independent candidates who call themselves centrists often end up with a platform that is highly idiosyncratic, well-suited to themselves, perhaps, but ill-suited to a broader movement.
Blue Sky v.
Reality
Although Mr.
Perot favors abortion rights and a balanced budget and vehemently opposed the North American Free Trade Agreement, it's hard to discern a set of underlying principles.
"It's not the kind of thing that can easily be translated into a stable organization," Mr.
Mayer said.
And Mr.
Perot's organization, United We Stand, shows what happens when one man's quirky views meet up with the realities of party-building.
Since its inception, United We Stand has been in an almost constant state of turmoil and has fielded virtually no candidates outside of its founder.
While the organization is a collection of Perot followers, Mr.
Mayer said, "they are not in any real sense an autonomous third party."


Dartmouth Defeats Fordham
The Fordham Rams, in another rebuilding season in the Patriot League, are trying to gauge how far they have to go.
On Sept. 9, they snapped a 14-game losing streak by routing Marist, the defending champions of the Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference.
But last week, the Rams returned to their usual ways in a last-minute defeat to Bucknell.
Yesterday afternoon, Fordham faced an early-season barometer: an Ivy League opponent.
But at Jack Coffey Field in the Bronx in front of 5,311 spectators, Dartmouth defeated Fordham, 34-14.


Christa Ramirez And C. T. Harpin
Christa Anne Ramirez, the daughter of Diane M. Ramirez and Samuel A. Ramirez of New York, was married yesterday to Christopher Taylor Harpin, the son of Jacqueline G. Eastman of Annapolis, Md., and the late Richard Rock Harpin Jr.
The Rev.
Bernard Camire performed the ceremony at St.
Jean Baptiste Roman Catholic Church in New York.
He was assisted by the Rev.
Lawrence Dolan, a great-uncle of the bride.
The bride, 25, and the bridegroom, 26, graduated from Lynchburg College.


INSIDE
INVESTING IT /Page 4  With retirement plans becoming less generous, Americans have to start saving earlier.
So why do only the good save young?
By Nick Ravo.
MUTUAL FUNDS /Page 7  The Kaufmann Fund has had a hot hand, and it wants the world to know it.
Trouble is, it may not be able to keep it up.
By Carole Gould.
EARNING IT /Page 12  A minor oversight at a lot of companies is costing employees who become disabled a lot of money in taxes.
By Bill Alpert.
VIEWPOINT /Page 14  Financial reporting is badly out of date, writes S.E.C.
Commissioner Steven M.H.
Wallman.


Open the Library, Sure, But Do It the Right Way
To the Editor:
Everyone agrees about the urgent need for better computer technology in libraries.
But many libraries, especially those in small or urban communities, are unable to meet this challenge because they lack the tax support.
Many of these libraries serve young people and adults who are desperately trying to improve themselves, and who have to compete with those who do have access to the latest information technology.


Portraits of a Neckline
Decolletage worthy of a Gainsborough.


Breath Defying
Garlic looks deceptively innocent.
On the surface, it appears pudgy and amiable, promising to deliver a note of summer to a meal in the middle of winter.
And it's this sunny disposition that may account for garlic's other life -- as antiseptic, antibiotic and deterrent to vampires.
A friend of mine was forced to wear a garlic necklace to school when she was young.
She was a healthy girl, but this may have had more to do with her social isolation than with garlic's germ-fighting properties.
Even so, I make a tea of chicken soup, chili peppers and 20 garlic cloves at the first sign of a cold.
It's funny how vulnerability sends moderns scurrying back in time for prescriptive remedies like Portuguese garlic soup and Greek garlic-and-potato puree.


Sept. 17-23; A Clear but Tenuous Victory
Hong Kong is to revert to Chinese rule in less than two years, but that did not prevent its voters from overwhelmingly turning down the appeal of pro-Chinese parties in legislative elections last week.
The elections, the last scheduled to be held under British rule, gave 12 of the 20 directly elected seats in the 60-member Legislative Council to the Democratic Party -- a group founded, in the wake of the 1989 massacre at Tiananmen Square in Beijing, to challenge China's plans for controlling Hong Kong.
In addition, the party secured 7 indirectly elected seats and is expected to be allied to 10 to 12 successful independent or small-party candidates.


A Club Fights For Its License
Webster Hall opened as a nightclub on East 11th Street in October 1992.
Within days, the neighbors began complaining.
Weekend nights were unbearable, they said in letters to Community Board 3, with the noise and congestion from cars and crowds often lasting until 5 A.M.
Because of the complaints -- and eight assaults and one rape that were reported on the premises -- the State Liquor Authority considered revoking the club's license.
It was renewed on Aug. 1, but only on the condition that the authority's board review the decision in public hearings.
The hearings began last week, with the next set for Oct. 5, and lawyers for both sides said the process could go on for months.


'Drive Fast': Words to Live By in Bosnia
The last improvised road sign, scrawled in black paint on a piece of plywood, before vehicles reach the front lines with the Bosnian Serbs reads: "Drive Fast."
The burned-out tanks, overturned trucks and small Yugo cars riddled with bullets lying along the road illustrate why that is good advice.
Serb heavy guns, moved recently from around Sarajevo to the sharp peaks that tower over the winding route, boom out like clockwork, tearing off huge chunks of asphalt.
World War II era tanks, covered with pine branches and crouched behind small rises, fire back.


BOOKS IN BRIEF: FICTION
HAPPY DAYS, UNCLE SERGIO  By Magali Garcia Ramis. White Pine Press, paper, $12.
Growing up in the repressed heart of the 1950's in the Puerto Rican town of Santurce, a young girl named Lidia plays the games of adolescence with her brother Andres and their cousin Quique.
As is often the case, they are in constant battle against the literal-mindedness of the adult world, here represented by Lidia's grandmother and two of her aunts as well as her widowed mother, who defers to the others rather than make waves.
Into this straitlaced universe of women suddenly enters the mysterious and exotic Uncle Sergio, fresh from New York and full of strange ideas.
For Lidia, what Sergio does most of all is help her define herself as a Puerto Rican and as a woman -- by taking her seriously and honoring her imagination.
By the time he returns to the United States, he has become "the only man I had ever learned to love." Because of this, she is devastated by her uncle's imagined betrayal, yet even this is something that, almost in spite of herself, she will eventually learn from.
Gracefully translated by Carmen C. Esteves, Magali Garcia Ramis's "Happy Days, Uncle Sergio" is a fine, frequently magical novel of growth and self-discovery.
JAMES POLK


Josie Edmondson, John Warfield
Mary Josephine Edmondson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Edmondson of New York, was married yesterday to John Watkins Warfield, a son of Maj.
Gen.
Edwin Warfield 3d of Woodbine, Md., and the late Carol Philips Horton.
The Rev.
Stephen Connor performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Maximilian Kolbe in Scarborough, Me.
Mrs.
Warfield, 28, is known as Josie.
She is a sales assistant in Vail, Colo., for Pecos River Learning Centers, a corporate training company.
She graduated from Vassar College.
Her father, a management consultant in New York, is a former president of the Kasco Corporation, a manufacturer of blades for the meat-cutting industry in New York.
Her mother, Mary Edmondson, a former head of the middle school at the Spence School in New York, retired as the director of admissions at the Loyola School, also in New York.


East Meets West
So you've seen "The King and I" and who hasn't?
Now try the source - Wednesday at 1:45 P.M. and Wed./Thur. at 3:45 A.M. on AMC.
John Cromwell's artistic black-and-white drama, "Anna and the King of Siam" (1946), from a fact-based book by Margaret Landon, is a delightful vehicle for Rex Harrison and Irene Dunne.
There's one stark touch: the runaway lovers are burned; Anna paces her room as flames light the window.
But it's a fine yarn, even without those songs.
Howard Thompson


The Art of the Entourage
EVEN in publicity, fashions come and go.
And the publicity trend of the moment?
The entourage.
Mimicking royal courts of the 16th century, the entourage -- a traveling retinue -- was invented as a publicity tool by movie studios in the 1930's, when stars were simply advertising vehicles.
The mogul Louis B. Mayer went so far as to send out lists of people stars could and should be seen with.


Kimberly McConville, Terry Kuester
Kimberly Anne McConville, a lawyer in Douglaston, Queens, was married yesterday to Terry Gerard Kuester, a principal consultant at Price Waterhouse, the accounting firm in New York.
The Rev.
James Dorr, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Church in Manhasset, L.I.
Mrs.
Kuester, 27, is a daughter of Patricia and Bernard R. McConville of Manhasset.
The bride graduated from Boston University and received her law degree from St.
John's University.


G.O.P. CONTENDERS FIND U.S. COFFERS SHORT OF MONEY
In a predicament that could directly affect whether some Republican Presidential candidates make it through the crucial first stage of the primary season, the Federal Election Commission is expecting a shortfall of at least $15 million in the Federal matching funds that candidates are planning to receive early next year.
While the amount of the deficit depends on how much the campaigns request by the end of this year, commission officials say the Treasury will have only $22.5 million to dispense in January.
Requests are expected to be between $30 million and $40 million, but could go higher.


IN SEARCH OF...WATER: Needing It, Find It, Doing Without; Harvest Worries
New Jersey is the third largest producer of cranberries in the nation, after Massachusetts and Wisconsin, and the 40 cranberry farmers here depend upon water to harvest their crops -- water that some of them don't have readily available this year.
Cranberries are planted in low-lying ground, and the bogs are separated by dirt dikes.
To harvest the berries, farmers pump water from a river or other body of water.
The water flows from one bog to the next, usually by gravity.


In This Corner . . .


Marshall &amp; Sonja &amp; Cheryl &amp; Jack
ANOTHER YOU  By Ann Beattie. 323 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $24.


POSTINGS: A Town House Facade to Deinstitutionalize the Look; Housing in Brooklyn for Mentally Ill Veterans
Until recently, most new shelters and residences for the homeless were in old buildings that had been renovated.
A recently completed project in the Bushwick section of Brooklyn, however, is one of the first of a new generation to be built from the ground up.
The five-story brick structure on a 9,000-square-foot lot at 832 Knickerbocker Avenue at Covert Street provides permanent housing for homeless mentally ill veterans.


Sept. 17-23; E-Mail
The Week in Review's electronic mail address is review@nytimes.com


Tiffany's Refitted For Breakfast, And Other Meals
For a generation of Greenwich Village residents, "Breakfast at Tiffany's" is not a reference to the 1961 Audrey Hepburn film but to a rendezvous at a cherished all-night diner on Sheridan Square.
That Tiffany's closed last year after a kitchen fire, but next month it will reopen with new owners and a decidedly upscale look.
Gone are the pink Formica flourishes, beveled glass and tattered vinyl booths.
The 120-seat diner is being refitted with mahogany and marble paneling, etched mirrors and a granite-trimmed Art Deco facade.
The new Tiffany's will have an "upgraded menu," said Pat Georges, who, with her husband, Angelo, has taken over the diner; they now run Michael's Diner in Astoria.
"We're making it much more fancy," she said, "but you'll still be able to order eggs at 3 A.M. as well as 3 P.M."


When It's Time to Bring Family Into the Family Business
EDWARD C. JOHNSON 3d knows a thing or two about managing money.
After all, he runs the nation's largest mutual fund company, Fidelity Investments.
So last month when he gave away a big stake in Fidelity's parent company, the FMR Corporation, you can be sure he had good reason.


For Part-Time Business Students, Golf Will Have to Wait
ON a sunny morning late last month, 40 alumni of New York University's Westchester business program met at Sterling Farms Golf Course in Stamford for a day of golf, sun and fun.
Of the school's 240 current students, however -- all of whom were invited -- just one attended.
"Time becomes a very precious commodity once you enter the program," said Mary K. Oberhelman, Westchester director of New York University's Stern School of Business.
"It's a lot easier to do things like that when you don't have to go to school."


Montague St. Faces Rigors Of Popularity
These days, when the telephone rings at the Brooklyn Heights office of William B. May, the real estate company, it is often a prospective business owner eager to find commercial space on Montague Street, the neighborhood's main shopping thoroughfare.
The company receives about 20 such calls a week, compared with two or three a week several years ago, said its vice president, Christopher Thomas.
"Usually, I have to tell them there's nothing available," he said.
Until recently there were as many as six vacancies along the four short blocks of Montague Street.
Today there are none.
"Things have never been so tight," Mr.
Thomas said.


For Lukas, A Day to Dominate And Plan
On an afternoon that cast long shadows toward the Breeders' Cup five weeks away, Thunder Gulch won, Serena's Song lost and their trainer, D. Wayne Lukas, towered over the racing landscape at Turfway Park by saddling four winners in the six races of the Kentucky Cup series.
Thunder Gulch had to fight for his seventh victory in nine starts this year, as he always does.
But he ran down Judge T C in the deep homestretch of the Kentucky Cup Classic and prevailed, as he did in the Florida Derby, the Kentucky Derby, the Belmont and the Travers.
And he will carry the same gutty style into the $3 million Breeders' Cup Classic at Belmont Park on Oct. 28, when at long last he will fight the 5-year-old handicap star Cigar for the title of Horse of the Year.


Bonnie McElroy, Paul F. Weber
Florance Wynn McElroy, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. McElroy 3d of Paoli, Pa., was married yesterday to Paul Frederick Weber, a son of Joan D. Weber of Ann Arbor, Mich., and the late Charles F. Weber.
The Rev.
Stephen K. Jacobson performed the ceremony at St.
David's Episcopal Church in Wayne, Pa.
Mrs.
Weber, 32, is known as Bonnie.
Until recently she was an executive secretary in the international business development division of Home Box Office, the cable television company, in New York.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
Her father is a principal in 1838 Investment Advisers in Radnor, Pa.


An Inn, a Menu and Works in Progress
IN everyday life everyone has an occasional off day, and friends understand.
But at a restaurant where dinner for two costs $50 to $70, those paying the tab are not interested in excuses.
A well-managed restaurant strives to maintain consistency.
Which brings us to two dining experiences at the beautifully refurbished Cafe Lafayette in Madison.
New owners have obviously spent a lot of money restoring the landmark inn and its two airy, high-ceilinged, peach-walled dining rooms, a third dining room with trellised roof and glass wall, and a more casual taproom off the bar.


A Celebrity Chef, but Not in Restaurants
ONE of Long Island's most publicized chefs has never worked in a restaurant kitchen.
Last month Cosmopolitan magazine chose him as the bachelor of the month.
When he appeared on the QVC shopping network on cable television, he sold 2,800 of his cookbooks in 11 minutes, more even than the Galloping Gourmet.


High Drama at the Birdbath
THIS summer's long drought in the Northeast has underscored just how important water is to life.
And not just plant life, but also the birds attracted by the flowers and seeds a gardener nourishes.
A particular delight in the garden has always been the birdbath, where various visitors congregate for cleanliness, a song and a sip.


WHO WILL FACE THE MUSIC?
Why in heaven's name have the young advocates of Social Security reform skipped over the really important intergenerational inequities immediately confronting them and fastened on to a post-work issue?
If I were 21 or 22 today, I would be much more concerned about the paucity of promising work and wage opportunities than about the longer-term problem of Social Security going broke before I got my chance to dip into it.
ROBERT B. CARSON Oneonta, N.Y.


Kathleen A. Leo, Steven Schwartz
Kathleen Anne Leo, the daughter of Dorothy and Robert Leo of New York, was married last evening to Steven Michael Schwartz, the son of Nancy Bristol of Westfield, N.J., and Richard Schwartz of Cherry Hill, N.J.
The Rev.
Sara Goold, a United Methodist minister, officiated at the Harrison House, a conference center in Glen Cove, L.I.
Rabbi Cy Lowenheim took part in the ceremony.
The couple both received law degrees from the Albany Law School.


Driving Without Delay: Trouble Spots To Avoid on the Roadways, if You Can
A look at trouble spots you may encounter in the next week courtesy of Transcom, an interstate transportation agency. 1.
ROUTE 4 -- Fort Lee.
Eastbound left lane and ramp to northbound Interstate 95 closed, through Oct. 31.


In Favor of a Bill To Register Pesticides
"Lawmakers to Push Bill for Pesticide Registry"  [ Aug. 27 ]  on the efforts of breast-cancer activists, environmentalists and public officials to pass a pesticide-registry bill in Albany highlighted the key issues of the bill.
Unfortunately some of the most important objections raised by the Long Island Farm Bureau are inaccurate and misleading.
The Farm Bureau official tried to claim that the bill doesn't cover "residential use," but he's partly wrong.
It's true the bill doesn't require individual homeowners to report their pesticide use.
But it does require reporting from lawn-care applicators and other businesses that apply pesticides to residential lawns -- or to school playgrounds or parks.


The Good Old Days Are Now
COMING OF AGE  The Story of Our Century by Those Who've Lived It.
By Studs Terkel. 468 pp.
New York: The New Press. $25.


On His Latest Trip to Atlanta, Carpenter Can Be More Secure
The last time he was in Atlanta, eight months ago, Ron Carpenter was trying to make the World League -- the refuge for National Football League wannabes -- and worried that he was considered a mere third-stringer in a special camp to place the players.
But when the Jets face the Falcons in the Georgia Dome today, Carpenter will be one of only three World League graduates starting in the N.F.L. this weekend.
He is the Jets' free safety for the immediate future following Gary Jones's knee surgery.


F.A.A. Will Use Simulator to Train Controllers on Breakdowns
The Federal Aviation Administration has announced a series of actions to prepare air traffic controllers for equipment failures, an acknowledgment that such breakdowns are becoming more common.
Among other things, the agency will build a simulator to train its controllers on how to react when computers break down.


Correction
A brief report last Sunday in the Playing in the Neighborhood column, about an exhibition of objects from the 1964-65 New York World's Fair, misidentified the sculpture in the photograph.
It was a small model of "Rocket Thrower," by Donald De Lue, not "Aries," a bronze by Paul Manship.


THE OLD WORLD'S NEWEST PLACES
Lisbon  A park and cafes reclaim the riverfront
Traditionally, Lisboetas have gazed fondly at their sweeping, luminous Tagus River from atop the city's seven hills.
The waterfront itself was uninviting or inaccessible, cut off by decaying warehouses, factories, container piers and a vast parking lot on Praca do Comercio (Government Square).
With their sights on Expo 98, which will take place in Lisbon, the port authorities have pledged to give the river back to the people, and this summer opened a six-mile stretch planned for recreational activities.


HERE THEY COME
How is it that the United States, so often described as the greatest nation on earth, has produced such a dismal lot of candidates, from both parties, for the Presidency.
Berke's report makes one's blood run cold.


Colorful Ways to Enjoy Wild Mushrooms
LAST year, according to the Department of Agriculture, sales of specialty mushrooms nearly doubled.
Shiitake, portobello, cremini, enoki and oyster mushrooms, once hard to get, are now available in supermarkets, and varieties that were once found only by mushroom hunters can be ordered by mail.
Now chanterelles, which look like bright orange feathery trumpets, are at their peak.
An unusual recipe for these mushrooms, served with red peppers and salmon, is given in "A Cook's Book of Mushrooms" (Artisan) by Jack Czarnecki, proprietor of Joe's restaurant in Reading, Pa.


Colorful Ways to Enjoy Wild Mushrooms, From Near and Far
LAST year, sales of specialty mushrooms nearly doubled, according to the Department of Agriculture.
Shiitake, portobello, cremini, enoki and oyster mushrooms, once hard to get, are now available in supermarkets, and varieties that were once found only by mushroom hunters can be ordered by mail.


Musical Presidents
The history of popular-music performances at the White House, as varied as a spin up and down the radio dial, is the subject of a new exhibit at the Richard Nixon Library and Birthplace in Yorba Linda, "Rockin' the White House: Four Decades of Presidents and Popular Music."


An Ordinary Day In Trenton's Life
City life is sometimes painful, sometimes gritty.
And sometimes it passes in a blur.
On May 3, under the auspices of the Trenton Artists' Workshop Association, 32 photographers turned their lenses on Trenton, documenting a single day.
Their work has been compiled into "Trenton Takes: 24 Hours in the City," on display through Oct. 8 at the Trenton City Museum, Parkside and Stuyvesant Avenues.


Indian-Run Casinos And a Capitol Mystery
Tax bills are generally thought to be more incomprehensible than mysterious.
But buried in the tax bill that the House Ways and Means Committee approved this week lies a genuine whodunit.
Among the phased-out deferrals and disallowed rollovers and modified exceptions, the bill's Republican authors offered an unexpected proposal: to levy the 34 percent corporate income tax on the profits of casinos, bingo halls and other betting parlors on Indian reservations.


A Distressed Town's Famous Son Sends Investment Money Home
Mystery swirled around this Delaware River community for months: who was the secret buyer of 12 waterfront acres in the depressed heart of town?
No one had been interested in Penns Grove real estate since the sprawling Du Pont chemical works next door in Carneys Point, once a cornerstone of the local economy, began laying off blue-collar workers decades ago.
Statistically, if not emotionally, this town of 5,200 is the state's second most economically distressed municipality, after Newark.


Why the Rich Get Richer
THE WINNER-TAKE-ALL SOCIETY  How More and More Americans Compete for Ever Fewer and Bigger Prizes, Encouraging Economic Waste, Income Inequality, and an Impoverished Cultural Life.
By Robert H. Frank and Philip J. Cook. 272 pp.
New York: Martin Kessler Books/ The Free Press. $25.


Mary Marriot, M. P. Broadhurst
Mary Helen Marriott, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent J. Marriott of Pinehurst, N.C., was married yesterday to Michael Patrick Broadhurst, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert C. Broadhurst of Havertown, Penn.
The Rev.
John P. McNamee officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of the Nativity in Fair Haven, N.J.
Mrs.
Broadhurst, 27, is the assistant to the general manager at the Pennsylvania Convention Center Authority in Philadelphia.She graduated from Dickinson College and is studying for her master's degree in arts administration at Drexel University.


Birthday Party For 19th Amendment
To commemorate the 75th anniversary of the 19th Amendment, which insured voting rights for women, the Woodrow Wilson House, in Washington, is displaying "An Act of Right Justice: Woodrow Wilson and Women's Suffrage."
Under pressure from many sources, including his daughters, President Wilson supported the amendment, which was eventually ratified on Aug. 26, 1920.


Successful Ex-Busboy Tackles Soups
AN American success story -- al dente.
In 1980, Pino Luongo, a 27-year-old Italian actor and a conscientious objector came to New York to avoid being drafted into the Italian Army.
Unable to speak English, he learned the language on the job working as a busboy at a restaurant in Greenwich Village.
Now 15 years later, Mr.
Luongo, who lives in Rye, employs 700 people, most of them working in the 10 restaurants he has opened during the last eight years, restaurants known for their stylish settings and Tuscan food.
"When I came to New York, I could see right away that there were no real Italian restaurants," he said.
"They call themselves Italian, but they were serving Americanized versions of Italian food. I could find no restaurants specializing in Italian regional cooking such as the Tuscan cooking of Florence, where I am from. And as an actor touring all of Italy, I became familiar with the cooking of other regions in Italy as well."


N.J. VINES/Unionville Vineyards; A Versatile Companion, in Limited Quantities
Hunter's Red Reserve, 1994. About $11.
For starters, you notice a suggestion of cinnamon.
Then, a cherry.
Next, both features mesh with a sweet oakiness.
The texture is smooth; The aftertaste lingers and lingers.
The body?
Light, like mainstream Beaujolais.
The grape?
Chambourcin, a French-American hybrid, picked in late October on the estate, in Hunterdon County.


CAM FELLA GOES UNDER THE KNIFE
There are hundreds of remarkable stories that could be written about the New Bolton Center at the University of Pennsylvania's School of Veterinary Medicine.
I was thrilled to read one of them in your magazine -- "Cam Fella Goes Under the Knife" (Aug. 27).
As an ophthalmologist to the human species and as a horse owner, I am amazed every time I send an animal to New Bolton.
I look forward to more stories about this unique and wonderful hospital.
DONNA BOOTH, M.D.
Towson, Md.


Suzette Correll, David W. Tudor
Suzette Christine Correll and Dr.
David William Tudor, both biostatisticians, were married yesterday in Chatou, France.
The Rev.
Yves Laloux, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the church of Notre-Dame de Chatou.
Mrs.
Tudor, 34, is the director of biometry and data management at Laboratoires UPSA in Rueil-Malmaison, France.
Dr.
Tudor, 43, works at Synthelabo Recherche in Dagneux, France.


Daphne C. Klein, Zachary Kaplan
Daphne Camerer Klein, a daughter of Eloise C. Klein of St.
Paul, Minn., and H. Blair Klein of Buffalo, Wyo., was married yesterday to Zachary Matthew Kaplan, the son of Lloyd A. Kaplan and Carolyn S. Kaplan, both of New York.
The Rev.
Craig Townsend, an Epsicopal priest , performed the ceremony on the dunes in Orleans, Mass.
The couple graduated from Vassar College.


Accessible Broadway: The Cheap Seats
Tickets to Broadway shows may cost more than $65 apiece these days, but reduced-price tickets for many shows are available at the two TKTS booths -- the main one in Duffy Square at 47th Street and Broadway, and a satellite at 2 World Trade Center.
Tickets for selected shows are sold at Duffy Square beginning at 3 P.M. on the day of performance for evening shows and at 10 A.M. for Wednesday and Saturday matinees, noon for matinees on Sunday.
The World Trade Center booth opens at 11 A.M. and also sells matinee tickets for the next day.
Tickets cost either 50 percent or 75 percent of box-office prices, determined by the producers, plus a $2.50 service charge per ticket.
Only cash and traveler's checks are accepted.
Information: (212) 768-1818.


Anne McCormack, Freeman E. Jones
Anne Beverly McCormack, the president of a New York charitable foundation that bears her name, and Maj.
Freeman Epes Jones, a strategic planner in the office of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in Washington, were married yesterday in Richmond.
The Rev.
Dr.
Richard L. Sommers performed the ceremony at River Road Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Jones, 34, graduated from Mary Baldwin College.
Major Jones, 38, is a graduate of Washington and Lee University and received a master's degree in international economics from Johns Hopkins University.


Democrats Want No Part of One Poll on '96
The Democratic Party is trying to have President Clinton's name deleted from the ballot of a popularity poll in which voters in cities around the country will be asked who should be President.
The poll is intended to heighten the Presidential candidates' interest in urban issues, and nearly 20 cities, including Newark and Rochester, have agreed to participate.
The balloting will take place on Nov. 7, coinciding with municipal elections in most of those cities that day.


Egypt Says Militant Muslim Is Seized in Croatia
Egyptian officials said today that a senior leader of the militant Muslim organization seeking to overthrow the Government here was arrested this month in Croatia.
Al Ahram, Egypt's largest Government-owned paper, said that the militant, Talaat Kassem, was arrested in Zagreb, the Croatian capital, on charges that he entered illegally and that he was on his way to Bosnia and Herzegovina, where hundreds of Islamic militants are suspected of operating training bases.


Just for the Fun Of It
To the Editor:
Art Deco is fun, and you can enjoy it in living color in any of those British-made Hercule Poirot television episodes  [ "Art Deco: Still Not Forgiven for Being Fun," Aug. 27 ] .
Note the simplicity of the exteriors and the exuberance of the interiors, from railings to elevator doors.


Awaiting Call, Helms Puts Foreign Policy on Hold
After two months of pressure tactics intended to force the Clinton Administration to revamp its foreign policy bureaucracy, Senator Jesse Helms has dug in, vowing to continue to hold up all ambassadorial appointments until he is taken more seriously.
As part of his campaign, the North Carolina Republican has halted business meetings of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, frozen 400 State Department promotions and blocked more than a dozen treaties and other international agreements, including the second Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty and the Chemical Weapons Convention, so they cannot be voted on by the full Senate.


IN SEARCH OF...Water: Needing It, Finding It, Doing Without; Digging Deeper
Finding a well digger is no easy job these days -- most are out working overtime.
"We can't finish a meal anymore without people calling for help," said Connie Callahan, who along with her husband, Thomas, owns Callahan Well Drilling and Pump Service in Berlin, Camden County.
And it's almost always an urgent call.
"People are either in the middle of doing a load of wash or they are watering their grass and the well goes dry," she said.


Ann G. Crisp, J. T. von Stade Jr.
Ann Gilbert Crisp, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter O. Crisp of Mill Neck, L.I., was married yesterday to John Tagart von Stade Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs. von Stade of Peapack, N.J.
The Rev.
Robert A. Bryan, the Anglican Archdeacon of the North Shore of Quebec, performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church on Fishers Island, N.Y.
Mrs. von Stade, 28, is an associate in corporate communications at Salomon Brothers, the investment bank in New York.
She graduated from Hamilton College.
Her father is a founder and the managing partner of Venrock Associates, a venture capital firm in New York.
Her mother, Emily R. Crisp, is the president of Crisp Computer Corporation, a computer services company in Mill Neck.


Carol Burnett Comes Round To Where She Started From
IT IS A RAINY SUNDAY MORNING IN early August, and Carol Burnett is fighting a cold.
She is gamely attacking a Belgian waffle, popping vitamins C, B and E with calcium and beta carotene and talking about her return to Broadway after 30 years and several lifetimes of laughter.
She is trim and elegant in workout clothes, her surprisingly delicate fingers fondling the flatware.
She looks younger than her 62 years and greets a stranger with a big hug and a kiss.
But she is tired and bruised from 12-hour rehearsals, including bouts of fencing, and she hides her eyes behind smoky sunglasses even in this summer gloom.


Gingrich Seems To Withdraw Default Threat
Speaker Newt Gingrich appeared to back off slightly late Friday from his threat to have the United States default on its obligations unless President Clinton accepted the Republican plan for budget cutting.
In an interview with Bloomberg Business News, Mr.
Gingrich, Republican of Georgia, suggested that he might be willing to raise the debt limit temporarily -- a period he defined as "a couple of days or a week" -- so that the Government could continue to make payments on Social Security, veterans benefits and interest due on bonds.


Woodstock Family Values
Not many families are as eccentric as the one in Jonathan Strong's latest novel, OFFSPRING (Zoland, paper, $14.95).
Linc and Izzy Trace are unregenerate hippies happily ensconced in a Chicago suburb; their three young sons, misfits with Old Testament names who prefer pencils to computers, spend all their free time digging an elaborate tunnel in the dirt cellar beneath their home.
To the astonishment of their extended family, Linc and Izzy have forged an exceptionally durable bond, somehow managing to keep their children close inside a protective circle of love.
This is a deeply happy household -- or so it seems.
Yet external forces, from difficult relatives to interfering school officials, are beginning to assail its battlements.
And as the Traces' oldest son, Obadiah, inches toward adolescence, Linc and Izzy are in for some surprises that will shake their slightly smug certainty in their own private realm.
A timely fable of family and cultural values, Mr.
Strong's tender novel is somewhat undermined by its too conventionally unconventional protagonists and the cliche of the counterculture as repository of wisdom and probity.
But "Offspring" is saved by its exquisite writing.
With spare, fluid prose, Mr.
Strong envelops the Traces in a dreamy, womblike world, delineating in knowing and delicate detail all the bliss and the blundering that are part of parental, filial and conjugal love.
ZOFIA SMARDZ


AMONG THE BELIEVERS
IT'S DEATH WEEK HERE IN Memphis, the week leading up to the mass veneration of Elvis Presley's grave, and the signature sound in the ambient soundtrack is a song called "Hurt." The city is swelling with pilgrims from all over the world.
Tens of thousands of mourners, fans, impersonators, icon-sellers, former Elvis entourage members and hangers-on are flooding into this oven-baked Egyptian-named Mississippi River metropolis, the place that midwifed the birth of the blues on Beale Street and bore witness to the death of Elvis on his Graceland toilet.
For days, a Canterbury-like fusion of carnival and spiritual impulses has been building toward the convergence on the grave in a climactic ceremony referred to simply as "Candlelight." It's the central ritual in Elvis Culture, a phenomenon that has lately transcended the familiar contours of a dead celebrity cult and has begun to assume the dimensions of a redemptive faith.
It began, the veneration ritual, with small gatherings at the gates of Graceland in the first few years after Elvis's death on Aug. 16, 1977.
A few hundred fans lighting candles on Death Night has mushroomed to tens of thousands now.
Despite the oppressive August heat in Memphis, the death ceremony eventually dwarfed the January birthday remembrance on the Elvis liturgical calendar and began expanding from a single night to a full weeklong pilgrimage and pageant.
The corporate headquarters of Elvis Presley Enterprises at Graceland (representing the Estate, which is owned by Elvis's daughter, Lisa Marie) prefers calling it Elvis Week to Death Week and schedules a busy round of upbeat celebratory concerts, dances and the like.
But for the deadly serious mourners who make the pilgrimage here from all continents (and from all age brackets), the central focus is on loss, on hurt, on the moment of grieving communion at the grave.


Cheers for N.C.A.A.
To the Sports Editor:
The National Collegiate Athletic Association decision this year to stop individual celebration in the end zone is the first positive decision made on behalf of college football since Rudy was allowed one play against Georgia Tech.


At 90, 'Jewish Tarzan' Still Pleases Crowds
In the far less politically correct Depression era, they called him the Jewish Tarzan and the Hebrew Hercules.
He was a squat 200-pound professional wrestler named Abe Colman, who once went to Australia and came back kicking like a kangaroo.
He was known for grunting and groaning and for lifting opponents twice his size over his head and slamming them mercilessly to the mat.
Still built like a tank, Mr.
Colman, who turned 90 on Wednesday, is not as quick as he used to be.
He walks slowly now, with a cane.
His ears are shriveled like cauliflower, the result of more than 30 years of headlocks.
And he is mostly deaf in his left ear.
But he is still a crowd pleaser.


Demoralized, E.P.A. Works To Set Goals
Top officials at the Environmental Protection Agency are putting the final touches on what they call their first comprehensive statement of long-term goals, even as Congress prepares budget cuts that the officials say will make it impossible to achieve them.
The agency's statement defines broad goals that largely conform to mainstream environmental objectives.
They would establish concrete measures of success in the nation's effort to clean up the air in cities, the water in rivers, the emissions from automobiles and the poison in industrial toxic dumps.
Some of these goals have been codified in laws like the Clean Water Act or in treaties like the one on global climate signed in Rio de Janeiro in 1992.


What Czar Achieved
To the Editor:
Ralph Slovenko judges Czar Nicholas II to have been "an extraordinarily inane head of state" (letter, Sept. 20).
If Nicholas was as inane as his diary appears to Professor Slovenko, how does he explain the achievements of that reign -- the economic leap forward, agrarian reforms, birth of a parliamentary regime, the choice of world-class ministers; the achievements in World War I that were praised by Churchill?
IRINA BAGRATION  New York, Sept. 20, 1995


This Fall, Shows Look to the Girls, As Both Viewers and Characters
THE fall children's television season has begun, and this year it's coed.
"Girls like adventures as much as boys," Madeline tells Lord Cucuface in "The New Adventures of Madeline," a new animated series on Saturdays at 8 A.M. on ABC.
That a girl would make such a protest in 1995 may seem quaint, but children's television, particularly on Saturday mornings, has long been a boys' club, dominated by Ninja Turtles, X-Men and Garfield.


Not Cutting-Edge French, but Pleasant
IT'S vanilla," remarked a friend who was not referring to the rich ice cream in the restaurant's best dessert, a raspberry melba, but to the dining room and the dining experience at La Petite Maison.
The anonymous room, with its mulberry walls, muted floral carpeting, Art Deco lighting fixtures and walls of mirrors, has no distinctive personal features, no pictures, no decorative plates and no pottery.
The lace half-curtains at the windows and the tape of Edith Piaf's singing in the background are the only Gallic touches.


High Drama at the Birdbath
THIS summer's long drought in the Northeast has underscored just how important water is to life.
And not just plant life, but also the birds attracted by the flowers and seeds a gardener nourishes.
A particular delight in the garden has always been the birdbath, where various visitors congregate for cleanliness, a song and a sip.


A Bit Slower At 90, but Still A Crowd Pleaser
In the far less politically correct Depression era, they called him the Jewish Tarzan and the Hebrew Hercules.
He was a squat 200-pound professional wrestler named Abe Colman, who once went to Australia and came back kicking like a kangaroo.
He was known for grunting and groaning and for lifting opponents twice his size over his head and slamming them mercilessly to the mat.
Still built like a tank, Mr.
Colman, who turned 90 on Wednesday, is not as quick as he used to be.
He walks slowly now, with a cane.
His ears are shriveled like cauliflower, the result of more than 30 years of headlocks.
And he is mostly deaf in his left ear.
But he is still a crowd pleaser.


Coleman Is a Problem
To the Sports Editor:
Shame on Derrick Coleman for demanding that the Nets trade him!
As the highest-paid power forward in the National Basketball Association at $7.5 million a season, I am disgusted at Coleman for showing no loyalty to the franchise that has made him a multimillionaire.
If Coleman dares to question the franchise's commitment to winning, he need look no further than his own juvenile attitude on the court, and his petulant demands off it.
JAMES A. NOLL  Fair Haven, N.J.


Julia Pemberton And Jay Hellums
Julia Pemberton, a daughter of Patricia C. Pemberton of Stamford, Conn., and Louis W. Pemberton of New York, was married yesterday on Martha's Vineyard to Jay David Hellums, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jesse D. Hellums of Houston.
The Rev.
James C. Martin performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in West Tisbury.
Mrs.
Hellums, 32, is a food stylist and consultant and a culinary writer, based in Houston.
She graduated from Duke University and the New York Restaurant School.
Her father is a senior vice president of Oppenheimer &amp; Company, the investment bank in New York.


Great College Teachers Build Lasting Bonds; The Research Link
To the Editor:
Christopher Winship and Mark Ratner's Mr.
Chips has been supplanted by professors, women as well as men, likely to realize recognition as talented teachers and productive scholars (Op-Ed, Sept. 17).


K. M. O'Brien And Dhiren Shah
Katherine M. O'Brien, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James O'Brien of Wilton, Conn., was married yesterday to Dhiren Shah, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harkisandas Shah of Bhaunagar, India.
The Rev.
John Boehning performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
Mrs.
Shah, 32, is a vice president in the multimedia group at Capital Cities/ABC in New York.
She graduated from Duke University and received an M.B.A. from Stanford University and a master's degree in general graduate studies from Harvard University.
Her father is the deputy chief financial officer and a managing director of the Bankers Trust Company in New York.


In Passaic, a Road to Nowhere May Be Getting Somewhere
The missing link. A highway to nowhere. A permanent detour.
Route 21 has been called all these names, and more, by a generation of motorists who have been frustrated by the highway's abrupt end at Monroe Street here.
But their language may soon change.


Robin E. Haft, Steven J. Litt
Robin E. Haft, a daughter of Pamela W. Slatt of New York and Robert S. Haft of Sarasota, Fla., was married yesterday evening to Steven J. Litt, a son of Carole and Arthur Litt of Atlanta.
Rabbi Carole Balin performed the ceremony at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park.
Mrs.
Litt, 27, is the governmental and community affairs coordinator for Vail Associates Inc., the owner of Vail and Beaver Creek (Colo.) Resorts.
She is a graduate of St.
Lawrence University.
Her mother is the director of the lower- and middle-school music programs at the Birch Wathen Lenox School in New York.
Her father retired as a vice president of Aracca Petroleum, an oil exploration company, in New York.


Michael Petropoulos, Maria Picciuca
Maria Frances Picciuca, a daughter of Louise and Joseph Picciuca of Woodstock, Ga., and Michael Petropoulos, a son of Drs.
Katherine and Panagiotis Petropoulos of Garden City, L.I., were married yesterday in Hempstead, L.I.
The Rev.
Nicholas J. Magoulias officiated, and Msgr.
Thomas Leonard took part in the ceremony at St.
Paul's Greek Orthodox Cathedral.
The couple, both 30 and graduates of Trinity College in Hartford, work in New York for the American International Group, the insurance company, she as a bond claims analyst in the surety claims department and he as a senior supervisor in the environmental claims department.


WHO WILL FACE THE MUSIC?
I agree with the substance of Elizabeth Kolbert's "Who Will Face the Music?" (Aug. 27): reform the system now, or the "baby busters" will not stick around to see what happens.
I know of people who are thinking seriously of emigrating so that they might pursue the American Dream.
Remember the American Dream?
The one where your children would have better lives than yours?
Reform the system now, while it can still help me and my parents.
It is too late for my grandparents.
They had to sell their only asset, their house, to pay for health care.
They lived through the Depression in that house, and they never thought they would have to sell it to take care of themselves.
The system failed them.


Crossland's Parent Discussing A Takeover By Republic Bank
Two more New York City banks appear ready to combine.
Brooklyn Bancorp's directors met this weekend to discuss an acquisition offer from the Republic New York Corporation, people familiar with the negotiations said yesterday.
The price for Brooklyn Bancorp, which is the parent of Crossland Savings Bank, is expected to be in the range of $500 million.
Representatives of the two banks declined to comment on the negotiations.


Victoria Dalzell, Sean T. Dundon
Dr.
Victoria Perrine Dalzell, a pediatric resident, was married yesterday to Sean Thomas Dundon, an environmental consultant.
The Rev.
Susan H. Crampton performed the ceremony at the Grace Episcopal Church in Amherst, Mass.
The bride, 28, works at the Children's Memorial Hospital in Chicago.
She graduated from Smith College and received her medical degree from the University of New Mexico.
She is the daughter of Lee and Robert Dalzell Jr. of Williamstown, Mass.
The bride's father is the Ephraim Williams Professor of American history at Williams College there, and her mother is the college's head reference librarian.


Few Protest Metro-North Fare Hike
IF Westchester commuters were upset by the average 9 percent fare hike proposed for Metro-North, they did not turn out to protest.
Only 15 people showed up at a hearing held at the public library here recently by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority.
Of those speakers, four were elected officials and three came to complain about train service in Rockland County.


Sept. 17-23; Send Chili Con Carne To Your Kid in the Army!
REMEMBER $400 hammers, $600 toilet seats, $7,600 coffee pots and $3.5 million studies measuring women's torsos?
Well, now the Army has found a new way to prove its unerring instinct for economy.
A report commissioned by the Army under a three-year, $1 million grant has managed to say in 415 pages what every Jewish mother can say in a single Yiddish word: "Es!"


Fashionably Present
Barneys New York, Sept. 20.


RESULTS PLUS
AUTO RACING  Irvan's Return Delayed
Ernie Irvan's return to competition was postponed for at least a week when qualifying for yesterday's Goody's 150 Nascar SuperTruck race in Martinsville, Va., was rained out.
The wet weather limited on-track action yesterday to about 30 minutes of practice for today's Goody's 500 Winston Cup race and cut short qualifying for the truck race after only six drivers made attempts on the half-mile oval.


Arts of Africa Are Feted in Britain
A nationwide season of events celebrating the arts of Africa and the African Diaspora is being held in Britain this fall and winter.
Highlights include "Africa: The Art of a Continent" an exhibition at the Royal Academy of Arts in Piccadilly from Oct. 4 to Jan. 21.
Examples of the 700 works on display include a carved head of the Amarna Princess, daughter of Ahknaten, from the Cairo Museum; the basketry of Rwanda's Tutsi; a totemic bird pole from Zimbabwe; Zulu snuff bottles, and textiles produced in Zaire.
The museum is open daily from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission $9.75.


Tiffany Harrison, Jonathan Sweet
Tiffany Owen Harrison, an actress, was married yesterday to Jonathan Wray Sweet, an investment manager in New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
Michael Anderson performed the ceremony at the Westminster Presbyterian Church in Oklahoma City.
Mrs.
Sweet graduated from the University of Oklahoma and the American Academy of Dramatic Arts.
She is the daughter of Pattye Gers of Oklahoma City and the late Joe Harrison, and the stepdaughter of Jack Gers.


Liberties; What Is This?
Jesse Jackson was never going to go gently.
It was not surprising that he was openly snappish about losing his status as the Great Black Hope of American politics.
In a New Yorker profile of Colin Powell, Henry Louis Gates Jr. transcribed Mr.


Let the Movies Begin


A Hangout for Cigar Fans
Smokers are not in retreat everywhere.
The Grand Hyatt hotel on 42d Street in New York last week opened the Cigar Room at Trumpets, a 34-seat restaurant and lounge for cigar smokers -- and those who can stand the smell enough to hang out with them.
For information, contact the Grand Hyatt at (212) 883-1234.


Ms. Kamatani, Mr. DeMeulemeester
Kathleen Keiko Kamatani, an associate strategic planning director at the J. Walter Thompson advertising agency in New York, was married last evening to Robert Sean DeMeulemeester, a manager of business development and planning at AlliedSignal Aerospace in Teterboro, N.J.
The Rev.
Paul Sorensen of the United Church of Religious Science officiated at the Wyndham Bel Age Hotel in West Hollywood, Calif.
The bride, 30, and the bridegroom, 28, received M.B.A.'s from Columbia University.
She graduated from the University of California at Berkeley, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
He graduated from Lehigh University.


Elizabeth Obee, James C. Street
Elizabeth Mae Obee, a botanist, was married yesterday to Dr.
James Colin Street, a postdoctoral research fellow.
The Rev.
Robert J. Tomlian performed the ceremony at St.
John Nepomucene Roman Catholic Church in New York.
Mrs.
Street, 25, is a researcher who monitors endangered plant species for the Chester, N.J., field office of the Nature Conservancy, the land conservation organization, and for the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection in Trenton.
She graduated from Louisiana State University and received a master's degree in ecology from Rutgers University.


BOOKS IN BRIEF: FICTION
WORKING WOMEN  And Other Stories. By Tricia Bauer. Bridge Works Publishing, $19.95.
Set in small cities and modest suburbs, the stories in Tricia Bauer's debut collection are mostly about blue-collar men and women, people who work for a living, not for self-fulfillment.
But though many of these stories appear to be about first jobs and leaving home, the author's real focus is on the subtle discoveries that shape our ideas about ourselves -- about what we are and what we may become.
In "Fortunes," a young poetry-scribbling cashier named Carla accompanies her mother, a receptionist, and her mother's friends on a ladies' night out; the women visit a palm reader, whose predictions of dazzling success unexpectedly give Carla the courage to see herself as an artist.
The narrator of "Visiting Hours," just out of college but still living at home, spends her mornings briskly writing obituaries for a Scranton, Pa., newspaper and her nights driving aimlessly with a boyfriend, convinced she has "all the time in the world." At first aware of the dead only as so many names to spell correctly, she has realized, by the end of the story, that her name will one day join the list.
Ms.
Bauer's prose is as unpretentious as most of her characters, but its accumulation of simple, apparently artless detail sometimes leads to surprising depths, abrupt revelations of life's possibilities as well as its pain.
ELLEN PALL


Deadline Nears On Fund Waiver For Westway
Westway, the $2 billion superhighway proposed in 1974, provoked a classic New York power struggle and was finally killed a decade ago.
But one bitter Westway dispute is still unresolved after all these years, and the deadline for a decision is Saturday.
Public officials and community groups are fighting over whether the state and city should repay the Federal Government the $80 million it advanced in 1981 to buy Westway's right-of-way: 264 acres in the Hudson River and 66 acres along its bank.
The state has until Saturday to seek a Federal waiver that would cancel the debt.


Conversations/Paul Hill; From Thought to Deed: In the Mind Of a Killer Who Says He Served God
SANDY-HAIRED and bespectacled with a well-muscled 6-foot frame, Paul Jennings Hill has an appearance that might be described as Computer Programmer All-American.
The 41-year-old former Presbyterian minister presents such an air of cordiality and evenness that he hardly seems a homicidal religious fanatic at all.
Yet Mr.
Hill is an unapologetic killer, condemned to die in Florida's electric chair for the shotgun slayings of a doctor, John Bayard Britton, and a security escort, James H. Barrett, outside a Pensacola abortion clinic a year ago July.
To talk to him is to encounter a calm zealot's eerily disarming, internally consistent logic -- an impermeable personal conviction of the sort that often fatefully haunts society.
In an interview here at Florida State Prison a week and a half ago, Mr.
Hill spoke not of remorse but of relief for having killed.


Dollars and Dallas: League of Their Own?
ON the field, they butt heads.
Off the field, in the business of merchandising and promotion, the teams of the National Football League have long embraced one another, a 32-year success story in socialism.
They sell their names and logos for use on jackets, T-shirts, mugs, caps and other goods through a central organization, NFL Properties.
And at the end of the year, each of the 30 teams shares equally in the proceeds.
No matter that the Dallas Cowboys alone account for one-fifth of all sales of N.F.L. merchandise, nearly twice as much as the next best team.
Enter Jerry Jones, the Arkansas oilman who in 1989 acquired the Cowboys and their stadium for $140 million.
Mr.
Jones's mantra is that teams can market themselves on their own much better than does NFL Properties, and he has set out to prove it in ways that are enraging the league.


Can a Pop Composer Help Out Broadway?
IS THE WORLD READY FOR A Musical comedy spoof of "Faust" in which the Lord is an out-of-touch corporate executive, the Devil an aging, sexually impotent Lothario, and the title character a grungy, Nintendo-obsessed student at Notre Dame?
Randy Newman, the La Jolla Playhouse and Warner Brothers Records hope so.
This month, Mr.
Newman's first musical is making its debut in two forms: as an all-star record album and as a stage production at the playhouse, just north of San Diego.
Pop music's sharpest wit, who is famous for writing dangerous songs in which rednecks blast liberals, tall people wish short people dead and bigots and fantasists of all shapes and sizes spill out their twisted dreams, will soon learn how well his brand of hip irony translates to the stage.


The Return of Covert Operations
Almost from the day it was created nearly 50 years ago the Central Intelligence Agency has been bedazzled by covert operations.
At times the allure of acting in secret to bend the world to American interests with private armies, propaganda programs and political intrigue was so intoxicating it overwhelmed the agency's main business of espionage and intelligence analysis.
Now, despite a history of disastrous operations, the agency is talking about a new era of covert action.
There is a place for covert operations in the execution of American national security policy, but it must be narrowly and precisely defined.
Whatever thin justification the cold war provided for reckless adventures is gone.
The country can no longer tolerate uncontrolled operations like the failed Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba in 1961 or the clandestine effort in the 1980's to trade arms for hostages with Iran and secretly support the contra rebels in Nicaragua.


Other Memories of Queens . . . And Readers' Thoughts on Psychotherapy, Marijuana, and More; In Old Queens, Blizzards, Trolleys and a World's Fair
To the Editor:
I moved to Jamaica with my family when I was a teen-ager in 1931 and remained until Feb. 15, 1942, when I married and moved to Forest Hills.
I have so many memories of growing up in Jamaica.


Musicians, Practice and Pain
AT a place known for the exuberance of its music making, medical experts recently gathered to consider a dark subtheme plaguing many musicians and sometimes ending their careers: pain.
The Norfolk Chamber Music Festival, held in conjunction with the Yale Summer School of Music, was host to a conference this summer entitled "Medical Problems in the Performing Arts," which was co-sponsored by the festival and summer music school and the Yale School of Medicine's department of orthopedics and rehabilitation and the Yale Child Study Center.
Nearly 50 musicians, dancers and health professionals attended the day-long conference, which featured several authorities on music medicine and sports medicine.


Sept. 17-23: The Simpson Trial; The Lawyers Rest. The Defendant Speaks. Now It's the Jury's Turn.
Lawyers for O. J. Simpson couldn't end their case with Mark Fuhrman, who refused to testify, nor could they tell jurors in the double murder case why the former Los Angeles detective had disappeared.
And ending with two former Mafiosi was not quite the bang the defense had in mind, even if the pair challenged the testimony of another key police officer.
So the defense pulled out the biggest stop of all: Mr.
Simpson himself.
Though it lasted only a few seconds, and it was out of the jury's presence, Mr.
Simpson's soliloquy had been a work rehearsed for two weeks.
Ostensibly waiving his right to testify, he spoke instead of why he had not taken the stand, his faith in the jury, and his impatience to be freed of what he said were the false charges against him.


Angels Lose Ninth Straight
Rangers 5, Angels 1
The California Angels lost their ninth straight game and dropped one and a half games behind the Yankees in the wild-card standings last night as the Texas Rangers scored five runs in the first inning and won, 5-1.


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday with an article about local laws to protect farmers' rights misidentified a farmer shown riding a tractor.
He was Ronnie Lee, of Lee's Turkey Farms in East Windsor, not Jesse Blake.


Polly Greenberg, Donal P. Daly
Polly Greenberg, a daughter of Jan and Lester Greenberg of New York, was married yesterday to Donal Patrick Daly, a son of Brid and Hugh Daly of Dublin.
Judge Ruth Sussman of the New York Criminal Court in the Bronx officiated at Valeur, the former Alice Astor house, in Rhinebeck, N.Y.
Ms.
Greenberg, 27, is keeping her name.
She is an assistant district attorney in Manhattan.
She graduated from Wesleyan University and received her law degree from New York University.
Mr.
Daly, 31, is an institutional broker at Cantor Fitzgerald, a securities brokerage firm in New York.
He graduated from Trinity College in Dublin.


One for the Theater
The Joseph Papp Public Theater/New York Shakespeare Festival gala, Sept. 18.


Jury Deliberating In Terror-Plot Case
After eight months, more than 200 witnesses and a mind-fogging flood of secretly recorded conversations, the trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and nine co-defendants is nearly over.
A jury in Federal District Court in Manhattan has begun deliberating the fate of the men, who are accused of a bombing and assassination conspiracy.
Article, page 45.


No Deadline. No Details. No Big Deal.
BETTYELUISE SALLE, a 76-year-old retired schoolteacher in Hemet, Calif., has been the proud owner of AT&amp;T stock for more than three decades.
And, like many individual investors, she was not fazed by Wednesday's unexpected news that the $75 billion telecommunications giant was breaking itself into three companies -- for telephone equipment, communications services and computers.
"I have no intention of unloading," said Ms.
Salle, who owns 103 AT&amp;T shares.
"I think the other companies will do real well because they'll be able to do things they haven't done before."


For Chess, a Wonderful Town
The world championship tilt atop the World Trade Center, between Gary Kasparov and Viswanathan Anand, is but the latest page in New York's distinguished chess history.
In this city, after all, "New Yorkers walk fast, talk fast and think fast," says George Frohlinde [ noam doublechecking ] , the owner of the Village Chess Shop.
Many of those fast thinkers have been immigrants, and with each wave of immigrants, New York's standing in the chess world has risen.
Of the 41 American grandmasters, 22 live in or around New York. [ noam doublechecking ]  Here are some of the high points of its history: 1857 -- Paul Morphy, the prodigy from New Orleans, creates a stir in New York when he arrives to win what was considered the first national tournament. 1886 -- Wilhelm Steinitz, an Austrian who later became a U.S. citizen, wins a world championship match.
He died in 1900 in an insane asylum on Wards Island. 1905 -- Jose Raul Capablanca, one of the most intuitive and gifted players ever, arrives from Cuba to attend Columbia's engineering school. 1920 -- Samuel Reshevsky, who was later widely thought to be the world's great chess prodigies, arrives from Poland to begin a North American tour in New York at age 8.
He later takes up residence in the city. 1924 -- One of the great all-time tournaments is held at the Alamac Hotel.
The field includes Capablanca, Emmanuel Lasker and Alexander Alekhine, world champions all.
Capablanca spent some of his years as champion living in New York. 1945 -- The Soviet Union demolishes the United States, 15 1/4 to 4 1/2, in a match played by by radio telegraph.
Mayor Fiorello La Guardia, above, makes the ceremonial first move at a Manhattan hotel ballroom. 1959 -- Bobby Fischer, who grew up in Brooklyn and is considered one of the strongest players in history, drops out of Erasmus Hall High School to pursue chess.
He is already United States champion and the youngest grandmaster in history.
"It's a good thing he did," says his first coach, John W. Collins.
"I don't think he would have succeeded in too many other things." 1972 -- Fischer wins the world title from Boris Spassky as a worldwide television audience watches.
The New-York based commentator for PBS, Shelby Lyman, becomes a celebrity in his own right.  1989 -- Gata Kamsky defects from Russia at the New York Open, where he was the youngest entrant, at 14.
He is now a Brooklyn resident and the highest-ranked American player. 1990 -- "Chess" makes its debut on public access television, Channel 16 in Manhattan.
The host of the Saturday morning show, Jim Savage, analyzes games and interviews players in a studio on 23d Street. 1992 -- The first Chessathon is held in Central Park.
The annual event, now held at Grand Central Terminal, pits thousands of children against masters. 1993 -- The film "Searching for Bobby Fischer" opens.
Perhaps the best-known chess movie, it tells the story of Joshua Waitzkin, a real-life New York chess prodigy.
Like the film "Fresh," released last year, it spotlights speed chess as played in Washington Square Park as a source of street-based creativity.
A New York specialty, speed chess uses a clock that keeps track of the time players spend thinking.
Players are usually allowed five minutes a game.
Photos: Playing a game of speed chess outside Bryant Park.; Ivory chess piece from the 14th century in the collection of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.; Bobby Fischer at 14, four months before he won his first U.S.
Championship.


Testing, Testing . . .


Trouble Spots to Avoid on the Roads
A look at trouble spots you may encounter in the next week -- or month, or months -- courtesy of Transcom, an interstate transportation agency. 1.
ROUTE 4 -- Fort Lee.
Eastbound left lane and ramp to northbound Interstate 95 closed, through Oct. 31.


SCHOOL: Ban That Toy
Preschools nationwide, concerned about violence and violent play, are banning a variety of objects this fall.
Among them:
* Power Rangers, toy swords and guns -- South Fork Christian School, Water Mill, N.Y.


The Banality of Love
HANNAH ARENDT, MARTIN HEIDEGGER  By Elzbieta Ettinger. 139 pp.
New Haven: Yale University Press.


Hokies Are Outranked But Outplay Miami
Virginia Tech 13, Miami 7
Dwayne Thomas ran for 165 yards and a touchdown to lead host Virginia Tech to a 13-7 victory over No. 17-ranked Miami yesterday, marking the first time the Hurricanes have lost to an unranked team in 11 years, a streak of 71 games.


Putting a Different Spin On Rock-and-Roll's Past
IN THE FINAL EPISODE OF "Rock-and-Roll," a 10-part documentary series that begins tonight on PBS, the voice-over pauses for a lengthy excerpt from the rap group Run-DMC's video for its hit "King of Rock." The clip shows the band in a rock-and-roll museum watching a television monitor.
Flashing on the screen are scenes of Buddy Holly in bow tie, performing "That'll Be the Day"; Little Richard in manic grin, bashing out "Good Golly Miss Molly," and Jerry Lee Lewis jumping off his piano stool during a rendition of "Whole Lot-ta Shakin' Goin' On." Then a member of Run-DMC unplugs the television.
The scene well illustrates rap's feeling that it has been ostracized by rock-and-roll's mainstream, and it also shows how popular music now evolves by reacting against itself.
That's why the scene was included in the series.
But it also says a lot about the pitfalls inherent in the documentation of rock-and-roll.
Those same scenes of Buddy Holly, Little Richard and Jerry Lee Lewis are shown in previous episodes of the PBS documentary.
They also pop up in "The History of Rock 'n' Roll," another 10-part series, which was produced by Time-Life and broadcast earlier this year on commercial television, and in just about every other audiovisual attempt to trace the evolution of rock since its inception four decades ago.


A Bid to Get Them Out of Office


Neglected Melville
To the Editor:
"Undoing Melville" (Book Notes, Sept. 20) leaves the impression that Herman Melville's writing pretty much came to a halt after "Pierre."


Flatiron District: The New Elegance
AJA **  (212) 473-8388; 937 Broadway, at 22d Street; $$$; all major credit cards
An eclectic setting combining Victorian, Shaker and Art Moderne elements with open ducts, chandeliers and Art Deco fixtures is the backdrop for some of the most compelling Asian-American cooking in the Flatiron District.
For starters, there is a spicy tuna tartare in a small tower of crisp rice cakes and flavored with sesame oil, cilantro and lime juice; lobster rolls come with shiso oil and chili-garlic dipping sauce, and curried steamed mussels with jasmine-infused rice.
Main courses include grilled salmon in a rich crab broth with asparagus, black mushrooms and buckwheat noodles; grilled leg of lamb marinated with Indian spices, with coriander chutney, and roasted honey-glazed chicken with butternut squash dumplings and oyster mushrooms. (Review: 1/13/95)  ALVA *  (212) 228-4399; 36 East 22d Street; $$; all major credit cards
The young Alva is a friendly neighborhood spot intended for late-night owls, a dark space with lightbulbs popping out of the obscurity and a cozy bar with a chalkboard menu featuring a mix of bistro dishes.
Starters include roast beets and warm goat cheese; a salad of rock shrimp, calamari and artichokes; shrimp cocktail; corn and seafood fritters, and oysters on the half shell.
Main courses include grilled salmon with a riesling-mustard sauce; grilled filet of lamb nicoise with shoestring potatoes; garlic-roasted chicken with mashed potatoes, and spinach and artichoke ravioli in a sage broth. (Review: 6/30/95)  BOLO **  (212) 228-2200; 23 East 22d Street; $$$; all major credit cards
A gutsy interpretation of the cuisine of Spain is matched by the upbeat Spanish-accented setting, from bold graphic collages on the walls to Gaudi-style tiles around the oven.
Starters are tiny clams steamed in a broth with green onions; fried squid with anchovy vinaigrette and parsley pesto; shrimp and potato croquettes with a sauce of roasted yellow pepper and black pepper; baked eggplant and manchengo (a mild cheese) with a balsamic vinegar glaze, and roasted fricassee of wild mushrooms with goat cheese and seasoned with chili oil.
Main courses are squid ink risotto with grilled prawns and crab salad; striped bass, roasted whole, with a red-pepper-paprika sauce and a tarragon-scented wheat salad, and roast cod in an almond crust with an orange vinaigrette and fried potato pancakes. (Review: 1/7/94)  CAMPAGNA **  (212) 460-0900; 24 East 21st Street; $$$; all major credit cards
Its dishes may not be authentic, but the cooking is assertive, and that, combined with a rustic ambiance explains the popularity of this congenial restaurant.
The menu includes starters of seafood fritto misto with mushrooms; homemade sausage with broccoli rabe; crostini with sauteed chicken liver in sage sauce; beef carpaccio over arugula with mushrooms, shaved Parmesan and lemon, and a salad of grilled squid and octopus with red onion, scallions and hot pepper dressed in a vinegar glaze.
Pastas and entrees include spaghetti with sweet baby clams; rigatoni with peas and sausage in a light tomato sauce; grilled rib-eye steak with mashed potatoes and spinach; spicy paillard of chicken with rosemary, garlic and red pepper, and rabbit stew with white wine, olives, onions and rosemary, served with polenta. (Review: 8/26/94)  MESA GRILL **  (212) 807-7400; 102 Fifth Avenue, near 15th Street; $$$; all major credit cards
Southwestern cooking is a steady lure at this loftlike space, painted green and yellow and outfitted with red-vinyl banquettes with a cowboy-and-cactus motif and blowups of black-and-white photos.
Starters include tomato-and-tortilla soup topped with Cheddar cheese, avocado and cilantro; grilled lamb skewers with tortillas and a spicy yogurt sauce; barbecued duck in a blue corn pancake with a chili sauce, and a salad of grilled squid and Vidalia onion with a smoked-tomato-green-chili vinaigrette.
Entrees include barbecued salmon with chipotle butter and a salad of potato and roast corn; veal chop with a spiced maple glaze, with red onion marmalade; smoked tenderloin of pork with a serrano chili and dried apricot sauce, and tuna steak in a red pepper crust. (Review: 3/29/91; revisited: 3/3/95)  PATRIA **  (212) 777-6211; 250 Park Avenue South, at 20th Street; $$$; all major credit cards
An engaging cooking style was added to the city over a year ago, when Douglas Rodriguez, former owner of the Yuca in Coral Gables, Fla., opened Patria.
His "nuevo Latino" cuisine borrows from the Caribbean and South America.
Starters include cod empanada in a sweet corn crust with goat cheese and tomato; cold terrine of crab and potato with an escabeche of shrimp and calamari; sweet corn cake with foie gras, with stewed cod, and shredded beef with marinated mushrooms and shavings of Manchego cheese.
Entrees include escabeche of chicken on a bed of greens with goat cheese; grilled swordfish with horseradish cream, oyster croquettes and a banana-lentil salad, and roast loin of tuna in a coconut glaze served with malanga puree (a tarolike tuber) and chayote (a pear-shape squash). (Review: 4/8/94)  UNION SQUARE CAFE ***  (212) 243-4020; 21 East 16th Street; $$$; all major credit cards
For refined dining and top-notch service in a friendly ambiance, few in the neighborhood rival this Union Square institution.
The menu includes starters of fried calamari with spicy anchovy mayonnaise; spaghettini with sun-dried tuna roe in garlic and olive oil; zucchini and squash blossom risotto with fresh marjoram and Parmesan Reggiano, and portobello and spinach salad with fennel and Parmesan in balsamic vinaigrette.
This year-old restaurant on Irving Place is pretty and romantic, and the kitchen turns out an appealing roster of American fare.
One might begin with a ceviche of sea scallops with avocado, flavored with cilantro, or seared tuna garnished with cracked wheat, cucumber and tomatillo with mint.
Main courses include seared snapper with a ragout of turnips, carrots, white beans and roast garlic infused with basil; roast chicken breast with corn souffle, and grilled sliced loin of lamb with red lentils and tomato chutney. (Review: 11/25/94) Summaries of reviews use the star system; others are culled from articles (indicated by +), the $25 and Under column (++) and Diner's Journal (


Sept. 17-23: Just Business; Britain and Argentina Find Joint Goal in Falklands
After 162 years of bitter feuding (and some combat) in the South Atlantic, Argentina and Britain have finally found something on which they can agree about the Falklands Islands: the extraction of oil.
The two countries, which fought a 10-week war over the remote islands in 1982 in which 1,000 servicemen died, plan to sign an agreement this week giving each nation a share of the vast petroleum and natural gas resources that are believed to exist in the islands' waters.


For Sale: An Old Courthouse, Cheap
The old Rockaway courthouse lies abandoned at the foot of the Cross Bay Bridge, a crumbling and dilapidated testament to the peninsula's decline since its heyday as the city's premiere summer recreation area.
Now, a developer and the Rockaway Development and Revitalization Corporation want to refurbish the courthouse as a town hall, with office space for local elected officials, Community Board 14 and other service agencies.
But because the courthouse is owned by the city, the plans for the building have been snared in red tape since last spring.


FEAR OF BUYING
HAVE lived with men all my life: father, brother, husband, son.
I don't have to read books to figure out that men are different from women.
What intrigues me is the peculiar ways in which they differ.
Take skin care.
The business of men's skin-care products is only 1.8 percent of the gargantuan $2.07 billion skin-care market.
Granted, men have thicker skin than women and don't wrinkle as easily, but most men scrape a razor blade over their face every day.
And male skin is oilier, therefore more prone to enlarged pores and acne flare-ups.
In fact, men probably have more skin problems than women, not fewer.
Why are they so reluctant to get the help they need?


The Record of a Rookie: 3 Matches, 3 Victories
Going into Sunday's singles that will decide the Ryder Cup, a 40-year-old rookie, Loren Roberts, who didn't play in Friday morning's opening round, was the only undefeated American: three matches, three victories.
"I've had a lot of good help," he said today after Corey Pavin's chip-in at the 18th hole provided the United States with a 9-7 lead over the European team.
"I've had a lot of good partners."


Mattingly Should Not Leave Yanks Bitterly
Today could mark the last time fans at Yankee Stadium see Don Mattingly in a regular-season game.
The 13-year celebration of the ballplayer and hero seems about over.
One would hope that Don Mattingly will find a way to remember the wonder.
One would hope that Don Mattingly will also find a way to say "thank you." Just that, nothing more.


STATE LAWMAKERS PREPARE TO WIELD VAST NEW POWERS
The New Hampshire House of Representatives has 400 "citizen legislators" who draw an annual salary of $100, meet for no more than 45 days a year and represent districts of fewer than 3,000 people.
The California Assembly has 80 members, each representing a district with about 400,000 people, almost the size of a Congressional district.
Drawing salaries of $60,000 or more, these state legislators meet throughout the year, and many consider lawmaking their full-time occupation.


Diana Chin Hsu, 77, a Writer Who Opposed Communists, Dies
Diana Chin Hsu, a veteran Chinese journalist, novelist and poet whose writings on love, suffering and tragedy are read throughout Taiwan, Hong Kong and Southeast Asia, died on Wednesday in Queens.
She was 77.
The cause of death was stomach cancer, according to her son, Hugh H. Mo, a lawyer in New York.


ON SOLID GROUND
IN RECENT years it has almost seemed as if the fashion crowd were allergic to patterns, favoring solid-color coats, jackets and shirts, usually in a monochromatic mix.
The trend continues.
Now, with the addition of solid ties to complete the look, the combinations are still more striking.
Whether it's tone on tone, such as a navy tie and a chambray blue shirt, or contrasted, such as a bronze tie on a gray shirt, or a black tie on a white one, the effect is one of understated sophistication.


Colorful Ways to Enjoy Wild Mushrooms
LAST year, sales of specialty mushrooms nearly doubled, according to the Department of Agriculture.
Shiitake, portobello, cremini, enoki and oyster mushrooms, once hard to get, are now available in supermarkets, and varieties that were once found only by mushroom hunters can be ordered by mail.


A Tax Threat to Company Insurance
IT is one of those twists in the tax law that rarely capture much public attention yet provide a hidden bonanza for corporations sophisticated enough to know how to exploit them.
But the millions of dollars in tax savings to such well-known companies as Wal-Mart and Procter &amp; Gamble have now caught the eye of budget cutters in Washington.
The tax bill approved last week by the House Ways and Means Committee could do away with a little-known practice known as corporate-owned life insurance. .


A Show Honoring an Artist and His Sea
RAY PROHASKA was a painter, photographer and fisherman, but not necessarily in that order.
Although it is the order that his children settled on when they chose the title for an exhibition of his work, "Ray Prohaska: Painter, Photographer, Fisherman."
The show can be seen on weekends from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. in the East Hampton Town Marine Museum, in Amagansett, through Dec. 31.


Parkway Agency Considers Leasing Its Arts Center to Private Managers
For 27 years, the authority that operates the Garden State Parkway has also been one of the state's biggest entertainment entrepreneurs.
That could change before the end of the month.
The New Jersey Highway Authority is considering a plan to lease the Garden State Arts Center, on the parkway at Holmdel in Monmouth County, to a group that includes Sony Music Entertainment, Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation, Pace Entertainment Corporation and the concert promoter that already serves as the center's booking agent, Delsener/Slater Enterprises, a Manhattan firm.


A Grieved Mother Takes Her Daughter Home
Her daughter's life crammed into a few suitcases and her coffin in the cargo hold, Lidia Pinto Machado flew home to Brazil today, vowing to return to New York "for justice, not judgment."
Ms.
Machado, weary after a sleepless night trembling with the grief of her daughter's death, spoke of memories, hopes and plans as she waited for her flight.


Is It Ecologically Sound Being Green?
LET me declare a bias right off: I hate big suburban lawns.
The way I see it, civilization took a giant leap forward 2,500 years ago when ancient Italians covered the grassy hills of Rome with marble, and then built aqueducts to bring water from the mountains for baths, sinks, sewers and decorative fountains -- not for lawns.
Luckily, I live in a house on steeply terraced ground.
And my wife, who works in Manhattan all week, is a dedicated weekend gardener who actually enjoys puttering with various shrubs, plants and ground cover whose names I cannot pronounce, let alone spell.


MARKET TIMING
Monday The National Association of Realtors reports existing home sales for August.
Forecast: down one-half of 1 percent to 3.97 million homes, from 3.99 million homes in July.
Tuesday The Federal Open Market Committee meets.
Analysts do not expect the group to cut interest rates, especially in light of Alan Greenspan's testimony before the Senate Banking Committee on Friday that the economy seems to have avoided a recession and that inflation is under control.
The Conference Board releases its consumer confidence index for September.
Forecast: 101, unchanged from August.
The index was at 101.4 in July.
Wednesday The Commerce Department reports durable goods orders for August.
Forecast: up 3.5 percent, following a 1.7 percent decline in July.
The Department of Energy releases its weekly report on petroleum stocks, production, imports and refinery utilization.
Thursday The House Employer-Employee Relations Subcommittee holds a hearing on changes to the National Labor Relations Board.
The Senate Agriculture Committee holds a hearing on ethanol.
The Labor Department reports weekly claims for state jobless pay.
Friday The Commerce Department reports final estimate of second-quarter gross domestic product.
The previous estimate was 1.1 percent.
The Commerce Department also releases new home sales for August.
Forecast: 715,000 homes, unchanged from July.
The Federal Reserve releases the minutes from its Aug. 22 Federal Open Market Committee meeting.
The Federal Reserve also releases its weekly report on commercial and industrial loans at commercial banks.


A Cycle of War and Illusion
"OUR whole life is now a vast dying," the Croatian writer Miroslav Krleza wrote in 1917, lamenting that everything was "entangled in our own lies." Almost eight decades later, the dying in the Balkans continues, fed by the latest crop of fears, feuds, myths and half-truths.
With the 42-month-old Bosnian war now poised between resolution and redoubled conflict, a lucid appreciation of this continuity of Balkan violence during the 20th century appears particularly crucial.
The present is too raw: it offers no deep solutions.
Rather, it is the whole bungled, bloody history of Yugoslavia since its formation in 1918 that the United States must somehow confront, weigh and balance in order to impose a reasonable compromise and a basis for reconstruction.


Double the Pitching, Double the Victories
Just before the fifth inning of the second game between the Yankees and the Tigers yesterday, the voice of the public address announcer, Bob Sheppard, filled Yankee Stadium as he told fans how to purchase tickets to possible post-season games.
Surprisingly, the fans did not cheer.
They probably should have because the tickets could represent the end of a 14-year drought.


Coordinating the Giants' Demise: Defense Does the Trick
They know the Giants well.
They have studied them, watched hours of film on them.
They know their tendencies, from how many times the Giants throw on first down to the brand of bubble gum chewed by running back Rodney Hampton.
There may be no group that can talk with more authority about the offensive problems of the Giants than the defensive coordinators who played chess -- and won -- against the Giants over the past three weeks.
The Dallas Cowboys' defensive coordinator, Dave Campo, held the Giants scoreless.
Kansas City's Gunther Cunningham focused on shutting down Hampton, and the Chiefs did so in the second half.
Green Bay's Fritz Shurmur and the Packers' defense held the Giants to just two field goals.


IN SEARCH OF...Water; Needing It, Finding It, Doing Without
THE CAR is dry-rotting beneath a layer of soot and squashed bugs.
The lawn looks like shredded wheat.
Your clay tennis court is blowing away like something out of Oklahoma circa 1933.
Living with water restrictions is tough, you say.
Well, take heart -- it could be worse.
You could be a landscaper, or a cranberry farmer, or a carwash owner enduring the ignominy of using recycled water.


Yankees Look Away From Bronx
Some days it seems there ought to be three sets of baseball standings.
One for each division, a second for the wild-card races and a third devoted entirely to the daily speculation about where or whether the New York Yankees will move.
At the moment, those standings would put the Bronx in the basement behind the West Side of Manhattan and the New Jersey Meadowlands in a pennant race.
As George M. Steinbrenner 3d, the Yankees' principal owner, is set to begin a new round of talks with officials in both New York and New Jersey to determine where the team will land when its lease expires in 2002, there is finally light at the end of this years-long tunnel.
Yankee officials say they hope to decide by Opening Day, April 1.


Surf's Up
To the Editor:
Many rock stars turn to the magic of music when their sports dreams evaporate, but not so Brian Wilson  [ "A Mysterious Pop Genius, Still Unsolved," Aug. 27 ] .
His father, Murry Wilson, pushed Brian and his two brothers to excel.
Brian was captain and quarterback of the Hawthorne High School football team.


7 Police Agents Are Slain in Ambush in Mexico
Violence erupted again today in the troubled state of Guerrero when seven police agents were killed and three others were wounded in an ambush on a rural road.
A Red Cross official in Ciudad Altamirano, about 20 miles from the small towns of San Pedro and Las Garzas where the ambush took place just after noon, said the three surviving agents had told him that unknown assailants using heavy caliber weapons, possibly including AK-47 assault rifles, had surprised a convoy of police vehicles that was escorting a delivery of large amounts of cash.


Children's Books
MUSIC IN THE WOOD  By Cornelia Cornelissen.
Photographs by John MacLachlan. 48 pp.
New York: Delacorte Press.


Other Memories of Queens . . . And Readers' Thoughts on Psychotherapy, Marijuana, and More; In Old Queens, Blizzards, Trolleys and a World's Fair
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 3 article "Memories of Queens" inspired these recollections of my own.


Other Memories of Queens . . . And Readers' Thoughts on Psychotherapy, Marijuana, and More; Behind Downtown 'Scene,' Real Work Is Getting Done
To the Editor:
The article about Manhattan's emerging high-tech area ("The Buzz in Silicon Alley," Sept. 10) made some pertinent observations, but these became lost in the attention paid to the "downtown scene" that the new-media industry seems to have created.


THE OLD WORLD'S NEWEST PLACES
Moscow  Rehabilitated art and a Bolshoi revolution
Nearly four years into life as a market economy, Moscow continues in a fevered state of renovation and rebirth.
The results are not always to everyone's taste, but this no longer looks like a city where people are either going to a funeral or returning from one.


Bookless Abroad
To the Editor:
Like Gloria Hunter, I have been known to panic when on a trip and facing the possibility of no book to read.


Less Pay, More Pressure Greet N.B.A. Newcomers
A half-dozen professional basketball apprentices lounged on sofas on the ballroom level of the Marriott World Center here one recent afternoon, their long legs outstretched, alternately talking tough and probing one another for inside information that might help them down the road.
Suddenly, from an elevator just down the hall, there came a distinguished figure who could have offered them all a pearl of wisdom or two.
Except to them, Earl Monroe wasn't famous, or even familiar.
Monroe, who has had both hips replaced, walked stiffly past the rookies, without one of them so much as turning his head.


A Shot, A Bounce, A Roll, An Ace
It seemed sure to be the shot of the day, Costantino Rocca's hole-in-one on the sixth hole of the foursomes matches on Day 2 of the Ryder Cup at Oak Hill Country Club.
It was only the third hole-in-one in Ryder Cup history, and came as the European team rode a string of early success to temporarily tie the score.
But Rocca's spectacular shot turned out to be only the shot of the morning.
In the ebb and flow of international match play, it was the crest of a wave that by day's end would crash as a result of two other dazzling shots by American players -- chip-ins from just off the green by Fred Couples and Corey Pavin in the afternoon fourball matches.


Colorful Ways to Enjoy Wild Mushrooms
LAST year, according to the Department of Agriculture, sales of specialty mushrooms nearly doubled.
Shiitake, portobello, cremini, enoki and oyster mushrooms, once hard to get, are now available in supermarkets, and varieties that were once found only by mushroom hunters can be ordered by mail.
Now chanterelles, which look like bright orange feathery trumpets, are at their peak.
An unusual recipe for these mushrooms, served with red peppers and salmon, is given in "A Cook's Book of Mushrooms" (Artisan) by Jack Czarnecki, proprietor of Joe's restaurant in Reading, Pa.


FOR AN AMERICA THAT LOVED FREAKS
I took great interest in the photographs in your feature on P. T. Barnum's family album ("For an America That Loved Freaks," Aug. 20).
One might think that the social reforms of the 20th century and advancements in medical science would have meant the death knell for America's freak shows.
Alas, today we have the electronic equivalent.
You can step right up and see the adulterers on Jenny Jones, white supremacists on Geraldo, transsexuals on Jerry Springer.
Next to these modern-day freak shows, Barnum and his exhibitions seem quaint and almost dignified.
KEN GELWASSER Hollywood, Fla.


Perez Jailed After Arrest on Rape Charge
Pitcher CARLOS PEREZ of the Montreal Expos remained in police custody in Atlanta yesterday, a day after being arrested on charges of rape and aggravated sodomy.
Team officials were unable to get him released on bond.
Perez, 24, was being held at the Atlanta City Jail, accused of raping a 20-year-old woman he met at a bar for a blind date Friday night.
He was arrested at the team hotel Saturday morning.
The woman told police she was forced into a taxi and taken to Perez's hotel room, the police spokesman BENJAMIN SIMS said.


Making the PC Come Alive
At 3Com Park, a Giant batter hits a line drive through the hole and sprints toward first base.
Simultaneously, an animation of the scene -- with video-game realism -- can be displayed on computer screens anywhere on the Internet.
"When he hits the ball, his batting average is updated in real time," said Patrick Naughton, chief technology officer of the Starwave Corporation, an on-line provider of sports and other entertainment programming.


Robert W. Meserve, 86, Dies; Favored Stronger Legal Ethics
Robert W. Meserve, a former president of the American Bar Association who championed stronger ethics rules for lawyers, died Thursday at New England Medical Center in Boston.
He was 86.
As president of the bar association from 1972 to 1973, during the height of Watergate, Mr.
Meserve was deeply troubled by the parade of Government lawyers into Federal prisons and by what he saw as a lack of public outrage against the manipulations of the legal system during Watergate.


Hall of Fame for 4 Writers
Four writers will be inducted into the New Jersey Literary Hall of Fame next month in ceremonies at the Garden State Arts Center.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY POLICE FACE SKEPTICAL JURORS
Maurice Eason, a 19-year-old from the housing projects of East New York, walked into the central jury room at State Supreme Court in Brooklyn slightly after 9 A.M.
It was his first experience as a prospective juror.
Also arriving was Marie McElwan, a 68-year-old woman who had spent her life in Flatbush.
It was her seventh trip to jury duty.
The young black man and the older white woman came to Room 261 of the Brooklyn courthouse with a shared sentiment: a distrust of the city's police officers.  [ Page B3. ]
IN SCHOOLS RACE, NO GIULIANI 'FAVORITE'
Playing his political cards close to the vest, Mayor Giuliani declined again to endorse the candidate his aides have said he wants to be the next schools chancellor: Leon M. Goldstein, the president of Kingsborough Community College in Brooklyn.
Although the Mayor's aides and school officials say Mr.
Goldstein has the Mayor's support and enough votes on the Board of Education to get the job, Mr.
Giuliani insisted that he had "no favorite."  [ B3. ]
POLICE RETRACE JOGGER'S LAST MINUTES
A week after the slaying of a female jogger in Central Park, and with apparently few leads to a killer, dozens of police officers set out to retrace the jogger's last steps in hopes that it would lead them to new witnesses and clues, investigators said.  [ B4. ]
FIGHTING A WORDLESS WAR OF CHESS
It was just a flicker of emotion, a glint of triumph in the champion's eyes, as his opponent reached across the chessboard and gave up a more powerful rook for a hopscotching knight.
But moments later, the eminently readable face of Gary Kasparov registered concern as it became apparent that Viswanathan Anand had compensation for his material sacrifice in a stronger position for his pieces.
Eight moves later, the tension that had been mounting for hours in the sixth game of the World Chess Championship finally broke as the players shook hands over yet another draw.  [ B4. ]
TERROR-BOMB JURY FOCUSES ON 2 MEN
On its first full day of deliberations, a jury in Federal court in Manhattan asked to review testimony involving two lesser defendants in the trial of a prominent Muslim cleric and nine other men charged with a terror-bombing and assassination conspiracy.
The request indicated that the jury began what are expected to be long deliberations by focusing on Mohammed Saleh and Ibrahim A. Elgabrowny, 2 of the 10 men charged with plotting to blow up major structures.  [ B6. ]
TATTOO SHOW MARKS END OF AN ERA
The boardwalk shook as swarms of bikers on Harley-Davidsons thundered to Coney Island U.S.A.
They had come to the 10th annual Coney Island Tattoo Show.
But this show, a salute to tatooed women, had a special poignancy.
It was the last event on the boardwalk for Coney Island U.S.A., the nonprofit organization that has run a museum, a freak show and weekly avant-garde concerts there since 1985.
After years of financial turmoil and threats of eviction, it is leaving and taking with it a fabled remnant of the amusement park's recent past.  [ B6. ] REGION VIOLENCE IN NEWARK SCHOOLS
The first incident came during a classroom rumble, when a 10-inch machete dropped from a ninth grader's pant leg.
Then two teen-age girls fought in a high school cafeteria, prompting sporadic neighborhood clashes between gangs.
About 15 police officers were deployed outside the high school every morning and afternoon for four days to prevent eruptions.
Finally, a playground fight between two eighth graders ended when a boy slashed a girl across the face with a box cutter.
In Newark, school violence is back from summer vacation.  [ B7. ]
MAN ARRESTED IN DISAPPEARANCE OF GIRL
An acquaintance of a missing 7-year-old girl has been arrested in connection with her disappearance, the police said.
But the authorities still do not know the whereabouts of the girl, Rickel Knox, from Kingston, N.Y.
Larry Whitehurst, 25, was charged with first-degree kidnapping, a felony, officials said.  [ B7. ]
M.T.A. CHIEF FAVORS RAILROAD MERGER
The chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority has said he favors merging Metro-North and the Long Island Rail Road to save money, though he added that as yet he has no concrete plans to combine the two.
"From a managerial sense, it would make a lot of sense," the chairman, E. Virgil Conway, said.
"I think it can, and I hope it would happen, but not in the next year or two."  [ B6. ]


Bosnia Revolving Door: Muslims Get Serb Homes
Clutching his mother's hand, Mirnes Mujakovic descended from one of five packed buses this afternoon and searched for a place to sit on the sacks of clothing along the street.
The 5-year-old boy's home, friends, toys and neighborhood had all vanished eight days ago in a confusing blur of loud threats, pushing, beatings, tears and a bewildering night under the trees waiting for a boat to cross the Sava River into the Croatian town of Davor.
For a week he and his Muslim neighbors had lived on the bus, shuttled from Croatia to Slovenia and now to Bosnia.


CHRONICLE
What is it like to have an ancestor whose name is Mudd?
ROGER MUDD , the television reporter and commentator, said he would like to see history repair the reputation of Dr.
Samuel Mudd, his uncle "six times removed."
Dr.
Mudd is the physician who set the leg of John Wilkes Booth after he had assassinated Abraham Lincoln.
The doctor was convicted of conspiracy and sentenced by a military court to life imprisonment but was pardoned by President Andrew Johnson.


More Casinos, More Players Who Bet Until They Lose All
Down to her last dollar, Linda Edwards bet it on the slot machine and felt sick to her stomach as it vanished, like the $75,000 that had gone before.
Since the riverboat casino opened here four years ago, Ms.
Edwards, a 46-year-old factory worker, has squandered her retirement account, taken out three loans and borrowed to the hilt against two credit cards.
"It takes hold of you," said Ms.
Edwards, who has a teen-age daughter at home.
"I had thoughts of suicide."
Gambling, the fastest-growing industry in America, has spread like prairie fire across Iowa, a state that did not even have a lottery until 1985 and now has 10 big casinos, not counting the horse track in Altoona and the dog track in Council Bluffs, both of which have 24-hour slot machines.


Challenge To Quotas Roils School In Boston
Michael McLaughlin says he is not trying to roll back desegregation.
He says he just wants his daughter, 12-year-old Julia, to attend what is acknowledged to be the best public high school in the city, Boston Latin.
So, although Mr.
McLaughlin, who is white, has gone to court to challenge Boston Latin's quota for minority admissions, his lawsuit, he says, was not about race.
"This is about family values," Mr.
McLaughlin said.
It is also about winning.


Bright Light, Big Problems For Ochoa
Rene Lachemann, the manager of the Florida Marlins, likens right field in the afternoon at Joe Robbie Stadium to the Bermuda Triangle.
Alex Ochoa, the Mets' rookie right fielder, today found out just how treacherous the position can be.
Ochoa's travails figured in all of the Florida Marlins' runs in a 4-3 defeat of the Mets before a crowd of 28,623 that included about 30 of Ochoa's friends and family.
It was the Mets' fourth loss in a row.


Patents; An inventor sees a future in which energy will be generated by turbines sitting on the ocean floor.
FOR thousands of years, inventive farmers and merchants have harnessed nature's energy to help ease their workload.
Greek poetry from 85 B.C. praised the water wheel for freeing women from grinding corn by hand.
Ninth-century Arabic writings described wind-driven grain mills; records referred to similar designs at work in 13th-century China.
Those early power plants led to the tower windmills that sprung up across Europe in the 14th and 15th centuries.
Windmills and water wheels eventually gave way to steam engines.
But now a New York City inventor says he has patented machinery that will harness currents of a different kind.
Bogumil Kumbatovic says flexible turbines submerged offshore will extract cheap, clean energy from ocean waves.


Stunning Comeback Sends Ryder Cup Back Across Atlantic
In one of the most spectacular comebacks in the history of the event, Europe won the 31st Ryder Cup today, defeating the United States by 14 1/2-13 1/2 and taking the cup back for the first time since 1989.
It was a stunning victory, one that was, in the end, the best result for Europe, for the game and for the competition and the worst result for United States Captain Lanny Wadkins and his highly favored team.
The Europeans, trailing by 9-7 when the day began, stormed back across the Oak Hill Country Club course, winning 7 of the 12 singles matches and tying 1.
Just twice in the history of the competition -- in 1949 and 1957 -- had a team come back to win the cup after trailing by 2 points going into the final day, and this was only the second time the United States had lost on home soil.


Call to Merge Metro-North And L.I.R.R. Gains Favor
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority's chairman has said that he favors merging Metro-North and the Long Island Rail Road to save money, but that as yet he has no concrete plans to combine the two.
"From a managerial sense, it would make a lot of sense," the chairman, E. Virgil Conway, said last week.
"I think it can, and I hope it would happen, but not in the next year or two."


Houston Health Officials Aim to Prevent Spread of Dengue Fever
With an outbreak of dengue fever in Mexico and three suspected cases here, local health officials are spraying for the mosquitoes that can carry the disease and warning doctors and nurses to watch for dengue's symptoms, particularly among travelers who have been to the epidemic area.
"We're working overtime," said Raymond Geegan, field supervisor for the Harris County Mosquito Control District.
"We've got to get out there and beat the bushes."


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday
Existing-Home Sales Aug.  Tuesday
Consumer Confidence Sept.  Wednesday
Durable-Goods Orders Aug.  Thursday
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday
G.D.P. 2d Qtr. Final
New-Home Sales Aug.
Prices of New Homes Aug.


All Contemporary, and All Different
Too often a contemporary-music concert can seem like a scholarly convention.
Ideally, contemporary works, rather than being segregated into specialized concerts, should be integrated into programs that balance the old and the new.
But Joel Sachs, the director of the New Juilliard Ensemble, a contemporary-music group just two years old, has an exceptional talent for assembling balanced programs made up entirely of contemporary works, as the ensemble's engrossing concert at the Juilliard Theater on Friday night proved.


Well-Worn Memories, Recent Blues
The New Africa String Band brought a nearly vanished blues lineup to the World Financial Center on Wednesday night as part of the center's monthlong Wednesday night blues series.
With two guitars, cello and violin, the instrumentation was old-fashioned, but the repertory didn't hark back to the ragtime-flavored blues of the 1920's and 30's.
Instead, the group retrofitted more recent blues, including Jimmy Reed's 1960 "Big Boss Man" and John Lee Hooker's 1951 "I'm in the Mood," with Kash Killion's pizzicato cello basslines and Michael Ward's jazzy, spiraling violin solos.
Mr.
Killion's showpiece, a tribute to Mr.
Hooker in which he sang along with his own cello lines, outstayed its welcome.


San Francisco Chronicle Could Be Closed
Are the bells about to toll for another major newspaper?
The Hearst Corporation, owner of The San Francisco Examiner, a 108-year-old evening newspaper that has seen its circulation fall to 110,000, is reportedly negotiating to close The Examiner and to take over management of The San Francisco Chronicle.
The Chronicle, which is owned by descendants of Michael H. de Young, its founder, is the city's bigger, morning paper.
If a deal is struck, San Francisco would join the many major American cities with only one daily newspaper.


In America; Don't Call It Welfare Reform
I keep wondering who would be helped by the so-called welfare reform legislation that has so much support in Congress and with the public.
I keep coming up with the same answer. No one.


A Strong Endorsement for Clean Needles
By now the evidence seems highly persuasive that supplying clean needles to drug addicts is an effective way to slow the spread of AIDS.
The latest group to endorse the approach is the authoritative National Academy of Sciences, which studied the effectiveness of clean-needle programs at the request of Congress.
Its verdict, issued in a 334-page report last week, was unequivocal.
Clean-needle programs do slow the spread of the AIDS virus -- without increasing the use of drugs.
About 75 needle-exchange programs now operate in 55 American cities, including New York.
They typically seek to prevent AIDS by providing addicts with sterile needles, thus making it less likely that one addict will infect another by sharing the same injection equipment.
But many of the needle exchanges are underfinanced experiments, opposed by community leaders who fear they will simply encourage more drug abuse.


Bosnia Says It Will Shun Peace Talks in U.S.
President Alija Izetbegovic of Bosnia said today that his Government would not take part in peace talks set to begin in New York this week, contending that Bosnian Serbs had not acted in good faith.
The Bosnian state radio reported that Foreign Minister Muhamed Sacirbey would not attend the meeting with the Prime Ministers of Croatia and Yugoslavia, which consists of Serbia and Montenegro and which is representing the Bosnian Serbs.


Europe's Victory Offers A Lesson in Teamwork
Nick Faldo rediscovered his putting stroke and Bernard Gallacher called in three players from his Ryder Cup waiting room, and what it meant was that the wait was over for the European Ryder Cup team.
Europe regained the trophy it had relinquished to the United States in 1991 with a 14 1/2-13 1/2 victory after winning 7 of today's 12 singles matches, including a victory by its undisputed leader, Faldo, who made every putt he needed to and the most important one on the 18th green to steal a point from Curtis Strange.


With a Bit of Luck, Parishioners Are Set for Papal Visit
Lorraine Clark stared at the wicker basket that held the answer to her fate.
Would hers be one of the names pulled from it?
Inches behind her, Richard O'Brien put his arm around his wife, Jackie, and tilted his head forward to listen.
Name after name was being called.
Where was his?
In a meeting room at Our Lady of the Blessed Sacrament, Father Frank McNulty fished another slip of paper from the basket.
"Tina Corona," the pastor called.
"Hot dog!" Mrs.
Corona shouted as she clapped her hands, giggled, and then slowly turned teary at her good fortune.
She would be among the audience in Giants Stadium on Oct. 5 for a Mass celebrated by Pope John Paul II.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Russian Economy May Be On the Verge of Growth  For the first time since the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991, the Russian economy may be on the brink of growing.
All the signs point this way: inflation is down, the country's budget deficit is under control -- and its central bank has ceased the practice of printing rubles whenever it needed to prop up factories and farms, meaning that the ruble is for the most part holding its value.
While all these signs are encouraging, the economic and political atmospheres remain volatile, threatening stability -- and economists report a growing gap between the rich and poor.  [ Page A1. ] At NBC, Generation X Generates $  While the president of NBC Entertainment would have you believe that the network wants to appeal to all segments -- read, ages -- of the population, his actions tell otherwise.
NBC has annointed three young programmers, including 31-year-old Jamie McDermott, left, to run mini-networks of their own.
Shepherding such shows as "Friends," "E.R." and "Hope and Gloria," the programmers have been a blessing to the network, which leads all three networks by a wide margin in ratings among relatively young adults with household incomes greater than $60,000 -- a segment that advertisers are willing to pay a premium to reach.  [ D7. ] A Force to Contend With, Again  Ken Olsen, the founder of the Digital Equipment Corporation, is back.
At 69, Mr.
Olsen, who was forced to resign from Digital in 1992 after the company suffered heavy losses, is competing with Andersen Consulting, E.D.S., and I.B.M. to help businesses modernize their computer systems.
He believes corporations would do well to impose the same discipline on networks of PC's that they reserve for their mainframe and minicomputers.  [ D5. ] Janet Jackson Does the Impossible  Thanks to video technology, the singer finds herself running across the arms of the statue of Christ in Rio de Janeiro and sitting on top of the Easter Island monuments -- even though she never left the airplane hangar in California where she taped the video for her latest single, "Runaway." By imposing Ms.
Jackson's image into two-dimensional photographs of the locales, the production studio Hollywood Digital spent one-fourth of what it would have spent traveling to the locations shown in the video.
And those savings don't even take into consideration the idea of hoisting the pop rock star to the heavenly heights she appears to roam in Rio.  [ D7. ] San Francisco Examiner in Flux  The Hearst Corporation, which owns the 108-year-old evening paper in San Francisco, is reportedly in talks to close The Examiner and take over management of The San Francisco Chronicle -- the city's bigger, morning newspaper.
Since 1965, the papers have operated jointly, sharing printing, distribution and other business operations.
But they have maintained separate editorial staffs.
They have split profits, or losses, too.
For the current year, losses are estimated to be $10 million to $12 million.
Both newspapers have been losing circulation, with The Chronicle down to 110,000.  [ D8. ] Former Intel Engineer Arrested  The F.B.I. arrested William Gaede, charging the former Intel software engineer with mail fraud and interstate transportation of stolen property.
The Federal crimes of which Mr.
Gaede is accused are related to the theft of millions of dollars worth of production secrets for Intel's Pentium microprocessor.  [ D2. ]


No Headline
You ask around, and just about everyone now knows somebody with a gambling problem. -- TOM FENNELLY, an Iowa state counselor who works with Gamblers Anonymous.  [ A1:6 ]


Fans Make Mattingly A Winner In a Loss
Don Mattingly stood on second base and almost cried.
The tears were welling up in his eyes, there was a lump in his throat and emotions swam through his mind.
Mattingly pointed to his wife, Kim, behind home plate after his double in the eighth inning while the 34,848 fans who shared what might be his last day at Yankee Stadium stood, too.
It was a surreal moment.
The Yankees were losing by 8-3 to the dismal Tigers, a crucial game they had botched when their bullpen faltered and Detroit scored seven runs in the top of the eighth.
The Yankees would eventually lose by that score and their perilous lead in the wild-card race would shrivel to a half game after the Angels defeated Texas, 5-0.
Even Mattingly conceded this damaging loss was more significant than his personal affairs.


Staking Claim in Alternative Software on the Internet
James Gosling wants to make the computer software world safe for diversity.
In his view, and in the view of many other people in the industry, the software giant Microsoft is close to crowding out all its competition.


Environmental Promises to Keep
There was a time when Bill Clinton was mostly invisible on environmental issues.
But lately he has come alive.
This summer he spoke out against a mining project threatening Yellowstone National Park.
Now he has let it be known that he will rise up against Congress's reckless effort to dismantle a generation of laws protecting America's air and water and what is left of its natural landscape.
Vice President Al Gore says Mr.
Clinton will veto an appropriations bill crippling the Interior Department.
Alice Rivlin, the budget director, says he will veto a budget bill opening the Alaskan wilderness to oil drilling.
Add to this Mr.
Clinton's earlier pledge to veto a destructive revision of the Clean Water Act and one has the makings of the first real counterattack on the Republicans' anti-environmental blitzkrieg.


In Memory of a Slain Student
A scholarship fund has been set up in memory of Cindy Villalba, the Rutgers student who was shot to death in Paterson in July, a few hours after she returned from a university-sponsored program in Costa Rica, where she taught English to children.


Where Medical Savings Accounts Work; Implant Symptoms Real
To the Editor:
In "Implant Lawsuits Create a Medical Rush to Cash In" (front page, Sept. 18) you note that I saw 3,000 women with implants in 1993-94, yet you allow a single patient to label my office as an "assembly line."


To Reach Generation X, Hire Generation X
Network television has discovered Generation X. Every other new series this season, from "Dweebs" to "Too Something" to "Almost Perfect" to "Central Park West," seems to be about lovable, and/or achingly vulnerable, young urban professionals.
They laugh.
They cry.
They live.
They love.
And not a single one has seen his 34th birthday.
Behind all this, of course, is the huge success of NBC's recent spate of young-adult-oriented programs, like "Seinfeld," "Friends," "Mad About You" and "Hope and Gloria."


Congress Plans Stiff New Curb On Immigration
With the public growing angry over illegal immigration, the Republican Congress is considering the adoption of the most restrictive changes in the country's immigration laws in 71 years.
While the House and Senate bills differ in important respects, the overall thrust of the two measures is the same.
Both would crack down on illegal immigration and end what has been a 30-year-old policy of welcoming legal immigrants.
For the first time since 1924, there will be a reduction in the number of foreign-born people who are legally permitted to come to the United States.


In Boston, Reshaping A Debate on Schools
A Boston man has gone to court to fight a minority admissions policy that kept his daughter, who is white, from attending what is considered the city's best public high school.
The issues in the case are reverberating nationally as a backlash against affirmative action policies rewrites part of the nation's political agenda.


Turnpike Tolls Might Rise
Tolls on the New Jersey Turnpike could rise as much as 40 percent unless officials find another way to close a projected $90 million budget gap, The Associated Press reported yesterday.


Deutsch Executive Joins Kirshenbaum
Brian Martin, one of two senior vice presidents and business development directors at Deutsch Inc. in New York, is leaving to join Kirshenbaum Bond &amp; Partners in New York in the new position of executive vice president and business development director.
When Mr.
Martin, 35, joins Kirshenbaum Bond next Monday, Peter Drakoulias, 35, the other senior vice president and business development director at Deutsch, will become that agency's sole new-business executive.


Once More, Remembering When Rock Was Young
Not to be confused with Time Warner's 10-part "History of Rock 'n' Roll," recently in syndication, PBS's 10-part "Rock &amp; Roll" is produced by the BBC in association with WGBH in Boston.
Is there a difference?
Yes.
The BBC series, with the music critic Robert Palmer as chief consultant, is more thorough, going well beyond clips of performances to present interviews with songwriters, producers and studio engineers.
It tells not only what was going on from 1950 to 1990, but also why and how.
"Rock &amp; Roll" began last night on WNET and will run through Thursday in nightly two-hour installments.
In his book "Rock &amp; Roll: An Unruly History," Mr.
Palmer writes, "History is never tidy, but rock-and-roll history is particularly resistant to neatness and order." That is the problem.
As rock is stuffed into books and documentaries, not to mention a hall of fame, there's a whiff of embalming fluid coming from the form that once signaled revolutionary changes in pop culture.
It's decidedly unsettling to listen to rock pioneers pontificating as middle-aged experts, although that's not nearly as painful as watching some of them still performing.


From Search, Winners and Losers
In the momentous battle between Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the Board of Education president, Carol A. Gresser, over the next schools chancellor, the winner may well turn out to be . . .
Howard Golden, the Borough President of Brooklyn.
If the board really selects the Mayor's favorite, Leon M. Goldstein, Mr.
Giuliani won't get what he wanted -- a captain of industry.
And Ms.
Gresser won't get what she wants -- a distinguished educator.
But Mr.
Goldstein, the president of Kingsborough Community College, is a good friend of Mr.
Golden.
And in New York, political friendships are as good as currency.
So Mr.
Golden, a veteran Democrat, will have what he probably never dreamed he would with a Republican in City Hall: clout.


Hampton Steals Show, but Wheatley Takes Bow
The big numbers belonged to the two-time Pro Bowler, whose change of speed and deception beguiled the New Orleans Saints.
But the most spectacular run of the afternoon belonged to the rookie, a powerful jaunt that had everyone at Giants Stadium thinking the same thing: So that's Tyrone Wheatley.
On a day when the Giants desperately needed to deal with the present, they also received a sweet glimpse of their future.


It Is All In the Face; Chess Unfolds in Grimaces and Gestures
It was just a flicker of emotion, a glint of triumph in the champion's eyes, as his opponent reached across the chessboard and gave up a more powerful rook for a hopscotching knight.
But moments later, the eminently readable face of Gary Kasparov registered concern as it became apparent that Viswanathan Anand had compensation for his material sacrifice in a stronger position for his pieces.
Eight moves later, the tension that had been mounting for hours in the sixth game of the World Chess Championship last week -- a drama evinced by jiggling knees, agonized grimaces, moues and other unconscious gestures -- finally broke into expressions of relief as the players shook hands over yet another draw.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:  MONDAY
Cascade Nat Gas Corp
Disney Walt Co
Unocal Corp TUESDAY
Allergan Inc
Centerior Energy Corp
Harsco Corp
Montana Pwr Co
Nipsco Inds Inc
North Fork Bancorp WEDNESDAY
Aquarion Co
Bello A H Corp
Brooklyn Un Gas Co
Commercial Intertech
Puerto Rican Cem Inc
Raytheon Co
Washington Gas Lt Co THURSDAY
Boston Edison Co
Delmarva Pwr &amp; Lt Co
KCS Energy Inc
Lennar Corp
Manor Care Inc
Pier 1 Imports Inc FRIDAY
CTS Corp


Glimpsing Solitude In Worlds Black and White
You may find it hard to awaken from the lonely dream worlds that have been created in the Signature Theater's exquisite, harrowing new productions of Adrienne Kennedy's "Funnyhouse of a Negro" and "A Movie Star Has to Star in Black and White."
These exceptional, rarely seen one-act plays, first produced in New York in 1964 and 1976, respectively, possess a trait often found in fiction and poetry but rarely conveyed by theater: the sense of the interior landscape of a single mind.
For Ms.
Kennedy's heroines, young black writers struggling to find points of connection in a suffocatingly white culture, that world is self-contained to the point of isolation, artfully woven into a confining net of cyclical rhythms and imagery.


AFTER LONG SLIDE, RUSSIA'S ECONOMY NEARING STABILITY
After a painful and chaotic slide, the Russian economy appears to be stabilizing, and may be on the brink of growing for the first time since the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991.
There is still considerable risk that things could go awry again, and the gains that look so impressive on statistical charts have been slow to filter down to ordinary Russians.
But nearly all the signs are positive.


Sri Lankan Monks on the March


Gridironlock
The Yankees are again threatening to move to the Meadowlands in New Jersey and, as usual, "parking" is their mantra.
Let me tell you about parking at the Meadowlands.
A friend invited me to the Giants' opening game on Sept. 4.
Giants Stadium is about 10 miles from my house, so I figured that even with traffic it would take me less than a half-hour to get there.
I wanted to give myself plenty of time to park, so I left my house at 7:15 P.M. for the 9 o'clock game.


Middle Ages for All Ages


Coast Seems Clear For the Yanks, but . . .
As the Yankees embark on perhaps their most important journey in a decade, they should be comforted by the strength, or lack thereof, of the opposition.
Or so it says on paper.


Lessons From California
California, that harbinger of so many fads and fashions, is now a laboratory for the hardship that can result from years of refusing to face up to fiscal realities.
Los Angeles County faces enormous cutbacks in health and other services, although the immediate threat that dozens of health clinics would be shut down was eased last week with President Clinton's announcement of an emergency aid package.
Orange County, the wealthy neighbor to the south, is in actual bankruptcy, and is trying to bail itself out by raiding funds vital to preserving its bus system and infrastructure.
The state government, itself awash in debt and deficits, is unable to help southern Californians avoid shredding the social safety net.


Congress Plans Stiff New Curb On Immigration
With the public growing angry over illegal immigration, the Republican Congress is considering the adoption of the most restrictive changes in the country's immigration laws in 71 years.
While the House and Senate bills differ in important respects, the overall thrust of the two measures is the same.
Both would crack down on illegal immigration and end what has been a 30-year-old policy of welcoming legal immigrants.
For the first time since 1924, there will be a reduction in the number of foreign-born people who are legally permitted to come to the United States.


The Toast of Hungary


Stanley Lewis, 58, Bookseller And Publisher of Poetry Journal
Stanley Lewis, owner of the Parnassus bookshop on the Upper West Side of Manhattan and former publisher of the journal Parnassus: Poetry in Review, died on Saturday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 58 and lived on the Upper West Side.
He had leukemia, said his daughter, Andrea.


Man Gets Life Term in Killings
An Atlantic City man who pleaded guilty in July to bludgeoning to death his ex-girlfriend, her live-in companion and her 2-year-old daughter at the print shop where he worked has been sentenced to life in prison.


G.O.P. in Michigan Basks In the Spotlight of Success
As he rode the ferry over here shortly after dawn on Saturday, Senator Arlen Specter, a candidate for the Republican Presidential nomination, fumed over rumors that he had been denied a room at the island's Grand Hotel, packed this weekend with Michigan Republicans attending their biennial conference and auditioning five Presidential aspirants.
"We didn't even try," Mr.
Specter said, offering an explanation for staying at a mainland Best Western that he would make later in his speech to the Republicans.
"We got in too late for the last ferry."


Dolan Again Named Swimmer of the Year
TOM DOLAN, the first United States swimmer to break three American records in one year since MATT BIONDI in 1987, has been chosen as United States Swimming's swimmer of the year for the second straight year.
Dolan, of Arlington, Va., was the National Collegiate Athletic Association swimmer of the year at Michigan. (AP)


The F.B.I. sting operation on child pornography raises questions about encryption.
FEDERAL agents swooped down on more than 125 homes and offices across the United States on Sept. 13, seizing computers and diskettes from people suspected of trafficking in child pornography over the America Online network.
But to date, the number of arrests in the sting operation remains at 15.
More arrests are expected, but why haven't more occurred?


High Stakes in Bridgeport: Two Proposals for Casinos
Two developers are competing for the right to build a casino in Bridgeport -- Mirage Resorts, which runs casinos in Las Vegas, and the Mashantucket Pequot tribe, which operates the Foxwoods casino in Ledyard.
A three-member panel appointed by Gov.
John G. Rowland is to recommend one of the proposals to the Governor by Friday.
He will then make his own recommendation to the General Assembly, which is to vote this fall on legislation authorizing the casino to operate.
In March, Bridgeport residents voted 17,989 to 2,953 in favor of allowing a casino in the city.
Both of the proposed casinos would be on the city's waterfront, a short distance from a dog track that is to open later this year.


Parking Rules
Because of Rosh ha-Shanah, alternate-side street cleaning regulations will be suspended in New York City today and tomorrow.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Summer Weather
This summer may have seemed like the hottest and driest in recent memory, but there were higher temperatures and even less rainfall in the region as recently as 1993.
There were only 25 days with measurable rainfall in Central Park in June, July and August of that year, compared with 28 this year.
This August was the driest on record, however.
There was just .18 inches of rain, as well as a 24-day dry spell from Aug. 7 to Aug. 30.
The drought helped fuel brush fires and threatened plant life.
New York City's reservoirs are currently at about 58 percent of capacity.
They are normally 78 percent full at this time of year.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Sept. 4, about the increasing use of electronic samplers of music and sound by recording artists, misstated the role of Martin L. Erskine, a composer and music arranger, in the creation of the score for the movie "Pocahontas." Mr.
Erskine was a co-arranger of the songs in the movie.
He did not create the score for "Pocahontas"; that was composed by Alan Menken.


Memorial for Slain Child


Where Medical Savings Accounts Work; Bedside Honesty
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 14 news article on the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research noted that a back surgeon, Dr.
Neil Kahanovitz, founded a lobbying group to battle the agency as wasteful -- after an agency study concluded that most surgery for back pain was unnecessary.
Normally, I would have finished reading this with a cynical "It all comes down to money." But the name Neil Kahanovitz means more to me than that.


On Lobbying, States Must Follow Federal Lead
To the Editor:
While it's encouraging that some type of Congressional action on limiting gifts and meals to legislators appears imminent (front page, Sept. 18), many state laws utterly fail to rein in special interest spending.
Our survey of lobbying laws shows that many states do not limit the ability of lobbyists to shower legislators with gifts, meals, travel and entertainment.
Perhaps more disturbing is that in most states lawmakers may ask for and lobbyists may give political contributions -- at the same time that the lobbyist is seeking favors for a high-paying client.


Taking Good Care of the Pope
Newark may have a reputation as a dangerous city, but its officials say they are taking great pains to insure that Pope John Paul II will not encounter any security problems.
Police officers will be stationed every 15 feet along the route the Pope will take when he leaves Newark International Airport for evening prayer at Sacred Heart Cathedral, also in Newark.
Other officers on motorcycles will accompany the Pope's motorcade, the police director, William R. Celester, said.


Treasury to Auction Bills and Notes This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week includes today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and two-and five-year notes to be auctioned tomorrow and Wednesday.
According to traders, at the close of the New York cash market on Friday the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was at 5.17 percent and the rate on the six-month issue at 5.27 percent.
In when-issued trading, the two-year note was offered at a price to yield 5.82 percent, and the five-year note at 6.06 percent.


Essay; Out of Our Funk
I can't blame it on "malaise," the way Carter did.
And I certainly can't use a word like "depression." So I'll say the country is in a "funk."
How else to explain my high negatives in the midst of peace and prosperity?
O.K., a deep blue national "funk" it is, and I'm the guy to snap us all out of it.


Yehuda Meir Getz, Western Wall's Rabbi, 71
Rabbi Yehuda Meir Getz, who presided over the Western Wall of the ruined Second Temple in East Jerusalem -- Judaism's holiest site -- died on Sept. 17 in Jerusalem.
He was 71 and lived in East Jerusalem.
He died of a heart attack, The Associated Press reported.


Plymouth Journal; A Special Island, but, Oh, the Troubles It's Seen
"The sulfur smelling so bad, the ashes driving me mad," Desmond Daley, a musician known as Flasher, sings in his latest calypso, a long and vibrant tradition here.
"The thought of volcanic eruption have me in frustration!"
That sentiment is widely shared by inhabitants of this remote 39-square-mile Caribbean island, which in recent weeks has suffered a string of natural disasters reminiscent of biblical plagues.


General Powell's Chance
Political experts give us a fistful of reasons why Colin Powell cannot be elected President.
His showing in the polls is just book-tour puffery.
He has peaked too soon.
In an ideological age, he has no ideology.
He has no attachments to a party.
If he runs as an independent, he will not be able to raise the necessary money.
And anyway, independents never win in this country.
People who think that way do not understand the Powell phenomenon -- or understand how Americans feel these days about their political system.
When those realities are understood, General Powell has to be taken very seriously as a potential candidate.


Congress's Slow Pace
Despite taking a number of revolutionary positions, Congress has not passed any of the 13 appropriations bills needed to keep the Government running.
Page A12.


Giants' Dream of First Victory Is Reality
Many members of the Giants met for lunch at a Houlihan's restaurant on Friday and none other than Lawrence Taylor picked up the tab.
But the team's inspiration for what was an incredible performance today against New Orleans probably did not come from having nachos with a former player.
It may have come from a higher plane -- perhaps from the dreams of George Henshaw, the offensive coordinator.
Last Monday, Henshaw dreamed that the Giants would score 30 points against the Saints.
Now that may not make the prophesy hall of fame, but considering how the team had only scored one offensive touchdown in the first three games of the season, it was a pretty interesting vision.
And considering that the backup quarterback Tommy Maddox had a dream similar to Henshaw's, well, someone had better call "Unsolved Mysteries."


In Hungary,Pataki Gets Treatment Of a Star
The 14-car motorcade that raced through the narrow streets of this rural village today, blocking traffic and forcing cars off the road, signaled the arrival of a foreign dignitary.
And in this case, the lanky and slightly rumpled man who alighted from the black limousine was indeed a chief of state, namely New York's Gov.
George E. Pataki.
Wearing a blue blazer and white pants and looking like a candidate primed for the campaign trail, Mr.
Pataki beamed broadly as he strode toward a whitewashed 17th-century church for morning mass, shaking hands and greeting parishioners in his halting Hungarian.


Equity Offerings For This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Accom Inc., Menlo Park, Calif., an initial public offering of 2.4 million shares.
Hambrecht &amp; Quist Inc.
AHI Healthcare Systems Inc., Downey, Calif., an initial public offering of 4.2 million shares.
Smith Barney.
Allied Healthcare Products Inc., St. Louis, 1.3 million shares. Cowen &amp; Co.
America Online Inc., Vienna, Va., 3.5 million shares. Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
ATC Environmental Inc., New York, 2.4 million shares. Rodman &amp; Renshaw Inc.
Baby Superstore Inc., Greenville, S.C., $100 million of convertible subordinated notes due in 2000.
CS First Boston.
Bally Entertainment Corp., Chicago, $115 million of preferred redeemable increased dividend securities convertible preferred.
Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
Checkfree Corp., Columbus, Ohio, an initial public offering of 6 million shares.
Lehman Brothers.
Computer Management Sciences Inc., Jacksonville, Fla., an initial public offering of 1.7 million shares.
Robinson-Humphrey Company Inc.
Credit Acceptance Corp., Southfield, Mich., 5 million shares. William Blair &amp; Co.
Data Documents Inc., Omaha, an initial public offering of 3.6 million shares.
Jefferies &amp; Co.
Discount Auto Parts Inc., Lakeland, Fla., 3.25 million shares. Smith Barney.
Eastbay Inc., Wausau, Wis., an initial public offering of 2 million shares.
Robert W. Baird &amp; Co.
Food Court Entertainment Network Inc., an initial public offering of 1.6 million units, each representing one series A share, one class A warrant and one class B warrant.
D.
H.
Blair &amp; Co.
HBO, North Atlanta, owned by Time Warner Inc., 3.6 million shares. Smith Barney.
Healthsouth Corp., Birmingham, Ala., 11 million shares. Smith Barney.
Human Genome Sciences Inc., Rockville, Md., 2.5 million shares. Lehman Brothers.
Idexx Laboratories Inc., Westbrook, Me., four million shares, including 3.2 million in the U.S. and Canada.
Cowen &amp; Co.
Jerry's Famous Deli Inc., Studio City, Calif., an initial public offering of 2.1 million shares.
Boston Group.
LTX Corp., Westwood, Mass., 4 million shares. Lehman Brothers.
Microwave Power Devices Inc., Hauppauge, L.I., 4.2 million shares.
Robertson, Stephens &amp; Co.
Mid Ocean Ltd., Hamilton, Bermuda, 3.8 million ordinary shares.
J.
P.
Morgan Securities.
Mizar Inc., Carrollton, Tex., an initial public offering of 1.8 million shares.
John G. Kinnard &amp; Co.
Nur Advanced Technologies Ltd., Petah Tikvah, Israel, 1.8 million shares, 1.5 million in the U.S. and Canada.
Josephthal, Lyon &amp; Ross Inc.
Patriot American Hospitality Inc., Dallas, an initial public offering of 12.2 million shares, 9.76 in the U.S. and Canada.
Paine Webber.
Personnel Group of America Inc., Charlotte, N.C., an initial public offering of 8 million shares.
Paine Webber.
PMT Services Inc., Brentwood, Tenn., 1.3 million shares. Alex. Brown &amp; Sons.
Quintiles Transnational Corp., Morrisville, N.C., 1.75 million shares.
Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
Renaissance Hotel Group N.V., Cleveland, 8.8 million shares. Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
Simware Inc., Ottawa, an initial public offering of 2.4 million shares.
Oppenheimer &amp; Co.
Southtrust Corp., Birmingham, Ala., 3 million shares. Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
Supreme International Corp., Miami, Fla., 1.3 million shares. Oppenheimer &amp; Co.
Thomson PBE Inc., Marina Del Rey, Calif., 3 million shares. Smith Barney.
Tylan General Inc., San Diego, 2.55 million shares. Hambrecht &amp; Quist Inc.
Zycon Corp., Santa Clara, Calif., an initial public offering of 4 million shares.
Prudential Securities Inc.
Source: MCM CorporateWatch.


Much-Traveled Pope Ready for U.S. Whirlwind
At 5:30 P.M. on Wednesday, Pope John Paul II's plane touched down in Rome after a grueling four-day, three-country trip across Africa.
At 6:20 the phone rang at the desk of Joaquin Navarro-Valls, the Vatican's chief spokesman, who himself had just returned from the United Nations conference on women in China.
"It was the Holy Father," Dr.
Navarro-Valls said, "who wanted to know about the conference -- how it went, and many other things besides." Even after 12 years on the job, the spokesman still finds himself wondering at the Pope's capacity for work.


Partners &amp; Shevack Gets Magazine Work
U.S.
News &amp; World Report, the weekly news magazine owned by Mortimer L. Zuckerman, has selected Partners &amp; Shevack in New York to handle its account, which was previously handled on a project basis by various agencies, including Partners &amp; Shevack.
The billings were estimated at $2 million.
The account was awarded on Friday without a review.


CHRONICLE
The season for literary parties is moving into high gear, but few are likely to have the spiritual aura of one to be held tonight in honor of Tricycle: The Buddhist Review, a quarterly publication that is celebrating its fourth anniversary.
Among the 150 guests expected at the magazine's new offices on Vandam Street in SoHo are PHILIP GLASS, ALLEN GINSBERG and MITCHELL D. KAPOR, the computer pioneer and founder of Lotus Development Corporation.


On Lobbying, States Must Follow Federal Lead; Bipartisan Nonfeasance
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 18 front-page article refers to a letter to Speaker Newt Gingrich from Representative Charles T. Canady, a Florida Republican who heads the Judiciary Subcommittee on the Constitution, on the inability of the Democrats to enact serious lobbying and Congressional gift-ban measures when they were in power.


A study by four agencies paints a surprising portrait of interactive computer users.
NEVER mind what the simple folk do, as King Arthur wondered in "Camelot." The question advertisers and agencies can't stop asking these days is: What do the interactive folk do?
Four agencies in New York owned by Cordiant P.L.C., specializing in advertising, media services and interactive marketing, hope to provide some answers in a study titled "The Interactive Consumer." Clinical psychologists and cultural anthropologists spent more than 300 hours in 30 homes of computer users to observe their behavior.
That examination of life on line, conducted in June and July, was supplemented with diaries and interviews.


Where Medical Savings Accounts Work
To the Editor:
"Medicare Misfire" (editorial, Sept. 17), suggesting that medical savings accounts will "attract only healthy individuals," is wrong.


Tidy Up a Wilderness, or Leave It in Natural Tatters?
On July 15, the sky fell on a large swatch of the Adirondack Park -- almost literally.
A 20-mile-wide wave of thundering black clouds and hurricane gusts roared from the west.
In a few minutes, the freak storm steamrolled a Rhode Island-sized triangle of the vast mosaic of wilderness and private land, focusing its power on the Five Ponds Wilderness Area south of this hamlet.
Microbursts like great fists of air punched down forests and houses, killing four campers and a motorist.


The School of London, Mordantly Messy as Ever
When the American artist R. B. Kitaj coined the phrase "School of London" in 1976, he conceded that such a school existed largely in his head.
There were "10 or more" world-class painters working in London, he said, but they would need a lot more attention and encouragement if they were to constitute a movement.
Strangely, though, his phrase stuck: the notion of a School of London was born, and its core members were gradually identified as Francis Bacon, Lucian Freud, Leon Kossoff, Frank Auerbach, Michael Andrews and Mr.
Kitaj himself.
And, while it was none too clear how much they had in common, they at least flew the flag of figurative painting when it was distinctly unfashionable.


No Favorites for Schools Post, Giuliani Insists
Playing his political cards close to the vest, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani declined again yesterday to endorse the candidate his aides have said he wants to be the next Schools Chancellor: Leon M. Goldstein, the president of Kingsborough Community College in Brooklyn.
Although the Mayor's aides and school officials say Mr.
Goldstein has the Mayor's support and enough votes on the Board of Education to get the job, Mr.
Giuliani insisted that he had "no favorite" among the board's three finalists.


A Brooklynite's Sway
If Leon M. Goldstein, the head of Kingsborough Community College, is selected as New York City's next schools chancellor, the real winner in the battle over the job may be his political champion, the Brooklyn Borough President, Howard Golden.
A vote for Goldstein would mean the Board would not have conformed to the initial goals of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, who wanted a captain of industry, or the board's president, Carol Gresser, who wanted an educator for the job.
Metro Matters, page B3.


Rutgers Seems to Think Enough Is Quite Enough
The bullies had apparently taken Saturday off.
Even Florida State and Nebraska found ways to turn pre-arranged mismatches into politically correct victories, the Cornhuskers somehow limiting themselves to a restrained 49-7 decision over Pacific despite gaining a total of 731 yards.
And then Mike McQueary, a substitute Penn State quarterback, spotted an open receiver late Saturday night, and the question of the young season -- When does too much become enough? -- was revived once more.
McQueary's 42-yard touchdown pass to Chris Campbell, 58 seconds from the end of Penn State's bizarre 59-34 victory over Rutgers at Giants Stadium, led to an angry exchange between Doug Graber, the Rutgers coach, and Penn State's Joe Paterno.


'Letterman' Not Amused As CBS Ratings Fizzle
The late-night television war, once considered a laugher in favor of David Letterman on CBS, has become a deadly serious competition again, with Mr.
Letterman in an intense ratings struggle against Jay Leno and "The Tonight Show" on NBC, and Ted Koppel and "Nightline" on ABC.
As Mr.
Letterman and his staff see it, the reason the "Late Show With David Letterman" has fallen behind the pack has been the collapse in the ratings of CBS, the network Mr.
Letterman joined two years ago after a much-publicized exit from NBC.
Mr.
Letterman has dominated the late-night competition for most of those two years, but in the last several months -- and especially in the last four weeks -- Mr.
Letterman has seen his lead evaporate.


Sports of The Times; The Captain's Choice: 'I'm So Disgusted'
AS soon as Nick Faldo's putt disappeared into the cup on the 18th green, Curtis Strange strode over, shook hands, turned and headed toward the Oak Hill locker room.
"It's all right, Curtis," somebody yelled.


From I.B.M., Help in Intricate Trading
Orange County might have missed its chance.
This week, I.B.M. is introducing its latest technology for big investors to escape many of the risks of intricate financial trading.
With it, the logic goes, Robert L. Citron, as Orange County treasurer, might not have panicked and sold his portfolio of derivative securities, taking the horrendous losses that pushed Orange County into bankruptcy.


Pioneer in Minicomputers Is Trying Again at Age 69
In a converted shopping mall in this Boston suburb, Ken Olsen is trying to conquer the world -- again.
At 69, the man who founded the Digital Equipment Corporation and ran it for 35 years before he was forced to resign in 1992, shows no signs of slowing down.
Indeed, Mr.
Olsen, who built Digital into a $14 billion global enterprise from the site of an abandoned mill in nearby Maynard, talks and acts like a man with something to prove.
"We grew faster and larger, with more profit, than any company in history," he said in a recent interview, referring to his days at Digital with bitter sarcasm.
"And I was always being beaten up for being stupid and backward. I was the stupidest, dumbest guy there ever was."


RESULTS PLUSPierce Defeats Sanchez Vicario in Final    Calling her aggressive net play "a new and important addition" to her game, Mary Pierce beat Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, 6-3, 6-3, yesterday in the final of the Nichirei International Ladies Tennis Championship in Tokyo.   "I think I'm very competitive and Arantxa was a very tough player," said Pierce, 20, who is ranked fifth in the world. "To beat her, I had to be at the top of my game."
TENNIS


Restless for Adventure And the Ultimate Story
A GOOD LIFE Newspapering and Other Adventures  By Ben Bradlee  Illustrated. 514 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $27.50.
Ben Bradlee begins his engaging autobiography, "A Good Life: Newspapering and Other Adventures," by citing a profile of him that was done as part of a study of "normal" young men at Harvard in 1940.
Here the reader gets a detailed glimpse of a "mixed up" boy with "a rather immature, emotional and romantic outlook" on the career of foreign correspondent, which he wants to pursue.
"He has done several things to overcome his restlessness," the interviewing psychologist adds.
"There have been times when he has drunk too much alcohol, but this does not satisfy him."


A Film Festival With Fewer Firsts Yet No Boundaries
The United States Government may be confused about how to deal with China, but the New York Film Festival is not.
On Friday, the 33d edition of the festival opens with "Shanghai Triad" by the Chinese director Zhang Yimou, an event that speaks volumes not only about the shifting geography of film culture, but also about the evolution of the festival under Richard Pena.
Under Mr.
Pena, the program director of the Film Society of Lincoln Center and the chairman of the festival's selection committee since 1988, New York filmgoers have come to expect films from Iran, Finland, Tunisia and Burkina Faso.
The prominence given to Mr.
Zhang this year, or to Asian cinema in general, should surprise no one.
"Shanghai Triad" is Mr.
Zhang's fourth film in the festival since 1988.
Last year's festival included four films from China, Hong Kong and Taiwan.


ISRAEL AND P.L.O. REACH ACCORD TO TRANSFER WEST BANK AREAS
After months of arduous negotiations and a tense last-minute flurry of crises and walkouts, Israel and the Palestinians concluded a major agreement today on transferring control of much of the occupied West Bank to its Arab residents.
With only two and a half hours left before Israel shut down for the celebration of Rosh ha-Shanah, the Jewish New Year, the Israeli Foreign Minister, Shimon Peres, and the leader of the Palestine Liberation Organization, Yasir Arafat, finally initialed the 400-page document.
The major obstacle they had ovecome was the security arrangements for Hebron, where Jewish settlers live surrounded by Arab residents.


Seeking Fresh Leads, Police Rerun Slain Jogger's Route
A week after the slaying of a female jogger in Central Park, and with apparently few leads to a killer, dozens of police officers set out yesterday to retrace the jogger's last steps in hopes it would lead them to new witnesses and clues, investigators said.
Two female police officers ran the 6.2-mile loop of the park in the early morning hours -- the time police believe the jogger, Maria Isabel Pinto Monteiro Alves, was slain on a rainy Sunday morning a week ago.
Police officials said they hoped the run -- started at the time a doorman said he saw Ms.
Alves leave her block -- would help them precisely determine when she was attacked as she ran on the East Drive near Lasker Rink.


This Team Needs Some I's, As in 'I'm Mad and I'm Not Going to Take It'
If the Jets walk in, bet the house that it is not through the "in" door but through the "out" door.
If the Jets make a trip from, say, New York to Boston, it is likely with a stopover in Los Angeles.
When the Jets take two steps forward, it is usually followed by four steps backward.
And the beat -- a tiring, listless, mistake-filled and uninspiring beat -- goes on and on and on.
Can we uncover our eyes now?
Yes we can.
Slowly now.
This 13-3 Jets loss to the Falcons here at the Georgia Dome was enough to give you a thumping headache.
It was so hard to watch.


Coney Island Adieu With Tattoos, Tattoos
The boardwalk shook last night as swarms of bikers on Harley-Davidsons thundered to Coney Island U.S.A.
They had come to the 10th annual Coney Island Tattoo Show.
But this show, a salute to tattooed women, had a special poignancy.
It was the last event on the boardwalk for Coney Island U.S.A., the nonprofit organization that has run a museum, a freak show and weekly avant-garde concerts there since 1985.
After years of financial turmoil and threats of eviction, it is leaving its barnlike former bathhouse at the boardwalk and West 12th Street and taking with it a fabled remnant of the amusement park's recent past.


Don't Increase the Obstacles for Teachers
To the Editor:
Grudgingly acknowledging the financial sacrifices teachers have made, the sweeping changes we have proposed to reform the schools and overcrowded classroom conditions, you nonetheless devote three editorials in three weeks (Aug. 24, 31 and Sept. 15) to urging concessions from New York City teachers.
You seem fixated on teacher preparation periods and sabbatical leaves.


INSIDE
A Mass Killing in France
After slaying his mother, stepfather and half-brother, a teen-age boy calmly opened fire on a town square in southern France, killing nine others and then himself.
Page A3.
Unusual Abortion Lawsuit
A Nebraska couple, prevented from obtaining an abortion for their daughter, are suing the boyfriend's family and officials.
Page A8.
Mayor Won't Play Favorites
Mayor Giuliani won't commit himself to Leon Goldstein as schools head, but Brooklyn's borough president can only bid him well.
Page B3.
Jury Considers Terror Case
The jury in the Manhattan terror conspiracy case spent a first full day of deliberations reviewing testimony on two lesser defendants.
Page B6.
U.S.
Loses One, Wins One
The U.S. golfers lost the Ryder Cup to Europe, while the American tennis team beat Sweden in the Davis Cup semifinals.
Pages C1 and C7.


Survey of Cambodia Abuses Will Seek Input on Internet
Twenty years after the Khmer Rouge took over Cambodia and installed one of this century's most brutal regimes, a new program sponsored by the United States and Australia is beginning to catalogue the victims of its mass killings and identify their tormentors and executioners.
The Cambodian Genocide Program, begun in January at Yale University, is establishing databases that will be made available on the Internet to encourage participation from people everywhere with experience or knowledge of events in Cambodia during the Khmer Rouge reign of terror from April 17, 1975, to Jan. 7, 1979.


Milton Munitz, A Professor And Writer, 82
Milton K. Munitz, who retired as distinguished professor of philosophy at the City University of New York, died yesterday at his home in Scarborough, N.Y.
He was 82.
The cause was prostate cancer, said his wife, Dr.
Lenore Bloom Munitz, who retired as a professor of philosophy at Briarcliff College.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7 ISRAEL AND P.L.O.
REACH ACCORD After months of arduous negotiations and a tense last-minute flurry of problems, Israel and the P.L.O. concluded a major agreement on transferring control of much of the West Bank to the Arabs.
A1  U.S QUICK TO CLAIM CREDIT President Clinton was quick to praise the P.L.O. and Israel for taking what he called a major step toward peace, but Administration officials were not shy about claiming some credit either.
A1  POPE PREPARES TO VISIT U.S.
Days after visiting Africa, Pope John Paul II will begin a demanding trip next week to the U.S.
At 75, he shows no signs of tiring as he talks of leading the church into Christianity's third millennium.
A1 Militant Palestinians denounced the Mideast peace accord.
A6 MASS KILLING IN FRANCE  After slaying his parents and brother in their home, a teen-age boy in southern France walked to the next village and calmly opened fire, killing eight more people before turning the gun on himself.
A3  REVOLVING DOOR IN THE BALKANS  A Muslim-Croat offensive has driven thousands of Serbs into the Serb-held part of Bosnia and forced Muslims to flee Serbian territory.
Now refugees from both sides are moving into their enemies' homes.
A3  BOSNIA TO SHUN PEACE TALKS  Bosnia's President said his Government would not take part in peace talks in New York this week, contending that Bosnian Serbs had not acted in good faith.
A3 Data about atrocities in Cambodia are to be entered on Internet.
A5 Plymouth Journal: A volcano is just one of Montserrat's woes.
A4 National A8-12, A16 THE PRICE OF GAMBLING  The gambling industry has spread rapidly across Iowa, and for many people its spell has proved to be a curse.
A1  THE IMMIGRATION REVOLUTION  Republicans are considering the most restrictive changes in the country's immigration laws in 71 years, proposals that have been criticized by an unusual array of interests.
A1  A FIGHT TO GET INTO SCHOOL  In Boston, where the affirmative action debate has a particular edge, the family of a student who did not get into the prestigious Boston Latin High School is suing over the school's quota system.
A8  UNUSUAL ABORTION DISPUTE  A Nebraska couple, prevented from obtaining an abortion for their daughter, are suing the boyfriend's family and officials.
A8  DISPROPORTIONATE JUSTICE?
Jury selection in the corruption trial of Representative Walter R. Tucker 3d focused on whether prospective jurors thought that prominent blacks had received undue attention from prosecutors.
A10  MOVE OVER, NEW HAMPSHIRE  Michigan's Republican Party, in disarray only seven years ago, found itself heavily courted by five Presidential candidates, who especially praised Gov.
John Engler's anti-Washington policies.
A11  BILLION-DOLLAR CONTROVERSY  Revelations that the nation's spy satellite agency has kept a $1.5 billion carryover fund has brought an order for a reassessment of the agency's financial practices.
A11  LOTS OF TALK, LITTLE ACTION  Congress has been taking plenty of revolutionary stands, but so far its tally of completed legislation is less than overwhelming.
A12  FEVER ON THE WING  Officials in Texas have been on guard for an outbreak of dengue fever, a flulike disease spread by mosquitoes that can be fatal in extreme cases.
A16 Metro Digest B1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C11-16  Richard Pena and the N.Y.
Film Festival.
C11  The dogged School of London.
C11  Philharmonic musicians threaten strike.
C12  Theater: Two one-act plays by Adrienne Kennedy.
C11  Music: Karen Akers at Rainbow and Stars.
C12  New Juilliard Ensemble.
C12  New Africa String Ensemble.
C12  Books: "A Good Life," by Ben Bradlee.
C16  Television: A BBC and WGBH history of rock-and-roll.
C14  Sports C1-10 Baseball: Mattingly and Yankees blow a lead.
C9  Mets lose to Marlins.
C7  Columns: Anderson on golf C7  Vecsey on Giants C5  On Baseball C9  On Pro Football C3  Golf: European comeback stuns United States in Ryder Cup.
C1  Pro Football: Giants put it together for first victory.
C1  Falcons beat Jets.
C2  Rams improve to 4-0.
C4  Tennis: United States wins Davis Cup semifinal.
C7  Obituaries B10  Yehuda Meir Getz, Rabbi.
Milton K. Munitz, Professor.
Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15  Editorials  Environmental promises to keep.
Lessons from California.
An endorsement of clean needles.
Letters Anthony Lewis: General Powell's chance.
Bob Herbert: Don't call it welfare reform.
William Safire: Out of our funk.
John Patrick Diggins: The pursuit of whining.
Charles Paikert: Gridironlock Chronicle A16 Bridge C14 Crossword C16


Congressional Memo; So Many Measures, So Little Time
Not in memory has Congress taken so many revolutionary positions and passed so little legislation.
A week before the fiscal year ends on Saturday, not one of the 13 appropriations bills that pay for everything, including Congressional salaries, Federal electricity bills, fighter planes and health research, has been sent to President Clinton to be signed or vetoed.


Corrections
A brief report in the Company News column of Business Day on Friday about an agreement by the Netscape Communications Corporation to acquire Collabra Software Inc. for stock misstated the value of the deal.
It is $108.7 million, not $10 million, based on Thursday's closing price of $58.75 for Netscape shares.


Jurors Question Honesty Of Police
Maurice Eason, a 19-year-old from the housing projects of East New York, walked into the central jury room at State Supreme Court in Brooklyn slightly after 9 A.M. one morning last week.
It was his first experience as a prospective juror.
Also arriving was Marie McElwan, a 68-year-old woman who had spent her life in Flatbush.
It was her seventh trip to jury duty.
However different their backgrounds, the young black man and the older white woman came to Room 261 of the Brooklyn courthouse with a shared sentiment: a distrust of the city's police officers.
The potential impact of their skepticism regarding the honesty of police officers is easy to appreciate.
In Brooklyn, nearly 40 percent of criminal prosecutions involve drug or gun cases, and the vast majority of those cases are built exclusively on the testimony of the police.


Probationary Officer Charged in Robbery
A probationary officer attending the Police Academy was arrested yesterday and charged with hitting and robbing a cabdriver in Greenpoint, Brooklyn.
The probationary officer, Paul Digiglio, 21, who had been at the Police Academy since June 30, and a friend, Robert Bascetta, 19, were arrested at the Lorimer Street subway station on the L line, a few blocks from where the attack occurred, said Officer Arek Tarih, a police spokesman.
He said that a third man who took part in the attack was being sought.


Pizzeria's Curbs Anger Youths
The 22 Bagel Cafe and Pizzeria has been a popular lunchtime destination for Somerville High School students since it opened last year.
But its co-owners, Al Padkowsky and Elaine Vitale, say they have been forced to take action as a result of escalating rowdiness by some of the teen-agers.


Abbott Pitches Angels Out of Skid and Into Scramble
Angels 5, Rangers 0
Jim Abbott ended the Angels' free fall from division leader to wild-card scrambler, pitching a three-hitter yesterday in a 5-0 victory over host Texas that snapped California's nine-game losing streak.
California's woeful slump showed signs of ending in the first inning when Tim Salmon hit a two-out r.b.i. single to give the Angels their first lead in 84 innings.
They got two more runs in the second, one in the fourth and one in the eighth.
Eight California starters either scored a run or drove one in.


Jury Focuses On 2 of 10 Accused In Bomb Plot
On its first full day of deliberations, a Federal jury asked yesterday to review testimony involving two lesser defendants in the trial of a prominent Muslim cleric and nine other men charged with a terror-bombing and assassination conspiracy.
The request indicated that the jury began what are expected to be long deliberations by focusing on Mohammed Saleh and Ibrahim A. Elgabrowny, 2 of the 10 men charged with plotting to blow up major structures like the United Nations headquarters and the Lincoln and Holland tunnels.


Bridge
Bridge players who own computers now have many possibilities.
They can play bridge, either on the Imagination Network or OKBridge, and there are many significant pages available to them on the World Wide Web.
The enthusiast can find information from around the world, including conventions, systems, movements and laws.
A month ago the Manhattan Club, at 27 West 72d Street, became the first club in North America to have its own Web page accessible at http://www.bway.net/ bridge/


A Head Start For Children In Computing
"Will your toddler go to college on the Internet?" asks the radio ad currently being broadcast in California.
"What's an Internet?" wonders the drooling one-year-old baby strapped in a car seat, gnawing a rubber teething ring.
The radio ads are currently running nationally, and two television spots are scheduled to start in October.
All are promoting a new computer product from Comfy Inc. for children as young as 12 months, an age when most kids are more interested in gumming a joystick than using it to operate a software program.


The Understudy Martin Plays Like a Star
With the hometown host and self-appointed shepherd of this Davis Cup semifinal event, Andre Agassi, on the Caesars Palace sidelines with a surprise injury, it was up to the ultimate understudy to produce some ultimate tennis against the defending champion Sweden this afternoon.
Already a loser in doubles and at the gaming tables here, Todd Martin not only turned his luck around but stole some of Agassi's signature thunder in the process.


'Letterman' Not Amused As CBS Ratings Fizzle
The late-night television war, once considered a laugher in favor of David Letterman on CBS, has become a deadly serious competition again, with Mr.
Letterman in an intense ratings struggle against Jay Leno and "The Tonight Show" on NBC, and Ted Koppel and "Nightline" on ABC.
As Mr.
Letterman and his staff see it, the reason the "Late Show With David Letterman" has fallen behind the pack has been the collapse in the ratings of CBS, the network Mr.
Letterman joined two years ago after a much-publicized exit from NBC.
Mr.
Letterman has dominated the late-night competition for most of those two years, but in the last several months -- and especially in the last four weeks -- Mr.
Letterman has seen his lead evaporate.


A Joyous Winner for the Pope's Visit


Twist to Shuttle Diplomacy: U.S. Aide Mediated by Phone
Secretary of State Warren Christopher got a telephone call at 7 A.M.: on the line were Yasir Arafat and Shimon Peres, announcing they had reached an agreement on Palestinian self-rule.
During the call, Mr.
Peres, Israel's Foreign Minister, praised Dennis B. Ross, the Administration's top Mideast negotiator, for conducting "the first shuttle diplomacy by telephone."
Mr.
Ross got a call even earlier, when Israel's top negotiator reached him at home in Bethesda, Md., at 3 A.M. to plead for help in calming Mr.
Arafat, the P.L.O. leader.
He had stormed out of the talks on Palestinian self-rule in the occupied territories, screaming that Israel was trying to shove an unfair map down his throat.


An Edith Piaf for Today, But With a Different Aura
Karen Akers, the most regal of New York's leading cabaret performers, has been integrating French songs into her programs for as long as she has been performing.
But "Whenever I Think of Paris," her new show at Rainbow and Stars (30 Rockefeller Plaza), is the first time she has made her own Francophilia the center of her act.
The show, which opened on Tuesday and continues through Oct. 14, mixes Edith Piaf signature songs like "La Vie en Rose" and "Non, Je Ne Regrette Rien" with American songs, many of which touch on French themes ("The Last Time I Saw Paris," "I'll Be Seeing You").
Dave Frishberg's sarcastic "Another Song About Paris" and Noel Coward's sendup of feline mating rituals, "Chase Me Charlie," provide humorous changes of pace.


Taking In The Sites; Places Where Standards Are Maintained
It's no coincidence that most credit cards look alike.
Nor is it happenstance that the computer language used by the World Wide Web doesn't -- or shouldn't, at least -- cause your computer to crash.
Both of these trivial facts of everyday life can be traced to international organizations that standardize all manner of things, including lumber, modems, rulers and automobile tires.
Finding the right standard, or even discovering that one exists, can be a laborious task, but the price of failing to standardize can be quite high: adhering to international standards can cut development costs and greatly improve chances of selling products worldwide.


Will Congress Reverse U.S. Policy on Indians?
To the Editor:
Congress is considering a tax on Indian gaming revenues and will soon recommend to the President that the United States reduce its funding of Indian treaty obligations by almost $100 million.
Despite over 200 years of trying to formulate a workable policy for dealing with the "Indian problem," Congress seems intent on using the slow forces of poverty to push America's first inhabitants over the brink of extinction.


On Lobbying, States Must Follow Federal Lead; Legal Eagles?
To the Editor:
On a Labor Day train ride from Vermont to New York, I talked with a woman for several hours before each of us discovered the other was a lawyer.
The fact was, neither of us wanted to admit it (see "More Scorn and Less Money Dim Law's Lure," front page, Sept. 22).
After we revealed our legal secrets, I told her I would never have guessed she was an attorney.
She smiled and said, "I'll take that as a compliment." Sadly, I suppose, for our profession, I meant it as one.
DANIEL A. SEFF  New York, Sept. 22, 1995


Chief Resigns At Bates U.S.A.
Frank Assumma is unexpectedly leaving Bates Worldwide, where he has been president and chief executive of Bates U.S.A. and Bates North America in New York.
Mr.
Assumma's departure, effective immediately, comes as Bates is working to keep an important account, the Miller Genuine Draft beer brand of the Miller Brewing Company, and to recover from losses of large accounts like Mars Inc. and the American brands of the Campbell Soup Company.
Last week, Bates lost its last American Campbell brand, Chunky Soup, to FCB/Leber Katz Partners in New York, a unit of True North Communications, though Bates continues to handle all Campbell soup brands in Canada.


To Divide Or Combine?
Corporate America can't seem to make up its mind these days: is it better to put companies together or pull them apart?
The two opposing schools of thought were on display as never before last week.
In the largest voluntary corporate breakup in history, the AT&amp;T Corporation announced on Wednesday that it was splitting into three companies and dropping out of the personal computer business.
Then on Friday, in the latest big media merger, Time Warner Inc. agreed to acquire the Turner Broadcasting System.


With Books, Controversy Can Be Good (or Bad)
In the priesthood and politics, controversy can end a career.
In publishing, as in film making and advertising, the prognosis is not so clear.


Most Wanted; 'Showgirls' Brings the Curious to Theaters
"Showgirls," the Paul Verhoeven film about Las Vegas strippers, chorus girls and lap dancers which has received an NC-17 rating, was a weak second at the box office this weekend to "Seven," the film, directed by David Fincher, about a string of murders.
But while "Showgirls" opened on far fewer screens than most movies usually do -- some chains, from Alabama to Wisconsin, refused to show an NC-17 rated film -- advance publicity and curiosity brought in audiences at a rate that gave it the highest per-theater gross of the week.


Time Warner Studio Stays Above Fray
While the New York-based generals who are fighting to conclude the merger of Time Warner and the Turner Broadcasting System continued to train their guns on enemies within and without, the company's highest-ranking officers in Hollywood were celebrating this weekend.
"A terrific fit," said Robert Daly, the co-chairman and chief executive at Warner Brothers, and the more outgoing of Hollywood's most successful business partnership.
Terry Semel, his co-chairman, said, "These companies complement each other on a worldwide basis and, ultimately, it's a very positive purchase for the shareholders of both companies."


Statue Will Honor Fenwick
A life-size bronze statue of former United States Representative Millicent Fenwick, who entered Congress at the age of 64, will be unveiled on Oct. 15, the A.P. reported.
Representative Fenwick, the model for the Lacey Davenport character in the "Doonesbury" comic strip, began her political career on the Bernardsville Township school board.
She died in 1992.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Thursday listing large holders of AT&amp;TCorporation stock misattributed some data.
Figures showing the holdings of institutional investors were from Technimetrics Inc., not Bloomberg Business News.


Crossland Savings Votes to Sell to Republic
Cashing in on a remarkable recovery, the parent company of the Crossland Savings Bank agreed this weekend to be acquired by Republic New York Corporation for $530 million in cash.
The board of the parent, Brooklyn Bancorp, voted Saturday night to approve the deal in a meeting at its headquarters in Brooklyn Heights.
Republic had been in talks with the bank for more than a month.


Newark Schools Focus On Restoring Discipline
The first incident came during a classroom rumble, when a 10-inch machete dropped from a ninth grader's pant leg.
Then two teen-age girls fought in a high school cafeteria, prompting sporadic neighborhood clashes between gangs that left one girl with a punctured lung from a stabbing.
About 15 police officers were deployed outside the high school every morning and afternoon for four days to prevent eruptions there.


Tantalizing hints of a brave new world filled with mirrors.
ACCORDING to the experts, the media are in a race for content.
The media don't know it yet, but recent events have shown that they have discovered the perfect content for the new-media future.
You read it here first: They will cover themselves.
Only themselves.


A Shake-Up at Spy Agency As Secret Fund Is Disclosed
The Director of Central Intelligence, John M. Deutch, has ordered a shake-up at the nation's spy satellite agency after discovering that it secretly accumulated at least $1.5 billion in unspent appropriations, Administration officials said today.
Mr.
Deutch's actions came in response to complaints by members of Congress, who said that the agency, the National Reconnaissance Office, had not kept them properly informed about its accumulated money.


'Mikado' Challenges Singers' Diction
For all their popularity, the Gilbert and Sullivan operettas seldom fare very well in the opera house.
They require performers with the vocal resources of opera singers and the text-projection skills of Broadway songsters, a rare combination.
The New York City Opera's production of "The Mikado," which opened on Saturday afternoon, has much to commend it: Thierry Bosquet's fanciful, color-mad costumes and sets, Patricia Birch's nimble choreography, Christian Smith's comedic stage directing and a generally engaging cast.
But in the critical matter of enunciation, the singers, with two exceptions, managed only intermittently to make Gilbert's clever words clear.
The vibrant soprano Barbara Shirvis phrased Yum-Yum's song "The Sun, Whose Rays Are All Ablaze," with shapely lyricism, but the words were indistinct.
Joyce Castle as Katisha sang with husky tone and character, but it took three repetitions of the line "May not a cheated maid die?" to clarify what she was saying.


Congressman Heads to Trial In California
In an unusual prelude to the extortion trial of Representative Walter R. Tucker 3d, lawyers asked prospective jurors whether they believed black politicians were targets for "takedown" by the Federal Government more often than their white counterparts.
The question is at the heart of Mr.
Tucker's contention that as a black man representing a Congressional district with one of the largest black populations in the nation, he is the victim of overzealous white prosecutors.
Jury selection was completed last week, and the trial is expected to begin in earnest on Monday.


Lawsuit Says Compulsion Prevented Girl's Abortion
Gossip travels fast and anti-abortion sentiment runs strong -- in small towns like this one 25 miles north of Omaha.
But on a Monday one year ago, when a 15-year-old girl told her parents, her 16-year-old boyfriend and his parents that she was pregnant, she and her family expected that the decision whether to continue the 23-week pregnancy would be theirs to make.


Sports of The Times; The Giants' Victory Will Definitely Keep L.T. Off Their Backs
LAWRENCE TAYLOR, who sorely needed a new life, now has one: motivational speaker.
Not a slick new-age guru like Pat Riley, telling executives how they can become chief executive officer, but an up-close-and-dirty intimidator of his fellow athletes.
Taylor will not operate from the podium, using a clicker to operate the audiovisual machine.
Rather, for a certain fee, L. T. will visit a locker room and browbeat the incumbents.


Orchestra Threatens To Strike This Week
The negotiating committee for the New York Philharmonic musicians has warned the orchestra's management that the players will strike on Thursday if substantial progress toward an agreement on a contract has not been made by then.
It would be the orchestra's first strike since a 10-week walkout in 1973.
The warning came just before the Philharmonic's Saturday evening concert.
A negotiation session -- the first full-scale meeting since talks broke down on Sept. 14 -- is scheduled for tomorrow afternoon.


ISRAEL AND P.L.O. REACH ACCORD TO TRANSFER WEST BANK AREAS
After months of arduous negotiations and a tense last-minute flurry of crises and walkouts, Israel and the Palestinians concluded a major agreement today on transferring control of much of the occupied West Bank to its Arab residents.
With only two and a half hours left before Israel shut down for the celebration of Rosh ha-Shanah, the Jewish New Year, the Israeli Foreign Minister, Shimon Peres, and the leader of the Palestine Liberation Organization, Yasir Arafat, finally initialed the 400-page document.
The major obstacle they had ovecome was the security arrangements for Hebron, where Jewish settlers live surrounded by Arab residents.


Hong Kong Includes A Large Leased Area
To the Editor:
"Hong Kong Votes for Democracy" (editorial, Sept. 19) states that the British colony will be returned to China in 1997 "when the 99-year lease on the colony expires."
Actually, it is the lease on the large area known as the New Territories that expires in 1997.
The island of Hong Kong is not a leasehold.


Jet End Zone Flirtations Are Met With Rejection
This wasn't one for the ages, although it could have been for the Jets if they had actually pulled it out.
But having two first-and-goal opportunities squandered because of turnovers in the final 12 minutes of the game has a way of wiping out any notion of savoring that game for posterity.
No, this game against the Falcons at the Georgia Dome belonged in the trash heap with plenty of others the Jets have played -- the most recent being the 52-14 embarrassment in Miami in the season opener.


Argentine Economic Chief Seems Safe in Job, for Now
After weeks of mounting speculation that dismissal was imminent for Finance Minister Domingo Cavallo, the architect of this country's economic stability, it appears that he is keeping his job, at least for now.
Mr.
Cavallo, whose bright star has dimmed lately as Argentina endures a stubborn recession and record unemployment, departed on Friday on a mission to Europe and the United States to convince international investors that he is still at the helm of Argentina's economy, which he maintains is fundamentally strong, despite current hard times.
He will be visiting bankers and investors in New York on Wednesday.


Rams Remain Picture of Perfection After Error-Free Victory Over Bears
Rams 34, Bears 28
The move to St.
Louis continues to do wonders for the Rams, but one thing stays the same -- quarterback Chris Miller remains injury prone.
The Rams, just 23-57 during the 1990's in Southern California, improved to 4-0 yesterday by beating the Chicago Bears, 34-28, in their second home game at Busch Stadium.
They did it by remaining turnover-free for the fourth straight game, scoring on Toby Wright's 73-yard fumble return and three touchdown passes from Miller before he left in the fourth quarter with a concussion.


John Tesh, With Piano, Onstage in His Other Persona
John Tesh's concert on Thursday night at the Beacon began promptly at 8:10.
This gave Mr.
Tesh's fans just enough time to rush from watching him on the television show "Entertainment Tonight," which ends at 8, to the Beacon to see him in the flesh.
Mr.
Tesh in the flesh is a pleasing sight.
A "manly man," as he described himself during his performance, he has a disarming smile, a well-proportioned 6-foot-6-inch body and blond hair blow-dried to perfection.
As a harmless, likable television host, Mr.
Tesh has grown to enjoy the spotlight so much that a taped announcement at the beginning of the show encouraged flash photography (as well as tape-recording and clothes-shedding).


G.O.P. Wants I.R.S. to Use Bill Collectors
Congressional Republicans are poised to pass legislation requiring the Internal Revenue Service to turn over some debt collection to commercial interests, thereby giving certain private citizens access to confidential taxpayer information for the first time.
The agency's appropriations bill, now stalled in a Senate-House conference over an unrelated issue, would provide $13 million for the I.R.S. to test whether private bill collectors could do a better job than the agency's own employees, even though they would be denied such governmental powers as the ability to seize property.


At Conference on Links Of Violence to Heredity, A Calm After the Storm
The beleaguered University of Maryland conference on the links between criminal behavior and genes was born in strife and reared on dissension and outrage, but it ended on Sunday with a note of civility and even passivity.
The biologists, psychologists, philosophers, lawyers and social critics who participated in the two-and-a-half-day affair, whether they believed that violent and aggressive behavior had a hereditary component or not, concurred that science had no quick fixes for America's crime problem, and perhaps never would.


U.S. Court Upholds Disciplining Of Off-Duty Officers in Protest
A Federal appeals court in Manhattan upheld a lower-court ruling yesterday that the Police Department can discipline off-duty officers who blocked traffic during a rowdy demonstration in 1992 without violating their First Amendment rights.
The ruling ended a two-year legal battle for 57 officers who were docked 10 vacation days for participating in a protest at City Hall on Sept. 16, 1992.
They were protesting support by Mayor David N. Dinkins for an all-civilian board to review police misconduct.
Some officers carried signs with racial slurs.


Chancellor Finalist Is Praised by Mayor
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday praised Leon M. Goldstein, the president of Kingsborough Community College in Brooklyn and a finalist for schools chancellor, calling criticisms of Mr.
Goldstein's political ties an attempt to "besmirch his character."
The Mayor's remarks were his strongest public expression of support for Mr.
Goldstein.
Mr.
Giuliani has yet to endorse any of the Board of Education's three finalists, even though his aides have said that Mr.
Goldstein has the Mayor's support and the votes of at least four of the board's seven members.


Imperiled School Is Black Recruits' Path to West Point
Jabari Miller managed just a C+ average in high school in Baltimore.
Nathaniel Edwards scored only 740 on his S.A.T. in Cary, N.C.
And while Katina Manning was the senior class president at her high school in Monticello, Fla., her math skills were so poor she gave up on college and enlisted in the Army.
"In the Army, the only math I needed was for counting pallets of ammo," she said.


Two to Tango, Especially on a Kitchen Table
A man and a woman on a kitchen table have an inconclusive erotic encounter that resembles a sitting tango.
Two other characters are more explicit about missed connections: they open and close doors, but not at the same time.
Sasha Waltz, a 32-year-old choreographer based in Berlin, knows how to create a sharply staged theater of images, as seen in these scenes from "Travelogue: 20 to 8." The hourlong piece was presented by Sasha Waltz and Guests on Sunday night at La Mama as part of a North American tour.


Fiat and Renault Campaign for the Compact-Car Market
It had all the trappings of a carnival, but it was really a declaration of war.
For 12 days this month, this smoggy northern Italian city became a burst of bright bunting, music and street theater, as the big Fiat S.p.A. automobile company introduced a range of compact cars bearing the names Bravo and Brava.
Earlier, in Barcelona's huge Olympic Stadium, in northern Spain, France's Renault S.A. displayed, with a bit less fanfare but equal hopes, a similar line of cars called Megane.
Both car makers have traditionally been linked in European minds with their staples, mini-cars and subcompacts.
Their new models, priced aggressively and with a styling that has more Latin flair than northern European stolidity, are a frontal assault on the next level in the European market: slightly larger and sturdier compacts.
That is the largest, most profitable segment -- but one that they have all but ceded to Volkswagen A.G., the Ford Motor Company and the Adam Opel A.G. division of the General Motors Corporation.


Top Honors At Crestas Shared
Pytka, the commercial production company in Venice, Calif., led by the director Joe Pytka, and Casadevall Pedreno &amp; Prg. in Barcelona, Spain, shared top honors, winning the most awards, in the Cresta International Advertising Awards.
The winners of the awards, which were sponsored by the International Advertising Association and Creative Standards International, were honored last week at a ceremony in Sao Paulo, Brazil.


Barbara Cook Sings of Love
Midway into her new show at the Cafe Carlyle on Saturday evening, Barbara Cook announced that she had recently returned to her hometown, Atlanta, for her 50th high school reunion.
"I'm all Southern again," remarked the singer, who in metamorphosing from a quintessential Broadway ingenue into a New York cabaret legend has increasingly allowed her Southern roots to show.
The worlds of light opera and the blues rarely intersect.
But Ms.
Cook, with her shadow of a drawl lending a hint of Southern languor to her singing, uses them to bring an earthy undertone into a genre that is traditionally formal bordering on prim.


Perez Posts Bond in Rape Case
The Montreal Expo rookie pitcher CARLOS PEREZ was released from the Fulton County (Ga.) jail today after posting bond in a rape case that a judge has ordered transferred to a higher court.
Perez, a 24-year-old left-hander, was arrested Saturday on charges of rape and aggravated sodomy after a 20-year-old woman told the police he forced her to have sex in his hotel room.


Enberg Hits the Perfect Pitch
In what may have been the perfect mating of an emotional announcer with an emotional event, NBC's Dick Enberg found a home at the Ryder Cup.
Enberg, who sometimes gushes like Old Faithful, emanated the proper amount of schmaltz on Sunday, plucking the right strings, choosing the best of bon mots.


COLLEGE SOCCER REPORT
Atlantic Coast Conference
Virginia again presented evidence to suggest that a fifth consecutive national title is not a remote possibility.
The Cavaliers stretched their undefeated record to 17 games, going back to last season, with a 7-1 thrashing of North Carolina, which played without three injured starters, including the all-America defender Eddie Pope.
The six-goal margin Sunday over the Tar Heels, ranked seventh in the country before the game, is the largest in the 38 victories the Cavaliers have posted over ranked teams since the Intecollegiate Soccer Association of America started its weekly poll in 1971.
The previous mark was held by the 1986 Virginia team that beat No. 5 Duke and No. 7 North Carolina State by scores of 4-0 that year.


E.P.A. Chief to Visit Cleanup Site
The nation's top environmental official will visit a 200-acre abandoned industrial site along the Delaware River today to discuss how the sharp budget cuts that Congress is considering might hamper cleanup efforts at toxic-waste sites across the country.
Carol M. Browner, Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, will be joined by Senator Frank R. Lautenberg, Democrat of New Jersey, at a news conference at the old Roebling Steel Company works about seven miles south of Trenton.
The site has been designated for cleanup under the Federal Superfund program.


In Performance: DANCE
A 25th Anniversary With Three Premieres  Joan Miller's Dance Players  Gould Hall
Joan Miller has been going her quiet way in modern dance for several decades now.
But on Friday night Ms.
Miller kicked up her heels with near-abandon in celebration of the 25th anniversary of her company, Joan Miller's Dance Players.


On My Mind; Clinton's Big Pictures
President Clinton tells White House reporters he has decided to impart the big picture to Americans.
That's nice.
Certainly every President should do that.
But I hope it is not too impolite to say that his announcement of this epiphany is richly, shiveringly embarrassing.


Smile for the Cameras, Mr. Riley
Members of the news media outnumbered the players yesterday when PAT RILEY held his first workout as coach of the Miami Heat.
The start of a three-day mini-camp in Hialeah, Fla., drew 17 prospects, all hoping for an invitation to training camp next week.
Some 20 reporters and photographers were on hand to watch.


Among the Besieged, the Refugees Bring a Clash of Cultures
Alen Borovac, a 17-year-old orphan, seldom leaves his room at the refugee hotel.
But when he feels adventurous, he goes out to play soccer at a local field.
It is his only leisure activity, Mr.
Borovac said, except for smoking, in a city where snipers' bullets are still a threat to those who venture out.
Unfortunately, Mr. Borovac usually does not get to kick the ball.


Sports of The Times; No Reason For Mercy, Mercy, Mercy
DOUG GRABER is a solid football coach and a good guy who has managed to hold the fort at Rutgers.
But enough is enough.
After watching his team absorb a pummeling by Penn State at Giants Stadium on Saturday, Graber met Penn State's Joe Paterno at midfield and reportedly launched into a diatribe about the Nittany Lions' poor show of sportsmanship.


Broken Line Cuts Water Pressure
Construction work at the Atlantic City water system's treatment plant in Pleasantville caused a break in a 4-inch line yesterday at its intersection with a 48-inch line.
The result was low water pressure in buildings in much of Atlantic City.
Repairs were expected to be completed by this morning.


Mary-Scott Welch, 75, Writer, Editor and an Official of NOW
Mary-Scott Welch, a writer and feminist leader who fostered the concept of networking to advance a woman's career, died on Friday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 75.
The cause was cancer, said Hubert Pryor, her companion.


On a New Peace and Old Atrocities: Mubarak Reflects
President Hosni Mubarak, who has played a significant role in narrowing differences between Israelis and Palestinians, said today that the agreement they reached Sunday on Palestinian self-rule was a courageous step that must now "be implemented in full faith."
Mr.
Mubarak said a failure by either side to carry out its promises could "make room for violence and the extremists or increase the rate of violence."


Inertia on Schools
For years now, it has been widely acknowledged that the governing structure of New York City's schools is a mess.
The teachers' union has said so.
Mayors and governors have said so.
Parents' groups and lawmakers from both parties have said so.
But acknowledging that there is a problem and solving it are two vastly different things, particularly when the State Legislature is involved.
And at the moment, it seems almost certain that the lawmakers will not enact the fundamental changes that many think are needed.
It is not even clear that the Legislature will tinker around the edges.


Moscow Resurrecting Icon of Its Past Glory
A mountain of concrete is rising, day and night, on the banks of the Moscow River.
A work force of more than 2,500 people labors in shifts around the clock, seven days a week (including the Sabbath), to rebuild the vast 19th-century Cathedral of Christ the Savior, destroyed by Stalin in 1931 and then turned into a weird outdoor swimming pool.


Welfare Recipients Know What's Wrong With the System
To the Editor:
You miss a fundamental point about our welfare system in "For the Poor, Defining Who Deserves What" (Week in Review, Sept. 17).
The point, overlooked by most commentators and pundits, is that our present welfare system diminishes and demeans its intended beneficiaries.
That is why so few welfare recipients defend the system.
Welfare "beneficiaries" almost always say they don't like welfare and would like to get off it.


Global Warming, Unfortunately, Is All Too Real; Wood Replenishes
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 10 front-page article on global warming couples burning of wood with burning of coal and oil as the culprits, a mistake repeated in your Sept. 18 front-page article.


Contract Talks Reach Impasse
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman declared an impasse yesterday in contract negotiations with the 35,000-member Communications Workers of America, the state's largest public employee union.
The declaration starts a process leading to mediation and fact finding.


; 2-Day 'Meistersinger' By Chicago Symphony
Purposes were mixed if not always crossed in the Chicago Symphony's two-part concert presentation of Wagner's "Meistersinger von Nurnberg" under Georg Solti on Saturday evening and this afternoon at Orchestra Hall.
Decca/ London was recording the performance live, as listeners were continually reminded by the profusion of microphones and the presence onstage of a recording producer.
He steered the singers from one mike to another and beamed on their work like some benevolent inversion of the character Beckmesser, the rigid enforcer of the Mastersingers' code.
There were subtler compromises as well.
Jose van Dam as Hans Sachs and Karita Mattila as Eva seemed for long stretches to be scaling and molding their performances carefully for the record rather than trying to project to the ,audience.
Beckmesser notched no demerits during Walther's Trial Song, and Sachs hammered no shoes; Mr. van Dam yielded to an onstage percussionist for the clangorous criticism of Beckmesser's serenade and left his cobbling music unadorned, presumably to be punctuated in the studio.


British Utility Stocks Plunge After Tax Threat
The stocks of British electricity and water companies fell yesterday after the Labor Party said it would try to make utilities pay a one-time tax totaling as much as $:3 billion ($4.7 billion) if Labor unseated the ruling Conservatives.
Labor said the tax was justified because the companies had posted big profits and paid almost no tax since the Government sold them in the early 1990's.


Traffic Jams in Brain Networks May Result in Verbal Stumbles
IT is so frustrating!
You are talking to a friend when suddenly you cannot remember the name of something.
It is on the tip of your tongue but no matter how hard you try, you cannot say what it is.
Even more maddening, you know so much about it: It is an animal that lives in South America.
It gives wool that is sometimes made into sweaters.
You met someone in California last year who raises them.
It is an . . . er, um. . ..
To scientists who study the brain, this is a tip-of-the-tongue experience.
It even crops up in a slightly different form among users of sign language.
They call it a tip-of-the-finger experience.


Market Place; Nasdaq offers its own plan aimed at cutting costs for investors.
THE Nasdaq stock market formally proposed a plan yesterday that would make it easier for individual investors to trade at better prices than they get now.
The proposal, called Naqcess, would make it possible for the first time for an individual to reduce the spread between bid and asked prices that is shown on the nearly 300,000 terminals around the world that carry Nasdaq data.


High-Tech Labs Say Times Justify Narrowing Focus
SCIENTISTS at AT&amp;T Bell Laboratories once practiced a researcher's dream, following their own curiosity while another department decided whether and how to commercialize their discoveries.
With the breakup of AT&amp;T announced last week, the dream is over.
Most scientists will work for the new split-off company that makes equipment.
Others will go to the company that provides services.
Their goal will be to produce incremental improvements in existing products.
This is a far cry from the mission of Bell Labs when it was regarded as the jewel of American industrial research.
For many years it was almost the only industry lab in the United States with a large program of long-term basic research, out of which flowed many fundamental discoveries, from the transistor to the universe's microwave background.


Danish Banks in Talks
The Danish banks Sparekassen Bikuben A.S. and Giro Bank A.S. have begun talks about a merger that would create a bank with assets of 165 billion kroner, or $29.6 billion.
Anymerger of Bikuben and Giro, Denmark's third- and fifth-largest banks, respectively, would take effect in January, the banks said. (Bloomberg Business News)


U.S. Steps Up Push For a Bosnia Accord
In an effort to give momentum to the fragile peace talks on Bosnia, Secretary of State Warren Christopher jumped into the negotiations in New York yesterday.
He urged the foreign ministers of Bosnia, Croatia and Serbia to reach an agreement today on the structure and the authority of a new Bosnian Government.
Article, page A14.


NEWS BRIEFS INTERNATIONAL SQN##121541##A PARTING OF WAYS The West Bank agreement concluded on Sunday resembles a divorce agreement -- a detailed and unsentimental arrangement hammered out by two sides. SQN##123110##BOSNIANS UNEARTH PAST Bosnian Government officers have begun to search for the bodies of hundreds, perhaps thousands, of Muslims massacred by the Bosnian Serbs three years ago. SQN##121320##Warren Christopher has joined Bosnia negotiations. SQN##121592##A RUSSIAN CHURCH RETURNS Moscow's vast 19th-century Cathedral of Christ the Savior, destroyed by Stalin in 1931 and then turned into a weird outdoor swimming pool, is being rebuilt. SQN##129712##BIG LOSS AT JAPANESE BANK Daiwa Bank of Japan said it lost $1.1 billion because of unauthorized bond trading in its New York office. The trading loss is one of the most spectacular in the history of banking. SQN##123323##SUFFERING IN SIERRA LEONE Relief workers, foreign military experts and many Sierra Leoneans say that the worst suffering in West Africa's last full-blown civil war may lie just ahead. SQN##121770##A DISPUTE ON U.N. POST FOR WOMEN Rift over an appointment to a U.N. job on women's issues. SQN##121312##AMONG THE BESIEGED, THE REFUGEES BRING A CLASH OF CULTURES Differing Muslim ways of life are clashing in Sarajevo. SQN##121398##THREE DIONNE QUINTUPLETS SAY FATHER SEXUALLY ABUSED THEM The Dionne quintuplets, who drew world attention in the 1930's and became the subject of three Hollywood films, say they were sexually abused by their father for years. SQN##129682##FOR FICTION, AND FIBBING, SHE TAKES THE PRIZE Sydney Journal: She was for a time the most celebrated young writer in Australia, a 24-year-old whose first novel was showered with the most prestigious literary awards in her homeland. But it is now clear that Helen Demidenko's most sensational work of fiction was her own life story. NATIONAL SQN##121444##SCHOOL BUSING UNDER FIRE Critics of school busing have renewed efforts across the country to end Federal desegregation mandates and the busing plans that go with them. SQN##121223##NEW INQUIRY OF GRAIN GIANT The Justice Department is investigating whether Archer Daniels Midland illegally paid millions of dollars in off-the-books compensation to company executives through foreign bank accounts, people with knowledge of the inquiry say. SQN##129836##BILL COLLECTORS FOR I.R.S.? Congressional Republicans are pushing legislation


INSIDE
Questioning in Jogger Case
Investigators combed through the hotel room of a man being questioned in connection with the killing of a jogger in Central Park.
Page B1.
Chess Drought Ends
After eight draws, a game was won in the World Chess Championship when Viswanathan Anand beat the champion, Gary Kasparov.
Page B2.
A Delany Sister Dies
Bessie Delany, the younger of the two sisters of "Having Our Say: The Delany Sisters' First 100 Years," died at the age of 104.
Page B8.


Bank Deals: Asking Cash In Mergers Doesn't Pay
Cash, they say, is king.
In most corporate deal-making, cash confers the authority to call the shots.
But in the topsy-turvy realm of banking, those who must deal in cash are in some ways enslaved, their fates controlled by accountants whose arcane rules limit their flexibility.


Q&amp;A
Physiatry
Q.  What is a physiatrist?
A.
A physiatrist is a doctor specializing in physical medicine and rehabilitation.
The word is often pronounced fizz-EYE-uh-trist, but the American Academy of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation in Chicago says it is pronounced fizz-ee-AT-trist, which sounds less like psychiatrist.
Physiatrists earn M.D. degrees and then train to practice physiatry, a specialty formally recognized in 1947, when medical techniques to help injured war veterans resume productive lives were being advanced by people like Dr.
Howard A. Rusk of the Rusk Institute.


In Assessing the Jets, Kotite Sounds Familiar
The day after for Coach Rich Kotite and the Jets was full of reflection and a search for answers.
Looking back on the team's woeful 13-3 loss to the Atlanta Falcons at the Georgia Dome on Sunday was painful enough.
Finding the answers may prove even more of a pinch for a team that is 1-3 with the physical and fleet Oakland Raiders up next.
"What do you do about things like this?" Kotite said at his news conference yesterday.
"Well, that's the part, I think, that is hard to answer and there isn't a cookbook answer -- you just can't look it up and it's there."


Knicks Ask Veterans to Attend Camp
The Knicks have invited four veterans to participate in the team's rookie/free agent camp at SUNY-Purchase this week.


Executives Said to Describe Illegal Pay at Grain Company
The Justice Department's criminal-fraud division is investigating whether the Archer-Daniels-Midland Company illegally paid millions of dollars in off-the-books compensation to an array of company executives through foreign bank accounts, people with knowledge of the inquiry said yesterday.
Some executives who have worked with the giant agricultural concern have already informed prosecutors either that they received corporate money in Swiss and other foreign accounts or knew of others who did, these people said.


Crowded Field, but No Full Houses
The Yankees, absent from baseball's post-season party since 1981, are headed in that direction with only six days left in the season.
The Seattle Mariners, who had only two winning records in their first 18 years, are on the brink of winning a division championship and have made an unexpectedly strong bid for a new stadium, too.
Both teams have the game's newest addition to thank -- the wild card.


In Performance: DANCE
Tribute to India By a Spiritual Seeker  'Dances by Kalya Yannatos' St. Mark's Church
Tamar Rogoff honored the art and mythology of India in "Shiva Shakti" on Thursday night, and the sculptural poses she devised united sensuality and spirituality.


The West Bank Peace Plan
The psychological and symbolic breakthrough of the 1993 Oslo peace agreement between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization is unlikely to be matched again as these two longtime foes work toward a new map of the Middle East.
It broke the stalemate of hostility.
But the agreement reached Sunday for extending Palestinian autonomy to the major population centers of the West Bank is a momentous substantive step toward translating the hope of Oslo into reality.
The future of the Oslo agreement rests on the delicate business of withdrawing Israeli forces from territory they have occupied since the 1967 war and placing it under responsible Palestinian control.
That is what Sunday's agreement is all about.
Israel's Foreign Minister, Shimon Peres, and the P.L.O.'s chairman, Yasir Arafat, crafted a fair compromise in months of tough negotiations.


Bessie Delany Dies at 104; Co-Wrote 'Having Our Say'
Annie Elizabeth (Bessie) Delany, the younger of the two sisters whose wisdom and triumphs have been celebrated in a best-selling book and in the Broadway play "Having Our Say," died yesterday at her home in Mt.
Vernon, N.Y.
She was 104.
"She just took a couple of deep breaths and passed away," said Amy Hill Hearth, co-author of "Having Our Say: The Delany Sisters' First 100 years," the 1993 best-selling oral history.
"And it's an important thing she died at home, in her bed, with her sister there. That's all she wanted."


Police Response: Immediate
The way Sgt.
Thomas Selesky of the New Brunswick police reconstructed it, Siyabulel Pahlaha of Bloomfield was doing 65 miles per hour in a 45-m.p.h. zone when he lost control of his car early Sunday and drove into a building, causing at least $20,000 damage.
Mr.
Pahlaha, 21, was both lucky and unlucky.
True, he was charged with drunken driving, speeding, reckless driving and driving with a suspended license, but he and his three passengers suffered only minor injuries.
And the police were on the scene at once.
The building Mr.
Pahlaha drove into was police headquarters.
DAVID STOUT


Dodgers Move Ahead Of Fumbling Rockies
Dodgers 4, Rockies 3
Eric Karros hit a two-run homer in the sixth inning last night, leading Los Angeles to a 4-3 victory over the visiting Colorado Rockies and putting the Dodgers alone in first place in the National League West Division for the first time since Sept. 5.
Los Angeles, which opened a half-game lead over Colorado, has five games left.
The Rockies have six left, including two more against the Dodgers, today and tomorrow.


Yankees Acquire Honeycutt
Not happy with the idea of playing their most important five games of the season with Steve Howe and Bob MacDonald as their only left-handed relief pitchers, the Yankees yesterday acquired Rick Honeycutt from Oakland for $50,000.
The 41-year-old reliever, 5-1 with a 2.42 earned run average and 2 saves in 49 games this season, would not be eligible for the post-season unless another pitcher were injured.
Since the left-handed Sterling Hitchcock is starting in place of the injured Jack McDowell tonight in Milwaukee instead of being available for relief, the Yankees felt they needed another lefty in the bullpen.
Reliever Jeff Patterson was designated for assignment to open a spot for Honeycutt.


At Conference on Links Of Violence to Heredity, A Calm After the Storm
The beleaguered University of Maryland conference on the links between criminal behavior and genes was born in strife and reared on dissension and outrage, but it ended on Sunday with a note of civility and even passivity.
The biologists, psychologists, philosophers, lawyers and social critics who participated in the two-and-a-half-day affair, whether they believed that violent and aggressive behavior had a hereditary component or not, concurred that science had no quick fixes for America's crime problem, and perhaps never would.


A Rock Singer Whose Words Sing, Too
Usually when a musician gets a standing ovation, it is given at the end of a concert in hopes of an encore.
But on Saturday night at the Beacon, John Prine received four standing ovations in the middle of his concert.
This is because Mr.
Prine, who has been building music from folk, country, the 6 o'clock news and his own idiosyncratic world view for 25 years, has a way with words that's hard to resist.
Mr.
Prine's songs are filled with hard-won profundities, some delivered as solemnly as a eulogy, others as offhand as a party joke.
He has a rapper's ability to make almost anything rhyme, and, as a veteran of both the Army and the Postal Service, a fatalism that never takes itself seriously.


Familiar Ring to the G.O.P. Medicare Plan? It's What Clinton Talked About
Republicans in Congress are using two of the Democrats' favorite tools -- fixed budgets for health spending and price controls for doctors and hospitals -- to rein in the cost of Medicare.
When Democrats proposed such devices last year, Republicans attacked them.
But the Republicans say there is a big difference between President Clinton's ideas and what they are now proposing.


Giants' Thrills Are Tempered By 49er Chills
The last time the Giants were in San Francisco, on Jan. 15, 1994, they got clobbered by the 49ers in a divisional playoff game.
At one point during the 44-3 crunching, Greg Jackson, now a safety with Philadelphia, began screaming at his own defense in the huddle.
He thought some players had been intimidated even before the game began and he had seen enough.
"It was crazy," remembered linebacker Corey Miller, one of the few players left from that season.
"He thought we were intimidated. He was screaming and cursing. But he was right, some of our guys were intimidated.


Samuel Guttman, 81, Physician And Leader in Psychoanalysis
Samuel A. Guttman, a physician and Freudian analyst who taught and published and was a leader in national and international psychoanalytic organizations, died on Sept. 18 in a nursing home near his home in Pennington, N.J.
He was 81.
The cause was complications of cancer, his family said.


In Park Death, A Hotel Room Is Searched
Investigators combed through the hotel room yesterday of a Harlem man who was being questioned in the killing of Maria Isabel Pinto Monteiro Alves, the jogger who was found beaten to death in Central Park last week, a senior police official said.
The man, who had been neither arrested nor charged, has been in police custody since Sunday morning, said the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
But the official called the development an important one since it led a judge to issue the first search warrant in the investigation.


Race-Ready Porsche That Killed Five Was Moving at High Speed, Police Say
A black 1985 Porsche that collided with a minivan on narrow, winding Route 9W in Tenafly Sunday, killing five people, had been adapted for racing and was being driven at high speeds by a mechanic who specialized in modifying sports cars, officials said today.
Authorities said the key unanswered question in their investigation is whether the mechanic, identified as Vatche Kasparian, 29, of Palisades Park, N.J., was road testing some new changes he had made or was simply joy riding at speeds estimated in the 80's when the crash occurred.


Ibsen's Nora and Torvald, With Subplots to the Fore
Shaw, writing nearly 50 years after Ibsen's "Doll's House" turned the London theater on its ear, called the play "epoch-making" in its advocacy of women's rights.
"The stage has never been the same since," Shaw wrote.
"It killed Queen Victoria."
Even allowing for Shavian hyperbole, it certainly killed the Victorian notion of women as little more than domestic songbirds, decorative but fragile creatures whose main purpose was to please their husbands.
Opening its 12th season, the Pearl Theater Company has mounted a diligent if somewhat desultory revival that boasts a strong supporting cast but suffers from undeveloped performances in the lead roles.


Solzhenitsyn Silenced (by Low Ratings)
After surviving forced-labor camps and self-exile, Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn fell victim today to low ratings.
The television show run by Russia's most famous writer and anti-Soviet dissident has been canceled.
"Lets face it, the feeling of something new and refreshing is gone," explained Aleksei Pushkov, public affairs director of the state-controlled public television station, ORT, which announced today that it had axed the 15-minute, biweekly show.


PEROT IS STARTING A 3D-PARTY DRIVE
Roiling the 1996 Presidential contest, Ross Perot said tonight he was forming a new Independence Party that would field its own candidate for the White House and would try to be the swing vote in Congressional races.
Mr.
Perot, who made a strong run as an independent in 1994, did not say he would be the candidate.
But neither did he rule out the possibility of another run.


Gambling Fuels Louisiana Voter Anger
From the days of Huey P. Long through the era of Edwin W. Edwards, the voters of Louisiana have shown a remarkable tolerance for political corruption.
This year, they may finally have had enough.
The reason is gambling.
Since the last gubernatorial election, four years ago, Louisiana has become a 52,000-square-mile casino.
There is gambling on the land, gambling on the rivers, gambling on the lakes, gambling in bars and restaurants, gambling at truck stops, even gambling in doughnut bakeries and barber shops.


Predicting Bird Extinctions From Deforestation
EVER since the Mayflower dropped anchor in 1620, American settlers have migrated west, clearing the land of trees to make way for farms, homes and factories.
Since then, nearly all the forests of the Eastern United States have been chopped down at one time or another.
Why, then, of the approximately 160 kinds of birds that inhabited the area from the Atlantic coast to the central plains and from Maine to Florida, have only four vanished?
That constitutes a rate of extinction far below what ecologists might expect from such a vast loss of habitat.
Critics have used the strikingly low number to challenge conservationists' claims that widespread deforestation in some parts of the world will inevitably lead to a severe loss in biodiversity.


Man Held in Slaying
In what may become the first case tried under New York State's new death penalty law, an unemployed grocery clerk in Kingston, N.Y., was charged yesterday with the kidnapping and murder of a 7-year-old girl who disappeared on Thursday.


PEROT IS STARTING A 3D-PARTY DRIVE
Roiling the 1996 Presidential contest, Ross Perot said tonight he was forming a new Independence Party that would field its own candidate for the White House and would try to be the swing vote in Congressional races.
Mr.
Perot, who made a strong run as an independent in 1994, did not say he would be the candidate.
But neither did he rule out the possibility of another run.


Bosnia Begins the Grim Search For Muslim Victims of the War
Armed with meticulously handwritten lists of the names of the missing, Bosnian Government officers have begun to search for the bodies of hundreds, perhaps thousands, of victims massacred when the Serbs swept through this area to drive out the Muslims three years ago.
Several sites near here have been marked off for excavation, all within a few miles of Kljuc.
Near Pudin Han is a site outside a cave that has human bones poking up out of a large circular depression.
Another site, known as Crvena Zemlja, or red earth, has already given up bones and clothing.
Here in Prhovo, now a vacant ruin perched on a hillside about five miles north of Kljuc, a man who witnessed a mass killing led the authorities to a spot where officials believe dozens of victims of the massacre lie buried.


By Design; Different Look for Legs
Not to be confused with their wider-legged sister, bell-bottoms, boot-leg pants are being snapped up by the fashion cognoscenti.
"It's a cross between a pant and a legging," said Ellin Saltzman, corporate fashion director for the Limited Inc., "but it's more forgiving than a legging and it makes everything -- jackets, sweaters -- look new."
Henri Bendel has Jill Stuart's black wool boot-legs for $230.
Anna Sui's wider version, in Ultrasuede, is more like the jeans worn over Dingo boots.
It comes in red, white or bottle green and costs $418 at Bendel's and $420 at Bloomingdale's.


Canadian Pasta Deal
The British food and beverage giant Grand Metropolitan P.L.C. said yesterday that its Pillsbury unit would sell its Primo brand pasta and Italian food businesses in Canada to Nabisco Ltd.
Financial terms of the sale to Nabisco, a unit of the RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation, were not disclosed.
The Primo brands have annual sales of about $90 million, Grand Met said. (Reuters)


Regulators Criticize British Telecom
British Telecommunications P.L.C. is unfairly subsidizing telephones, answering machines and fax machines in Britain, the telecommunications regulator, Oftel, said yesterday.
British Telecom's shares fell as much as 20 pence, or 5 percent, to 382 pence, but recovered later to 397.5 pence, or $4.73.


Geochemist Says Oil FieldsMay Be Refilled Naturally
COULD it be that many of the world's oil fields are refilling themselves at nearly the same rate they are being drained by an energy-hungry world?
A geochemist at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution in Massachusetts says she believes that hitherto undetected gas and oil reservoirs lying at very great depths within the earth's crust could stave off the inevitable oil depletion much longer than many experts have estimated.


Aircraft Repair Center Planned
Pilots and high rollers who fly in private planes to Atlantic City will have a $6 million aircraft service-and-repair center by early 1997.
Plans for the center, to be built for Raytheon Aircraft Services, were announced yesterday by Raytheon and the South Jersey Transportation Authority, which operates the airport.
The center will be the largest of Raytheon's 18 service centers across the country.


Europe's Ryder Cup Victory Destroys an American Myth
Simple statements are usually the most eloquent.
This is the case with one made by Bernard Gallacher on the 18th green at Oak Hill Country Club, a pithy observation that summed up a week of Ryder Cup Sturm und Drang.
As the Champagne and tears freely flowed -- and what other sporting event routinely makes grown men weep? -- Gallacher surveyed the scene on Sunday after his European team had won and said:
"It's almost getting too much to bear, this Ryder Cup."


Powell in the Center
To the Editor:
In "Powell Is Bad for the G.O.P." the partisan attack on Gen.
Colin Powell's views, which Laura Ingraham and Stephen P. Vaughn characterize as "certainly left of center," is misleading and inaccurate.
According to a Newsweek poll of registered voters conducted last week, 72 percent of respondents characterized the general's view on abortion as "about right." Sixty-nine percent agreed with his views on gun control and 53 percent with his views on affirmative action.


Global Warming, Unfortunately, Is All Too Real; What CFC's Can Do
To the Editor:
You report (news article, Sept. 21) that Representative John T. Doolittle, Republican of California, has introduced a bill to postpone the target date for banning chlorofluorocarbons, or CFC's, from 1996 to 2000.
He claims the connection between CFC's and human health is debatable.


'New Media' Experts Debate Proposals to Reduce Immigration
A Congressional proposal for strict new limits on immigration, which critics say would undermine the ability of high technology companies to recruit foreign workers, may not create severe barriers to a growing new entertainment industry in New York City, economists and business executives said yesterday.
The "new media" industry has in recent years grown out of the dense concentration of entertainment companies operating out of Manhattan lofts and inexpensive offices.
Hundreds of start-up companies have sprung up to find new markets for software, interactive video programs and other high technology products in publishing, television and advertising.


Farm Bill in Congress Offers Kansan Visions of Choice for His Open Fields
The table-flat fields of wheat on Randal Loder's farm stretch to the horizon, but Mr.
Loder believes he could make more money if Washington would allow him to plant that land in corn instead.
Showing that markets move faster than bureaucrats, corn sells at a premium here, largely because the world's largest beef-packing plant operates five miles down the road from Mr.
Loder's farm.


Test Delayed in Air Crash Inquiry
A malfunction has delayed tests that the authorities say they hope can help determine what caused an air crash near Pittsburgh on Sept. 8, 1994, that killed 132 people on USAir Flight 427.
One theory is that turbulence from a Boeing 727 about four miles ahead caused the USAir plane, a Boeing 737, to crash.
The Federal Aviation Administration's center in Pomona wants to test that theory by having a 737 fly four miles behind a 727.
Tests were to begin yesterday, but a third plane, which will monitor the experiments, was grounded with the problem.
Repairs were expected to be done in time for tests to begin today.


As the World and Soap Operas Turn; Blondes, Brain Tumors and Buckets of Tears on Hindi TV
Armed with a Sony video camera and $150,000 in loans, Sunil Hali, a 34-year-old scheduling coordinator for the Long Island Rail Road and an aspiring Indian television star, set out last year to tell an Indian-American story.
He began with a well-known Marathi-language play set in the teeming city of Bombay about the death of a young Indian woman and her father's dreams of her rebirth.


Shedding Sins for a New Year


COMPANY NEWS
ADVANCED MICRO FEARS WEAKER THIRD QUARTER  Advanced Micro Devices said yesterday that it expected weaker third-quarter results with flat demand for its flagship Am486 microprocessors, as the company slashed prices for the old-generation chip.
The company had been forced to cut prices of the Am486 with computer makers switching to the Intel Corporation's more powerful Pentium chip.
The stock of the company, based in Sunnyvale, Calif., fell $1.75 yesterday, to $31.125, in New York Stock Exchange trading of 2.7 million shares. (Reuters) GALEY &amp; LORD TO BUY TRIARC'S TEXTILE COMPANY  Galey &amp; Lord Inc., a major maker of high-quality woven cotton and cotton-blended fabrics, has agreed to acquire the Graniteville Company, a textile concern, from the Triarc Companies in a deal valued at about $254.8 million.
The price would include about $174 million of Graniteville's debt, to be assumed by Galey &amp; Lord.
Triarc, with annual sales of more than $1 billion, operates Arby's restaurants, produces beverages through Royal Crown and Mistic Brands and liquefied petroleum gas through National Propane.
Galey &amp; Lord's stock rose 87.5 cents yesterday, to $13, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Triarc edged up 12.5 cents, to $15.125.  (Reuters) MCI TO ANNOUNCE MARKETING AGREEMENT WITH MICROSOFT  The MCI Communications Corrporation plans to announce a joint-marketing agreement today with the Microsoft Corporation to provide computer networks that link offices hundreds of miles apart.
Large corporations typically have in-house experts who assemble the package of telephone services and software necessary to knit together such a network of data-sharing computers.
C.
David Sutton, an MCI spokesman, said the alliance with Microsoft would try to provide that same system-building expertise to smaller businesses.
He declined to provide further details.
The move comes less than a week after MCI bought computer network consultant SHL Systemhouse Inc. for $1 billion.  (Bloomberg Business News) FIFTH THIRD TO ADD FIRST NATIONWIDE OHIO'S BRANCHES  Fifth Third Bank of northeastern Ohio, a subsidiary of Fifth Third Bancorp, has signed a definitive agreement to acquire all the branches in Ohio of First Nationwide Bank of San Francisco for $129 million, the companies said yesterday.
The deal would include $1.4 billion in deposits and 28 offices throughout Lake, Cuyahoga, Medina and Lorain counties.
Fifth Third, based in Cincinnati, has about $17.2 billion in assets and 382 sites.
It also has 603 automated teller machines in Ohio, Kentucky, Indiana and Naples, Fla.
Fifth Third's stock rose 25 cents yesterday, to $58.25, in Nasdaq trading.(Reuters) ETHYL TO BUY TEXACO'S LUBRICANT ADDITIVES BUSINESS  The Ethyl Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire Texaco Inc.'s lubricant additives business.
Terms were not disclosed.
The Texaco division makes lubricating oil additives that are blended into automotive oils, transmission and hydraulic fluids, gear oils and other products.
The Texaco division had 1994 sales of about $350 million.
Ethyl, a Richmond-based lubricant additives company, had 1994 sales of about $1 billion.
Texaco, based in White Plains, said the lubricants business had been part of its chemical operations.(Dow Jones) WALLACE COMPUTER SAYS MOORE MISLED INVESTORS
Wallace Computer Services Inc. yesterday accused an unwelcome suitor, the Moore Corporation of Toronto, of making "false, misleading and coercive" statements to shareholders of Wallace, a business forms maker.
In amendments to its pending Federal lawsuits in New York and Delaware, Wallace cited statements by Reto Braun, Moore's chairman and chief executive, who suggested in a recent letter to Wallace shareholders that Wallace's stock price would fall to the low $40's from the $56-plus level if Moore withdrew its hostile bid.
Wallace contends that the statements violate Securities and Exchange Commission rules.
Hilda Mackow, a Moore spokeswoman, said the company stood by Mr.
Braun's statements. (AP) BALLY GAMING SAYS WMS SWEETENS MERGER PACT
Bally Gaming International Inc. said yesterday that WMS Industries had raised its takeover bid for Bally, a slot and video gaming machine maker, to about $142 million, outbidding a hostile offer by the Alliance Gaming Corporation.
Under the new offer, Bally shareholders would receive 0.625 of a WMS share for each Bally share, up from 0.55 a share offered previously.
WMS's stock fell $1 yesterday to close at $21.125 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Based on that price, the new offer would be worth about $13.20 for each Bally share.
Bally edged up 6.25 cents, to $12, in Nasdaq trading.
Bally said its board intends to meet within the next few days to consider WMS's proposal and to consider Alliance Gaming's revised conditional partial tender offer.(Reuters) BLISS &amp; LAUGHLIN GETS A HIGHER TAKEOVER OFFER
Bliss &amp; Laughlin Industries, which agreed last week to be acquired by the BRW Steel Corporation, said yesterday that it had received a higher takeover bid from the International Metals Acquisition Corporation.
International Metals offered $32.7 million in cash for Bliss &amp; Laughlin, a manufacturer of steel bars, based in Harvey, Ill.
International Metals owns the Niagara Cold Drawn Corporation, a Buffalo-based processor of steel bars.
Last week, Bliss &amp; Laughlin agreed to be acquired by BRW Steel for $30.8 million in cash.
Bliss &amp; Laughlin's stock jumped $1, to $8.25 a share, in Nasdaq trading. (Dow Jones) FIRST MISSISSIPPI TO SPIN OFF FIRSTMISS GOLD STAKE
The First Mississippi Corporation said yesterday that it would spin off to shareholders its 81 percent stake in FirstMiss Gold Inc., a gold mining and exploration company.
First Mississippi, based in Jackson, Miss., said it was focusing on its chemicals, fertilizer and related business.
Shareholders of FirstMiss Gold, based in Englewood, Colo., would get seven-tenths of a FirstMiss Gold share for each First Mississippi share they own.
FirstMiss Gold stock closed at $22.375 yesterday, down 12.5 cents a share, in Nasdaq trading.
First Mississippi shares were up 50 cents at $37.125 on the New York Stock Exchange. (Dow Jones) LITTON PLANS TO AQUIRE HUGHES'S DELCO SYSTEMS UNIT
Litton Industries, a maker of electronic defense systems, said yesterday that it planned to acquire the aircraft maintenance business of the Hughes Electronics Corporation's Delco Systems.
The price of the deal was not disclosed.
The unit, known as Inertial Systems, with operations in Goleta, Calif., and in Milwaukee, is expected to generate $70 million in revenue this year, Litton said.
The unit maintains, repairs and upgrades airplane avionics systems for commercial and military customers.
Hughes is a unit of the General Motors Corporation. (Reuters) PHYSICIANS CORPORATION OF AMERICA, Miami, a managed health care provider, said it had been awarded a Medicaid contract in Puerto Rico worth more than $100 million in annual revenue.
PICKER INTERNATIONAL INC., Cleveland, a manufacturer of medical imaging technologies, has acquired Scinticor, a nuclear cardiology company.
Terms were not disclosed.
U.S.
INDUSTRIES, Iselin, N.J., a distributor of housewares and leisure products, announced the sale of two commercial properties valued at $34.2 million in California and Nevada.
COMPUSA INC., Dallas, a computer equipment supplier, announced it had signed leases for 13 computer superstores that will open by next June.
CompUSA already operates 86 superstores.


Corrections
An article on Friday about a decline in applications to law schools misstated the figures for New York University.
Applications there declined to 6,623 in 1995 from 7,239 in 1991 (not to 5,761 in 1995 from 7,240 in 1991).
The article also misstated the given name of the assistant dean of admissions there.
She is Nan McNamara, not Ann.


At Home Alone With Windows 95
THE last sentient being in the universe not to have installed Microsoft Windows 95 finally took the plunge.
The Federal Express truck carrying the $89.95 upgrade on a CD-ROM arrived at home late on a weekday morning.
After finishing my coffee and the paper, I unwrapped the package and carried the disk and 95-page manual up to the home office as the town sirens were announcing that it was noon.
Following instructions, I started my current version of Windows, Windows for Workgroups 3.11, on the trusty 486/66, inserted the disk into its drive, selected Run from the File menu, and typed "D:win95setup." The program said it was checking the system, and the screen went blank.
After a few minutes, with no sign that either the CD-ROM or the hard disk was doing anything, I reset the computer.


Sydney Journal; For Fiction, and Fibbing, She Takes the Prize
She was for a time the most celebrated young writer in Australia, a 24-year-old whose first novel was showered with the most prestigious literary awards in her homeland.
But it is now clear that Helen Demidenko's most sensational work of fiction was her own life story.
And the discovery of her elaborate tapestry of lies has mortified Australia's literary establishment, leaving it open to accusations of gross naivete, historical ignorance and even anti-Semitism.


L.I.R.R. Service Deteriorates, A Survey of Riders Indicates
Long Island Rail Road customers think trains are too few, too late and too dirty, and for the first time in four years, they think the railroad is getting worse, not better, according to a survey released yesterday.
The survey, the ninth annual poll of riders conducted by the Long Island Rail Road Commuter's Council, found that after three years of improvement, passengers' perceptions of the railroad declined this year from last year.


Inchcape's Earnings Are Sharply Lower
The London-based international motor distributor and marketing company Inchcape P.L.C. said yesterday that its first-half results were severely depressed by the strong yen and by weak demand in some markets and that it had taken tough steps to improve prospects.
Pretax profit after exceptional charges fell to $:18.6 million, or $29.3 million, from $:125.5 million a year ago.
The latest earnings reflected charges and write-offs totaling $:64.7 million to cover the first stages of a large job cutback and asset disposals.


Big Japanese Bank Says Trader Lost $1.1 Billion on Deals in U.S.
In one of the most spectacular trading losses in history, Daiwa Bank of Osaka, Japan, said last night that it had lost $1.1 billion because of unauthorized bond trading in its New York office.
The bank said Toshihide Iguchi, an executive vice president, made an estimated 30,000 unauthorized transactions over 11 years.
He was dismissed yesterday, the bank said.


Transplant Failure Clue
A FACTOR that causes female tissue to reject transplants from males has been identified, solving a 40-year-old puzzle.
Dr.
Victor H. Engelhard, an immunologist at the University of Virginia, said this month that he and his colleagues had identified a compound that originates from the male Y chromosome and causes an immune reaction from female tissue.
The findings were reported in the Sept. 15 issue of the journal Science.


Why Many Trailblazing Scientists Must Wait Many Years for Awards
MANY landmark scientific discoveries win prizes only years, even decades, later.
Sometimes the lag reflects the time it takes to verify unorthodox findings or overcome long-held beliefs.
Sometimes a discovery is so far ahead of its time that years pass before its significance is understood.
In other instances, the delay reflects an establishment's habitual resistance to new ideas and endless foot-dragging by the scientists who nominate and serve on the award juries.
Consider Dr.
Barry J. Marshall, who was among the winners of this year's Albert Lasker Awards, which were announced yesterday.
Dr.
Marshall was honored for finding that a bacterium, not stress, causes inflammation of the stomach and ulcers.
The research was partly based on experiments he did on himself in the early 1980's.


Exide Cutback in Europe
The Exide Corporation, a battery maker and lead recycling company based in Reading, Pa., said yesterday that it expected to close more than half of its battery plants in Europe in the next five years as it consolidated operations after a series of acquisitions.
Exide will also integrate operations of its three European battery companies.
They are Euro Exide, formerly BIG Batteries, in Wales; Tudor in Spain and CEAC in France.
They have combined annual sales in Europe of 24 million batteries. (Reuters)


Out of a Crisis, an Opportunity
When Hugh D. Pace, Goodyear's manager here, heard on his car radio last December that the peso had crashed, dragging the nation's economy with it, he immediately met with his managers to assess the damage.
Within days, he figured that domestic demand for their tires would plunge more than 20 percent, or 3,000 a day.
His choices: lay off workers or find new export markets -- right away, before his warehouse overflowed.
Mr.
Pace turned his office into a war room.
On his walls, members of what he called Team 3,000 pinned outlines and diagrams of strategies to capture new foreign customers, especially in the United States.


High-Performance Computing Doesn't Recognize Any Borders; Illusion of Action
To the Editor:
Re "Fire Sale" (Op-Ed, Sept. 18) by Gary Milhollin: Two years ago, when I served as a Pentagon official, it was hard to see how trying to restrict exports of machines that a gifted junior high school graduate in India or Singapore could put together from off-the-shelf components did anything for our national security.


Face-Lift Plan Spurs Complaint
Officials of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey said yesterday that the Lincoln and Holland tunnels and PATH stations will get face lifts.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said the authority is doing more for New Jerseyans than for New Yorkers, again.  [ Page B5. ]


Ethics on Vacation
Gov.
George Pataki is in Europe this week, searching for his roots.
New Yorkers will understand his desire to visit his family homeland.
Indeed, many of them have made similar trips themselves.
Most of them, however, managed to do it without bringing along their own press spokeswoman.
Most also paid their own way.
The Governor and his party, which includes his wife, mother and son as well as four aides and two state troopers, are visiting Hungary as guests of the Hungarian-American Chamber of Commerce.
Later they will move on to Italy, where the Italian-American Chamber of Commerce is picking up the tab.


Anand Crushes Kasparov Under a Pawn Avalanche
Viswanathan Anand smashed Gary Kasparov with a powerful queenside attack yesterday in Game 9 of the world chess championship.
Thus, the 25-year-old Indian grandmaster brilliantly seized the lead in the 20-game match with a score of 5-4.
It was the first decisive result in the match, breaking a record-setting string of eight straight draws.
But Anand, calm and genteel in triumph, said, "I am really just a half-point ahead." Of course, you can't be a half-point ahead in a head-to-head contest, but Anand was surely making a little joke about gaining a whole point instead of the half-points he has received for drawing every night since play began on Sept. 11.


Dick Steinberg, 60, Jet Official Who Built Pro Football Teams
Dick Steinberg, general manager of the New York Jets the last six seasons and a respected talent scout who helped build the Los Angeles Rams and the New England Patriots into Super Bowl teams, died yesterday.
He was 60.
The cause of death was stomach cancer, the Jets announced.


Houghton Mifflin to Buy Publisher D. C. Heath
Hoping to establish an even stronger presence in the textbook market, the Houghton Mifflin Company announced yesterday that it had signed an agreement to buy the Raytheon Company's D. C. Heath &amp; Company educational publishing unit for $455 million in cash.
The deal, expected to be completed next quarter, would give Houghton Mifflin a substantial boost as a publisher of textbooks in modern languages, science, language arts, social studies and mathematics.


METRO DIGEST
BUDGET CUTS IMPERIL MILITARY SCHOOL The military's prep school at Fort Monmouth, N.J., is the main way for black applicants to reach West Point: half of all black cadets currently at West Point came from the school.
The teachers' union has said so.
Mayors and governors have said so.
Parents' groups and lawmakers from both parties have said so.
But acknowledging that there is a problem and solving it are two vastly different things, particularly when the State Legislature is involved.
News analysis.  [ B3. ] Highly sensitive metal detectors, newly deployed at 34 schools this year, are one part of the school system's response to repeated calls for a Police Department takeover of the school system's safety division.  [ B3. ] FARE INCREASE LOOMS, AS DO 'NEW TOKENS' Once upon a time, there was a Transit Authority that cried, "New Token!" It most recently cried "New Token!" when it planned to raise fares in 1991.
But the Transit Authority (heh! heh!) was only fooling.
The fares went up, but the tokens did not change.
Now subway and bus riders are facing another fare increase.
And once again, the Transit Authority is crying, "New Token!"  [ B3. ] PENALTY UPHELD ON OFF-DUTY OFFICERS A Federal appeals court in Manhattan upheld a lower-court ruling that the Police Department can discipline off-duty officers who blocked traffic during a rowdy demonstration at City Hall in 1992 without violating their First Amendment rights.
The ruling ended a two-year legal battle for 57 officers who were docked 10 vacation days for participating in an ugly demonstration at City Hall on Sept. 16, 1992.  [ B3. ] IN NINTH CHESS GAME . . .
A WINNER Viswanathan Anand smashed Gary Kasparov with a powerful queenside attack in Game 9 of the world chess championship.
Thus the 25-year-old Indian grandmaster brilliantly seized the lead in the 20-game match, 5 games to 4.


Accounts
*
SFGT Advertising Inc., Philadelphia, was awarded three accounts with combined billings estimated at $4 million to $5 million: the Philadelphia 76ers basketball team, previously in-house; SmithKline Beecham Clinical Laboratories, Collegeville, Pa., previously handled by various agencies, including SFGT, and Hoechst Celanese Textile Fibers Group, New York, to introduce its Microsafe fiber. *
Whitehall-Robins Healthcare, Madison, N.J., a division of American Home Products Corp., to the New York office of Young &amp; Rubicam Inc., as the first agency to handle its new electronic media account.
The billings were not disclosed.
Young &amp; Rubicam New York handles Whitehall-Robins brands like Advil, Anbesol and Dimetapp. *
Groupe Bull, Paris, to Duval Woglom Brueckner &amp; Partners Inc., Boston, to introduce a worldwide marketing program for its ISM computer software.
The billings were estimated at $2 million.
Duval Woglom handles advertising for a United States subsidiary of Groupe Bull, Bull HN Information Systems Inc. of Billerica, Mass. *
Wilmington Health Associates P.A., Wilmington, N.C., to Overcash &amp; Moore, Raleigh, N.C., as the first agency to handle advertising for the provider of health care services.
The billings were estimated at $1 million. *
Montefiore Medical Center, the Bronx, to Elkman Advertising and Public Relations, Bala-Cynwyd, Pa., to handle its account, previously handled on a project-by-project basis by various agencies.
The billings were not disclosed.


A Small College's Tax-Exempt Status Challenged
Washington and Jefferson College is a small liberal arts college tucked away in a corner of southwestern Pennsylvania.
But it has become the focus of a growing nationwide struggle by governments to tax colleges and other nonprofit institutions.
Founded in 1781, Washington and Jefferson, like other colleges and nonprofit groups, has always been tax exempt.
But two years ago, after watching other cities win payments in lieu of taxes from nonprofit organizations, the City of Washington, Pa., where Washington and Jefferson is located, asked the college to make such payments.
The college refused, and the case is now in the courts.


Boggs Hobbles Toward Playoffs
And on the 153d day of the season, Wade Boggs rested his aching left hamstring.
Finally.
The Yankees did not play yesterday so Boggs, who has done a miniature Cal Ripken imitation during New York's pursuit of the wild-card spot, did not have to tax his strained hamstring beyond walking onto an airplane in Newark and then walking into a hotel in Milwaukee.


Patterns
Cussle on Sixth
Young Innovators, a new showcase series planned as a low-cost alternative to Seventh on Sixth in Bryant Park, has found itself locked in battle with Seventh on Sixth organizers.
Darnell Brewster, the producer of Young Innovators, which is to take place Oct. 28 to Nov. 3, said relations had been smooth with Seventh on Sixth and the New York Fashion Calendar, which traditionally acts as a clearinghouse and referee for the scheduling of fashion events, until last week, when Seventh on Sixth learned that the designers Donald Deal and Violeta Villacorta were switching from the tents to Young Innovators.
To Seventh on Sixth, the shift means a loss of $27,000.


Bryant Reeves Signs With Grizzlies
BRYANT REEVES, selected sixth over all in the National Basketball Association draft, signed a three-year contract yesterday with the expansion Vancouver Grizzlies.
Reeves, a 7-foot center who led Oklahoma State to the National Collegiate Athletic Association Final Four last season, will earn an estimated $1.45 million in the first year of the deal that is limited by the league's new rookie salary cap.


The Less Mets Change, The Better Green Looks
Dallas Green wasn't lobbying to be kept as the Mets manager, although it is almost certain he will be even though General Manager Joe McIlvaine was not ready to make an official announcement yesterday.
Yet, Green made it clear that what the Mets need most now is stability, something the organization has lacked for the past three years.


No Headline
"It makes us better farmers to have to sit down and to decide what to grow on our own land. A lot of other businesses are not subsidized. On Main Street, it's the battle of the fittest." MARC MILLER, a Kansas farmer.  [ A18:2 ]


Small Profits in TB
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 18 front-page article on the resurgence of tuberculosis refers to the failure of a Japanese drug company to develop the fluroquinolone Sparfloxacin to treat tuberculosis.
Developers say use for this indication might preclude use for more prevalent or profitable conditions.


An Appropriate Way to Remember


His Long Shot Pays Off Handsomely
Jerry Carroll remembers it well.
It was 10 years ago and he was constructing a building across the road from Latonia Race Course in northern Kentucky.
The track was old and seedy.
You couldn't reach it directly from the nearby interstate that carried torrents of traffic from Cincinnati southwest to Louisville and southeast to Lexington, the heartland of horse racing.
They were putting up purses of $38,000 a day -- a day, not a race.
The entire track had one elevator that held seven people.
"And," he said, "the tote board was propped up by some 2-by-4's.


A WAVE OF SUITS SEEKS A REVERSAL OF SCHOOL BUSING
More than two decades after the high tide of court-ordered school desegregation, critics of school busing around the country are mounting renewed campaigns to end Federal desegregation initiatives and the busing plans that come with them.
Encouraged by conservative electoral successes and a string of Supreme Court decisions limiting the responsibilities of schools to foster desegregation, Denver, Minneapolis, Cleveland, Pittsburgh, Seattle, Wilmington, Del., and Indianapolis are among cities revisiting the emotional debate over school busing.
Norfolk, Va., and Oklahoma City have already eliminated mandatory busing for the purposes of desegregation.


30-Year Bond Up in Price On Light Day
Treasury prices were little changed yesterday in light trading ahead of the Federal Reserve's meeting on interest-rate policy today.
Prices of Treasury securities were generally lower, except for the long bond, which edged up 2/32 , to 10328/32 .
Its yield was unchanged from 6.58 percent on Friday.


Fossils Reveal a Rival to T. Rex
MOVE over, Tyrannosaurus rex.
Newfound fossils reveal a beast that may be the biggest meat-eating dinosaur known, scientists reported in the current issue of the journal Nature.
Scientists estimate that the dinosaur, which resembled T. rex, was 41 to 43 feet long and weighed 6 to 8 tons when it roamed the plains in what is now Argentina looking for food to chomp with its huge serrated teeth.


CHRONICLE
During the 1970's, ANGELA DAVIS, the black power advocate, was imprisoned in California on kidnapping and murder charges in connection with the invasion of a San Rafael, Calif., courthouse to free black prisoners.
At that time, social and political advocates in Cuba joined the international movement to secure her release.
Last week, Ms.
Davis returned to Cuba for the first time in 20 years, as part of a delegation from the United States-Cuba Medical Project to deliver a $5 million shipment of medicines and medical supplies.
It was the single largest donation from the project, said LESLIE CAGEN, its director.


A Guitarist Who Can Build Jazz On Silence
Jim Hall's guitar playing gains its definition in part by what it leaves out.
Mr.
Hall, who begins a six-night engagement tonight at the Village Vanguard, stutters and hesitates when he plays, and omissions, in the form of silence, are part of the construction material he brings to his solos.
The guitar is a notoriously prolix instrument, dependent not on breath for its sound, but on fingers, which don't normally need much rest.
Mr.
Hall plays differently, and the result has been a legion of fans who come to hear, or be part of, the intimacy of his groups, their intelligence and the beauty of self-imposed limits.
Mr.
Hall has just released a new album, "Dialogues" (Telarc), in which a handful of the best of jazz's middle-aged generation join in, among them the guitarists Bill Frisell and Mike Stern, the saxophonist Joe Lovano and the trumpeter Tom Harrell.
While Mr.
Hall, who is 64, has worked with such luminaries as Sonny Rollins, Art Farmer and Bill Evans over the last 30 years, the new album was meant to show his relationship with musicians of a different generation, many of whom have been influenced by his style.


McCann Office Works for CARE
The Atlanta office of McCann-Erickson Worldwide will donate its services to CARE, the international relief and development organization, and introduce a multimedia public-service campaign for CARE's 50th anniversary.
McCann Atlanta, a unit of the Interpublic Group of Companies, has created 17 television commercials and 8 print advertisements, and it has paid for production and talent costs.
To help win exposure for the campaign, the agency will ask other McCann offices, as well as Interpublic sibling agencies like Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas and Lowe &amp; Partners/ SMS, to encourage the media organizations they deal with to run the ads free.


A Late Kick By Lions Shocks 49ers
The Detroit Lions did it again.
They started sluggishly, backed themselves into a corner and then defeated the defending Super Bowl champions.
Last season, it was the Dallas Cowboys, on the road, on a Monday night early in the season.
Tonight it was the San Francisco 49ers, at home in the Silverdome, where the Lions won by 27-24 before a vocal and thrilled capacity crowd of 76,236.


Alan Bennett, Feet Dry and No Egg on His Face
WRITING HOME  By Alan Bennett  Illustrated. 417 pages. Random House. $25.
In the uproarious centerpiece of this sparkling new collection of journals and essays, the English playwright and actor Alan Bennett describes his emotionally fraught relationship with a bag lady named Miss Shepherd, who in the early 1970's came to live in an ancient and filthy van near his house in Camden Town.
Miss Shepherd isn't a terribly pleasant neighbor -- she leaves behind piles of smelly garbage, hurls insults at passersby and noisily carries on about her fantasies of running for Prime Minister -- but the people of Gloucester Crescent, being good liberals with bad consciences, are loath to ask her to leave.
Mr.
Bennett goes one step further: he invites her to park her van in his driveway.
It's an offer Miss Shepherd grudgingly accepts, and it's not long before she has turned his garden into the neighborhood eyesore: her van is festooned with bits of discarded carpet and old blankets (to muffle the sound of rain), and foul-smelling garbage bags are tossed from the van each morning.


Tea, but No Sympathy, for the Tasters
Slurp, swoosh, spit. Slurp, swoosh, spit.
For 48 years, Robert H. Dick, a Food and Drug Administration employee, has used this method to work his way through as many as 300 cups of tea a day in a small office near the Brooklyn waterfront.
Mr.
Dick is the Government's No. 1 tea taster, a connoisseur whose expertise is devoted to insuring adherence to an almost century-old standard that Americans drink only teas of "purity and wholesomeness."


For Sierra Leone, Elections and Starvation Loom
Like thousands of others who have straggled into this diamond-dealing outpost from the bush in recent weeks, Hawa Amara thought her family was saved when she stumbled on a foreign-run feeding center.
But weeks of eating little more than bitter palm kernels and wild roots torn from the ground as she moved from one devastated village to another, hoping to avoid this West African country's cutthroat rebels and its often equally brutal army, meant that Miss Amara, a mother of four in her early 20's, would have no such luck.


Gaining a Starring Role In Utility Industry Deals
John W. Barr often jokes that his firm, Barr Devlin Associates, which is advising the Potomac Electric Power Company in its merger with the Baltimore Gas and Electric Company, is the Rodney Dangerfield among advisers to the utility industry.
But in the last two years, Barr Devlin has earned a lot of respect on Wall Street, playing an advisory role in most of the large utility mergers over that time.
Although lacking the name recognition of its two largest competitors, Goldman, Sachs and Morgan Stanley, Barr Devlin has taken part in about 40 percent of the dollar volume of deals struck in the utility sector in the last five years, according to an estimate by the utility group of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


BUSINESS SUMMARY FRONT PAGE SQN##126578##OUT OF A CRISIS, AN OPPORTUNITY Goodyear is one of many big American companies in Mexico that have compensated for the collapse of domestic demand by sending goods abroad, to the United States most of all. As the peso shriveled in value, these companies saw their labor costs, in dollars, fall by more than a third. The resulting flood into the United States of cheaper autos, televisions and other products, including tires, is turning last year's $1.4 billion trade surplus with Mexico into a $15 billion deficit.  SQN##123587##BALTIMORE GAS AND POTOMAC ELECTRIC AGREE TO $2.9 BILLION MERGER In the utility industry's continuing move to cut costs and prepare for greater competition, two major East Coast companies, the Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and the Potomac Electric Power Company, announced plans for a merger yesterday that would create the nation's ninth-largest power company. The merger, one of the biggest announced so far in the industry, would create a new company serving 1.8 million electric and 530,000 gas customers in the Baltimore-Washington area. SQN##129836##G.O.P. WANTS I.R.S. TO USE BILL COLLECTORS Congressional Republicans are poised to pass legislation requiring the Internal Revenue Service to turn over some debt collection to commercial interests, thereby giving certain private citizens access to confidential taxpayer information for the first time. The agency's appropriations bill, now stalled in a Senate-House conference over an unrelated issue, would provide $13 million for the I.R.S. to test whether private bill collectors could do a better job than the agency's own employees, even though they would be denied such governmental powers as the ability to seize property. SQN##122033##BANK DEALS: ASKING CASH IN MERGERS DOESN'T PAY These days most bank deals are simply swaps of paper; the acquirer trades its shares to the stockholders of the target company. Doing deals entirely with stock allows banks to use a more favorable accounting treatment, known as pooling of interests -- which lets banks avoid having to reconcile on their books the fact that they bought a company for far more than its accounting book value. Buying companies for cash, or buying any subsidiary of another company must be accounted for as a purchase requiring the buyer to write off the good will -- the difference between the purchase price and the target's book value -- over 15 years. SQN##121223##ARCHER


ADVANCED MICRO FEARS WEAKER THIRD QUARTER
Advanced Micro Devices said yesterday that it expected weaker third-quarter results with flat demand for its flagship Am486 microprocessors, as the company slashed prices for the old-generation chip.
The company had been forced to cut prices of the Am486 with computer makers switching to the Intel Corporation's more powerful Pentium chip.


New Token? There Are 60 Million Reasons
Once upon a time, there was a Transit Authority that cried, "New Token!"
It most recently cried "New Token!" when it planned to raise fares in 1991.


Living Apart in Mideast
The West Bank agreement concluded on Sunday had little of the triumphal hoopla that usually accompanies such pacts, things like starting a new era or bringing peoples together.
This document was more of a divorce agreement -- a detailed and unsentimental arrangement hammered out in intense and sometimes stormy negotiations between two people who recognized that they could not live together, and had to decide exactly who gets what, where and when.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
4.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.68
5.66
4.78
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.14
5.17
4.79
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.27
5.27
5.22
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.24
6.23
7.55
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.58
6.58
7.79
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.55
7.55
8.64
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.12
6.11
6.53
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


The chairman of Wells Rich Greene is dismissed by the agency's parent in France and replaced.
KENNETH S. OLSHAN, the chairman and chief executive of Wells Rich Greene BDDP Communications in New York, was unexpectedly dismissed from his positions yesterday by the parent company's board in Paris, which cited "disappointing results" over the five years since the acquisition of Wells Rich.
The parent company, BDDP Worldwide, named Frank Assumma, who left Bates Worldwide on Friday, to succeed Mr.
Olshan, effective immediately.
Mr.
Assumma was also named a vice chairman of BDDP Worldwide.


A Dispute On U.N. Post For Women
The international women's conference held in Beijing earlier this month asked the United Nations Secretary General to appoint the organization's first high-level official for women's issues.
But the choice is proving difficult, officials say, because it threatens to reopen fissures between rich and poor nations only recently bridged in Beijing.
The leading contender for the job, which is expected to carry the rank of an under secretary general, is Gertrude Mongella, a former politician and diplomat from Tanzania who was secretary general of the Beijing conference.


2 Jersey City Officers Are Shot
Two Jersey City police officers were shot and wounded trying to make a routine traffic stop last night, the police said.


Observer; Hub Hails New Champ
Colin Powell is selling books like nobody ever sold books before.
In a single bookstore appearance in Boston he easily smashed the one-day sales record held by Larry Bird, the greatest star in the New England literary firmament since Nathaniel Hawthorne.
When the figures are all in, General Powell's sales may even exceed Hawthorne's.
What a mind-blower that would be.


New Tactic Is Tested on Illegal Immigrants
In the first major sweep of illegal workers in non-border states, Federal immigration officials have arrested or deported 4,044 illegal immigrants and replaced about 2,400 of them with legal workers, the authorities said today.
The raids, termed Operation South P.A.W. (Protecting American Workers), focused on assembly plants, food processing operations, restaurants and construction sites in six Southeastern states in the last three months.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, is selling $250 million of medium-term notes due in 1997 through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
The notes, which are callable in one year, carry an interest rate of 6.06 percent and are priced at par.


Dowd Is Willing to Wing It for the Devils This Season
Jimmy Dowd, the only New Jersey native to play for the Devils, is the player destined to move around from position to position because of Claude Lemieux's uncertain future and Valery Zelepukin's recurring problem with the vision in his right eye.
Dowd established himself as a center last season, but Coach Jacques Lemaire has used him at both left and right wing in the first three games of the exhibition season, and he plans to play him at wing again when the Devils play the Islanders on Tuesday night at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


High-Performance Computing Doesn't Recognize Any Borders
To the Editor:
Re "Fire Sale" (Op-Ed, Sept. 18): Gary Milhollin charges that the release of controls on the export of "supercomputers" (desktop machines by the Government's definition) will "help third world nations build nuclear weapons."


Lasker Awards Given for Work On Ulcers and Immune System
IN addition to Dr.
Barry J. Marshall, five scientists, whose research dates to the 1960's, were announced yesterday as winners of Lasker Awards.
The scientists will share the basic research award for solving a fundamental problem in immunology -- how certain white blood cells known as T cells recognize foreign proteins in order to start the immune system's defense reaction.


Corrections
An article by The Associated Press on Friday about a decline in teen-age birth rates misstated the birth rate for all women in the United States in 1993.
It was 67.6 births per 1,000 women of childbearing age (15.5 per 1,000 was the birthrate for the United States population as a whole).


Manweb Says It Has A Foreign Suitor
The regional electric company Manweb P.L.C. repeated its opposition yesterday to a revised bid by Scottish Power P.L.C., saying the bid undervalued the company.
Manweb also said it was in talks with an overseas suitor.
British newspapers reported over the weekend that Pacificorp of Portland, Ore., was talking to Manweb about a possible alternative offer to Scottish Power's bid of more than $1.66 billion.Both companies declined to comment.


Sydney Journal; For Fiction, and Fibbing, She Takes the Prize
She was for a time the most celebrated young writer in Australia, a 24-year-old whose first novel was showered with the most prestigious literary awards in her homeland.
But it is now clear that Helen Demidenko's most sensational work of fiction was her own life story.
And the discovery of her elaborate tapestry of lies has mortified Australia's literary establishment, leaving it open to accusations of gross naivete, historical ignorance and even anti-Semitism.


In Rain and Temperature Data, New Signs of Global Warming
IN a new study of weather trends in the United States, China, Australia and the former Soviet Union, scientists have turned up further evidence that some of the predicted effects of emissions of heat-trapping greenhouse gases on the world's climate are being felt.
Computerized models of the climate system suggest, among other things, that as concentrations of greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide rise, a greater proportion of precipitation will be in the form of heavy rainfalls and snowfalls.
They also suggest that day-to-day and week-to-week differences in temperature will be less pronounced.


Seeking to Avoid Carter Comparisons, President Refines Comments
President Clinton wants to make one thing perfectly clear.
"Malaise is a state of mind," he said today, touching his finger to his tanned temple.
"Funk is something you can bounce out of."


PATH and Tunnel Face Lift Prompts a Giuliani Attack
Port Authority officials yesterday promised face lifts for PATH stations and the Lincoln and Holland tunnels over the next two years, prompting Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani to accuse the authority once again of doing more for New Jersey residents than for New Yorkers.
The 13 PATH stations will be repainted and will get brighter lights and new maps, and some will get new handrails, ceilings, floors and walls, said Kathleen A. Donovan, the chairwoman of the authority.
Speaking at a news conference in the PATH station at Sixth Avenue and Ninth Street, in Greenwich Village, Mrs.
Donovan said the tunnels would also be better lighted and newly painted, and there would be minor improvements at terminals at Newark and Kennedy airports.


Clerk Is Charged in Killing of 7-Year-Old
In what may become the first case tried under New York State's new death penalty law, an unemployed grocery clerk was charged today with the kidnapping and murder of a 7-year-old girl who disappeared on Thursday while playing in front of her house here.
The authorities said that after several days of questioning, the 25-year-old clerk, Lawrence Whitehurst, led the police to woods on the outskirts of town before dawn today, to a pile of twigs and debris that covered all but a foot of the girl, Rickel Knox.
The Ulster County District Attorney said he won Mr.
Whitehurst's cooperation by agreeing to sign a plea bargain that was actually a ruse to find the victim.


Global Warming, Unfortunately, Is All Too Real
To the Editor:
S.
Fred Singer, in "Global Warming Remains Unproved" (letter, Sept. 19), criticizes the conclusions of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, an international group of thousands of scientists who analyze data and advise the world's governments of climate change.


Grade Inflation in Children's Software
HUNDREDS of computer programs vie for the attention of parents and children, so "Parent's Guide to Children's Software 96" (Newsweek, about $30) might seem useful.
The package includes not only a book containing more than 250 reviews of software for kids, but also a CD-ROM of "multimedia reviews" of what the reviewers deem the 50 best titles.
Along with ratings for "educational content," "replay," "multimedia," "interactivity" and "design," the book gives a description of each program and a letter-grade report card.
But many descriptions are as short as one sentence, and grade inflation creates lots and lots of A's and B's, but only about 60 C's, a dozen D's and nary a single F. A C grade is supposed to represent "an average disk," but in this infant field, the average is so low it would deserve a failing grade from most parents, teachers and children.


Baltimore Gas and Potomac Electric Agree to $2.9 Billion Merger
In the utility industry's continuing move to cut costs and prepare for greater competition, two major East Coast companies, the Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and the Potomac Electric Power Company, announced plans for a merger yesterday that would create the nation's ninth-largest power company.
The merger, one of the biggest announced so far in the industry, would create a new company serving 1.8 million electric and 530,000 gas customers in the Baltimore-Washington area.
It would have assets of $15 billion and projected revenues of $5 billion a year.
The merger would be accomplished through an exchange of stock valued at $2.9 billion.


Officer Hurt in Crash Dies
A New York City police officer who broke his neck on Saturday after his patrol car collided with a postal van died last night, the police said.
The officer, David Willis, 29, died from his injuries at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center at 11:30 P.M., said Detective Mark Patterson, a police spokesman.


COMPANY BRIEFS
PHYSICIANS CORPORATION OF AMERICA, Miami, a managed health care provider, said it had been awarded a Medicaid contract in Puerto Rico worth more than $100 million in annual revenue.
PICKER INTERNATIONAL INC., Cleveland, a manufacturer of medical imaging technologies, has acquired Scinticor, a nuclear cardiology company.
Terms were not disclosed.
U.S.
INDUSTRIES, Iselin, N.J., a distributor of housewares and leisure products, announced the sale of two commercial properties valued at $34.2 million in California and Nevada.
COMPUSA INC., Dallas, a computer equipment supplier, announced it had signed leases for 13 computer superstores that will open by next June.
CompUSA already operates 86 superstores.


Safety Plan Too Little For Mayor
Students at Adlai E. Stevenson High School in the South Bronx call the hallway outside the school cafeteria Belt Alley.
It got that name because students stop there every morning to put their belts back on after removing them so they can walk through the school's new metal detectors.


Mexico Sets Spending To Add Jobs
With roughly one in every 10 Mexicans out of work, the Government announced a $250 million fund today to help rebuild ports, railroads and bridges, creating some jobs but not enough to bring much relief from the record unemployment.
The idea behind the public works program is to encourage building projects by local governments and private companies by lowering the cost of financing.
Because of the current economic conditions and the risks associated with lending to Mexican companies, interest rates are several percentage points higher than normal.


Steinberg's Loss Is Felt
The Jets reacted with sadness and appreciation yesterday upon receiving the news that their general manager, Dick Steinberg, had died of stomach cancer.
"It's sad to see such a wonderful person who meant so much to the N.F.L. community for so many years pass on," Coach Rich Kotite said.
"Nobody has been more supportive of us than Dick Steinberg."


New Young Voices in City Opera's 'Carmen'
To its credit, the New York City Opera has always provided important opportunities for young American singers.
But introducing young voices can be a precarious business, as was made clear by the debuts of two promising singers during Sunday afternoon's performance of Bizet's "Carmen" -- the first this season -- in Jonathan Eaton's attractive production.
Making his debut as Don Jose was Adam Klein, a young tenor who not so long ago was singing the boy soprano role of Yniold in a Metropolitan Opera production of Debussy's "Pelleas et Melisande." Sunday's City Opera debut surely represented an exciting arrival for this New York native.


Fall's Ski Look: Shades of Futures Past
Fashion stands condemned for thrusting trends from nowhere on unsuspecting customers.
But no trend comes without precedent.
Trends have their own logic within the fashion system, not only because fashion must evolve, but also because it must have continuity.
If the freshest trend of the fall season -- the ski look -- didn't clobber anyone over the head, the elements have all been in place for the last two years.
The nylon.
The color blocking.
Fitted trousers that flare over the shoe.
Lean-bodied sweaters.


Magazines Win Awards
Six magazines took top honors last week at an annual awards competition sponsored by Circulation Management magazine, published by the Ganesa Corporation.
In the consumer category, the winners were: The Atlantic Monthly, published by the Atlantic Monthly Company; Backpacker, published by Rodale Press, and Men's Health, also published by Rodale.
In the business category, the winners were: Advertising Age, published by Crain Communications; Chief Executive, published by the Chief Executive Group, and Motor, published by the Hearst Corporation.


Rock Promoters Vie for Manhattan
Ron Delsener didn't become king of the rock-concert scene in New York City by accident: it was through a series of strategic moves.
By negotiating exclusive contracts to promote concerts at halls like the Academy and Roseland, he encouraged new bands to remain loyal to his company.
Thus did Mr.
Delsener take over Manhattan several years ago from John Scher, his only significant rival.
Mr.
Scher continued to promote regularly at other places on the East Coast, including the Meadowlands in East Rutherford, N.J., with an occasional foray into Madison Square Garden with the Grateful Dead or the Beacon with a smaller band.
But for rock, Manhattan became essentially a one-promoter game.
Until today, that is, when promoter wars returned.
The crucial pawn was Irving Plaza, at 17 Irving Place, the smallest of Mr.
Delsener's holdings.
With a capacity of 900, Irving Plaza was the perfect place for Mr.
Delsener to start young bands on his club circuit, moving them up to bigger venues: the Academy, Roseland, Jones Beach and, if their popularity continued to grow, Madison Square Garden.
But Mr.
Delsener didn't count on Irving Plaza's having a mind of its own.


CHRONICLE
CHARLES KURALT, the author and former CBS News correspondent, was in stable condition at a Manhattan hospital yesterday after suffering chest pains, said Sandy Genelius, a spokeswoman for CBS News.
Mr.
Kuralt, 61, told representatives at the network that he was undergoing routine tests at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center but that he felt well and expected to be released today.


CHRONICLE
GUS VAN SANT, the director, said it wasn't too difficult to decide whether to attend the Los Angeles or the New York premiere of his coming film, "To Die For," this evening.
"The New York premiere is to benefit the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force, which makes it a bigger deal for me," Mr.
Van Sant said by air phone en route from Los Angeles to New York.
"The film is not a gay story, but I've supported the task force and its work in Washington and in politics, and they need money."


Dismissal of Claims In Fraud Case Urged
A Federal magistrate has recommended the dismissal of all damage claims filed by defrauded investors against the law firm that advised the financier Steven Hoffenberg and his corporate flagship, the Towers Financial Corporation, later found to have been involved in a vast Ponzi scheme.
Mr.
Hoffenberg is awaiting sentencing after pleading guilty to Federal fraud charges stemming from his operation of Towers, which defrauded investors of more than $450 million before collapsing into bankruptcy court in March 1993.


Three Dionne Quintuplets Say Father Sexually Abused Them
The Dionne quintuplets, who drew world attention in the 1930's and became the subject of three Hollywood films, were sexually abused by their father for years, the three surviving sisters have charged on Canadian television and in a new book.
Annette, Cecile and Yvonne Dionne, now 61, made the allegation in an interview on the Radio-Canada television network in Montreal over the weekend.
Asked why they had waited so long to break their silence, Yvonne spoke of their need to find "inner peace."


Transactions
Baseball  American League
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Acquired Rick Honeycutt, pitcher, from the Oakland Athletics for cash.
Designated Jeff Patterson, pitcher, for assignment.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
HOUSTON ROCKETS -- Signed Eldridge Recasner, guard.
SEATTLE SUPERSONICS -- Signed Sherell Ford, forward, to a three-year contract.
VANCOUVER GRIZZLIES -- Signed Bryant Reeves, center, to a three-year contract.
Football  National Football League
CHICAGO BEARS -- Waived Mike Faulkerson, fullback.
Activated Steve Stenstrom, quarterback, from the practice squad.
Canadian Football League
HAMILTON TIGER-CATS -- Announced the resignation of Dieter Brock, offensive coordinator.
Named Mike Faragalli offensive coordinator.


To Spur Talks, Christopher Jumps Into the Bosnia Effort
In an effort to give momentum to the fragile peace talks on Bosnia, Secretary of State Warren Christopher jumped into the negotiations today, urging the Foreign Ministers of Bosnia, Croatia and Yugoslavia to reach agreement on Tuesday on the structure and authority of a new Bosnian Government.
But the three sides, as in past negotiations, were making new demands and resisting agreement on a brief draft document, which, said negotiators, defines the functions of the Presidency and the Parliament, calls for free elections and lays out the relationship between the Bosnian state and a Serbian political entity that would sit within its borders.


A Donaldson, Lufkin Founder Rejoins the Brokerage Firm
William H. Donaldson said yesterday that he had rejoined Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette, Inc. the brokerage firm he founded in 1959 with two fellow graduates of the Harvard Business School and a pool of $100,000 in capital.
The appointment of Mr.
Donaldson, who is 64 years old, as a senior adviser to the firm that bears his name comes as that company prepares a public offering of about 20 percent of its shares that is projected to raise $286 million.


The Return of the Lugs (Think Kramden)
According to most dictionaries a lug is, among other things, a loutish sort of fellow.
But back in 1930's movies he became a kind of urban blue-collar icon, the kind who got one of the heroines to mutter admiringly, "Aw, get outta here, ya big lug." Television refines the image further.
Now, shades of Jackie Gleason's Ralph Kramden and Carroll O'Connor's Archie Bunker, there is the adorable big lug, exuding his working-class charm through sitcom characters played in the current new season by Tony Danza ("Hudson Street" on ABC) or Andrew Clay ("Bless This House" on CBS) or Drew Carey ("The Drew Carey Show" on ABC).
Discovered at a Golden Gloves boxing tournament, Mr.
Danza established his spunky working-class credentials as Tony in "Taxi," which, beginning in 1978, ran for five years.
Then, again named Tony, Mr.
Danza spent eight years on "Who's the Boss?" Now playing Tony Canetti on "Hudson Street" (Tuesdays at 8:30), he applies his patented boyish charm to the role of a police detective in Hoboken who shares custody of his 10-year-old son with his still friendly former wife.
Tony's relationship with the boy is lovingly overprotective.
Son: "Don't call me honey!" Dad: "O.K., sweetheart."


In Performance: DANCE
An Unorthodox Take On Regeneration  'Changing the Direction of the Wind' Angela Caponigro
Angela Caponigro's new solo, "Changing the Direction of the Wind," serves as a reminder that spiritual experiences can be had in theaters as well as in houses of worship.
But while congregations presumably share certain attitudes toward theology and liturgy, audiences may come from more diverse backgrounds.
Performers therefore often have to lead theatergoers into new worlds of thought and convince them that journeys through these realms are meaningful.


A Cruel Revision of Medicaid
Congress shows no signs of slowing its assault on the social safety net stitched together over six decades.
Following radical surgery in both House and Senate on the Federal welfare program, and the House's decision to trim food stamps, the House Commerce Committee tore another hole in the net on Friday by eliminating the Federal guarantee of Medicaid insurance for millions of poor families.
At the same time it voted to slash Federal Medicaid spending, virtually forcing states to kick millions of poor children out of the program.
The bill would replace Federal matching grants -- Washington now kicks in at least 50 percent of what a state spends on its own -- with fixed annual grants.
It would eliminate most existing eligibility criteria and benefit standards.
The grants would be set at levels designed to cut $182 billion over the next seven years.


Devils Caught in Tangle Over Draft Pick and Lineup
When the Devils and the Islanders took the ice tonight for a preseason game, they did so from vastly different perspectives: The Islanders were just about set on their personnel for their regular-season opener in 11 days, but the Devils were still at the evaluation stage for about a dozen players.
Petr Sykora, New Jersey's first choice in the draft this year, was the player under the most severe scrutiny.
Sykora, who is 19, has been impressive in training camp, but he has been at the center of a dispute between the Devils and Sykora's team last season, the Detroit Vipers of the International Hockey League.


Every Drop of Rain Is Welcome, but There Is Still a Long Way to Go
Voices of cheer and gloom were heard yesterday under gray skies that delivered rain to a region that sorely needs it.
Both moods made sense, depending on the answer to the question, "Are the reservoirs half full or half empty?"
More than an inch fell over parts of the New York metropolitan region -- a blessing for lawns, to be sure.


Steal These Pants? Ad Pulled So New Yorkers Won't Try
First Calvin Klein. Now Levi Strauss.
In a new advertising campaign promoting Dockers brand pants, Levi Strauss placed khakis usually costing $55 under plastic shields in 40 Manhattan bus shelters.


Nothing Like an Upset To Heal the Lions' Ills
The Lions-49ers Monday night battle at the Silverdome was all about a reversal of fortune.
It was all about turnabout being fair play.
Last season, the 49ers strode in here in their sixth game of the season, trailed early and blitzed the Lions late in a victory that would serve as the springboard for their season.
They left here and marched straight toward a league-record fifth Super Bowl title.


INSIDE
West Bank Ponders Future
Ramallah residents are looking forward to the end of Israeli occupation, but they are uncertain whether life will improve substantially and worried about the economy.
Page A3.
Beethoven Sans Concrete
The Philadelphia Orchestra played Brahms and Beethoven at Carnegie Hall last night, and the subject of concrete (or its absence) was as prevalent as the music.
Page C11.
Perot Seen as Crafty
Even detractors say Ross Perot's move for a third party was masterful, giving him a chance to influence the 1996 campaign.
Page A17.
Clues About Chronic Fatigue
A study suggests a link between chronic fatigue syndrome and an abnormality in the way the body regulates blood pressure.
Page A16.


Corrections
A table in Business Day on Monday comparing the ratings of "Late Show With David Letterman" with those of its network rivals misattributed the figures.
They were from Nielsen Media Research, not Arbitron.


John L. Bates, 85, Interpreter For Roosevelt at Stalin Talks
John L. Bates, who fled Russia as the son of a top Czarist guard, returned in World War II as a United States military attache and interpreted for President Roosevelt in his momentous talks with Stalin at Teheran and Yalta, died on Sept. 20 at his home in Fort Belvoir, Va.
He was 85.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Getting to See Pope
The chance to pray with Pope John Paul II is a special occasion for any Catholic, but it is especially sweet for the nuns of the Monastery of St.
Dominic in Newark, who rarely leave their cloister.
On Oct. 4, they will be allowed to venture out for the Pontiff's visit.


At the Nation's Table: Alaska; Syrup Makers Turn Love Into Business
It has been about five years since the first birch trees were tapped in Alaska to produce birch syrup to sell commercially.
Now, a group of Alaskans is marketing the syrup.
In 1990, Marlene Cameron of Wasilla, Alaska, then a professor at the University of Alaska at Anchorage, became intrigued with local lore about how sourdoughs (old-time Alaska residents) and Indians would collect birch sap as it rose in the spring and boil it down to make a syrup.
She decided to try her hand at it by tapping her own trees.


CHRONICLE
MARY FISHER, the artist and crusader for people with AIDS, has learned the hard way that a coffin used as an artistic statement cannot be shown in a Senate building.
The Senate Rules and Administration Committee canceled an exhibition of her work called "Messages" that was to be on display this week in the rotunda of the Russell Senate Office Building on Capitol Hill.
It has as its centerpiece a hand-painted coffin.


Journal; 5756 In Idaho
If there's an antithesis to the New York Jew, it's surely the eastern Idaho Jew.
There is no rabbi in these parts.
Matzohs and gefilte fish for Passover must be ordered weeks in advance. (Potatoes, for latkes, are no problem.) And just down one interstate or another lurk Aryan Nations, the local militia and Bo Gritz, the far-right survivalist guru who spins Jewish banking conspiracies and embraces David Duke.
But Judaism -- albeit with very few Jews, many of them in mixed marriages -- thrives here anyway, in a form that Dan Yurman, who works in business development in Idaho Falls, calls "roll-your-own." Whatever it is, it's tenacious.
As an Eastern stranger visiting Temple Emanuel in Pocatello to see in the new year of 5756, I found yet another example of Judaism's eternal ability to survive as both a religion and a force for social justice -- even when cut off from Jewish culture, even when under real or threatened siege.


Lunchtime Gunmen Strike at Four Parking Lots
In less than an hour, armed robbers struck at parking lots at Fortunoff's, Bloomingdale's, Macy's and an office building at lunchtime today, succeeding in three robberies and failing at a fourth, the Nassau County police reported.
In each case, the police said, the robbers drove away in a white Chevrolet Cavalier.


N.F.L. to Discuss Deals With Jones
A group of National Football League owners and Commissioner PAUL TAGLIABUE are to meet in Washington today with JERRY JONES, the Dallas Cowboys' owner, for further discussions of deals that the league says violates revenue-sharing policies.
Yesterday, Jones said, "I'd like to see this thing resolved and out of the public eye."
The full ownership gathered last Tuesday to hear Jones say that he had done nothing wrong by signing Nike, Pepsi and Dr Pepper to Texas Stadium deals that do not involve selling the Cowboys' trademarks.
One day before, the league had sued Jones in Federal court.


Book Notes
First Out of the Gate
Last January, when Random House signed up Gerald Posner's newest proposal for a book, Harold Evans, the president and publisher of Random House's trade group, demanded that its subject be kept secret.
Only two people besides Mr.
Evans were told.
But after Ross Perot's announcement this week of his plans to organize an Independence Party for the 1996 elections, Mr.
Evans jubilantly announced that the book in progress was a treatise on Mr.
Perot and third-party politics.
The publishing house, which is already going great guns to promote Colin Powell's memoir, is breathless.


Congressional Panels Take Back $1 Billion From Satellite Agency
Congressional committees have withdrawn more than $1 billion from the secretive agency that builds spy satellites after learning that it had hoarded a larger sum of appropriated money without informing Congress, Government officials said today.
The money was withdrawn from the financing for next year's secret budget for intelligence programs, which had totaled nearly $29 billion.
It was transferred to weapons projects in next year's $243 billion Pentagon spending bill.


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
Love, Marriage and Family, Italian-American Style  'Brotherly Love' Samuel Beckett Theater
Like the visible bricks supporting the house where its action unfolds, the comedy drama "Brotherly Love" is made of familiar, sturdy, no-nonsense materials.
Mark and Vincent Valenti, two orphaned brothers grown to manhood as partners in a construction business, come to a crisis in their relationship when Mark, the elder, marries and brings his wife to live in the home their immigrant father built.


Knicks Are Open to Nelson's New Methods
For the first time anyone could remember, the blinds were pulled up today on the lone second-story window above the basketball floor at SUNY-Purchase here.
Among other things at the Knicks' opening day of camp for rookies and free agents, one could see Coach Don Nelson calmly working his first sideline in New York.
He nodded when things went right.
He pointed out instructions carefully when things were not right.
He often stood there in his black Knicks T-shirt, serenely staring onto the floor, maybe trapped in his own basketball mind.


Killing by Police Is Protested
Two dozen demonstrators marched outside City Hall yesterday, contending that the police fatally shot an unarmed man on Monday night while he was handcuffed and lying on the ground.
Police officials said the man, Robert Rodriguez, was killed when he tried to grab an officer's gun during a struggle after a routine traffic stop.


PLAN FOR SAVINGS IN SOCIAL SECURITY
Senators from both parties suggested today that the Government could solve some of its budget problems by slowing the growth of Social Security benefits paid to 43 million people.
President Clinton has threatened to veto any bill that carries out Republican plans to help balance the budget by cutting projected spending on Medicare and Medicaid by $452 billion, or 16 percent, in the next seven years.
As a possible alternative, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York, said the Government could reduce the annual cost-of-living adjustment in Social Security benefits.
The current formula overstates inflation, he said.


A chef is reunited with his true inspiration: a Sicilian grandmother: C7.


Upsize, Downsize
The juxtaposition of two major corporate moves last week invited comparisons.
AT&amp;T acted boldly and unexpectedly to break itself into three parts, while Time Warner sealed a long-negotiated deal for Turner Broadcasting to secure its position as the world's largest media empire.
AT&amp;T is getting smaller.
Time Warner, like Disney, is getting bigger.
Which strategy holds the key to the future?
Maybe both, because beneath the hype, the strategies are two versions of the same reality.
While some analysts have rushed to contrast the moves, the similarities are more striking.
They go beyond the observation that both are steps in an inexorable march toward a global information economy that is changing American industry and workplaces.
Such moves are also profoundly transforming our communities.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Authorities Try to Unravel How Daiwa Trader Hid Loss  Japanese and American authorities tried to unravel how a Japanese-born bond trader working for Daiwa Bank in New York lost $1.1 billion over the last 11 years, without raising the suspicions of regulators in either country or of his employer.
The trader, Toshihide Iguchi, an executive vice president, was arrested Saturday.
A complaint filed in Federal court in Manhattan charged that he maintained a false set of books enabling him to cover his losses, chiefly in United States Treasury securities.  [ Page A1. ] Mr.
Iguchi was an unlikely candidate to rise to executive vice president of a major Japanese bank.
Analysts said Gateway 2000 had the market virtually to itself, and although its market share is shrinking, its business should grow.
Market Place.  [ D10. ] Putting Ads in a Hole  Links Inc., a Connecticut company, has signed up 35 golf courses around the state to place ads at the bottom of their golf holes.
About two dozen advertisers have signed up for the promotion, including Snapple, Citibank, local Ford dealers, the Subway sandwich chain and Anheuser-Busch.
Links is seeking partners to take the idea across the nation.
Advertising.  [ D4. ] Gannett Outdoor Advertising agreed to withdraw an ad campaign for Levi Strauss's Dockers.
The "Nice Pants" campaign had real cotton trousers hanging between plastic shields at Manhattan bush shelters to tempt vandals.
"That's a terrible mistake," Mayor Rudolph W. Guiliani contended.
But the company got what it wanted: publicity.  [ A1. ] Stocks Slip on Rate Decision  Stocks eased after the Federal Open Market Committee decided to keep interest rates at current levels.
The Dow industrials fell 4.33 points, to 4,765.60.  [ D20. ]


Quayle Museum Gets Government Funds
The Dan Quayle Center and Museum in Huntington, Ind., has received two grants totaling $8,485 for museum and conservation "assessment." The grants come from the Institute of Museum Services, a Federal agency that awards operating money to museums throughout the country.
As Vice President, Mr.
Quayle strongly opposed Federal financing for the arts.
He also criticized "the cultural elite" for dominating the arts and "subverting America's traditional values." Writing in his syndicated newspaper column earlier this year, Mr.
Quayle recommended privatizing both the National Endowment for the Arts and the National Endowment for the Humanities, which are federally financed agencies and get their budgets from the same appropriations bill as the Institute of Museum Services.


A Familiar Face Returns To Take Charge of MSG
Joe Cohen, who helped build the MSG Network 20 years ago and left it a decade ago, is back to run it again.
Since mid-1994, he has been part-owner of the Los Angeles Kings, but the team's sale made returning to New York easy.
"I got a call from Dave Checketts, we talked and it started to feel right," said Cohen, referring to the president of Madison Square Garden.


CHRONICLE
It was a veritable crush of media names who gathered Monday night on the Upper East Side to celebrate one of their own: BEN BRADLEE, the former executive editor of The Washington Post.
Among the 200 people congratulating Mr.
Bradlee for his autobiography, "A Good Life: Newspapering and Other Adventures," published by Simon &amp; Schuster, were Charlie Rose, Don Hewitt, Roone Arledge, Mortimer Zuckerman, Barbara Walters and Richard Snyder.


Uncovered Short Sales Rise 6.8% on the Nasdaq Market
The National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday that the number of open positions of short sales on the Nasdaq market jumped 6.8 percent in the month that ended Sept. 15.
The short position in Nasdaq shares, which represented trading that took place between Aug. 16 and Sept. 12 and was settled by Sept. 15, totaled 893 million shares in that period, compared with 836 million in the period ending Aug. 15.
That tops the previous peak of 849.2 million shares on Aug. 15, 1994.


Chinese Gang Feud Is Outlined As Trial in 4 Slayings Begins
A bloody rivalry within a Chinese gang and a lust for riches obtained by smuggling illegal Chinese aliens into the United States led to the slaying of four gang leaders on a quiet suburban street in Teaneck, N.J., in May 1993, a jury was told here today.
William Murray, an assistant Bergen County prosecutor, outlined the violent feud at the top of the Fuk Ching gang and the four slayings that led to the gang's demise in opening arguments in the trial of six young Chinese men facing various charges of murder, attempted murder, kidnapping, burglary and arson.


Humanities Endowment Rises Above Politics; Continue Arts Grants
To the Editor:
Lynne A. Munson (Op-Ed, Sept. 21) quotes from "Censorship on Stylistic Grounds," an article I wrote for Art Journal (winter 1991) devoted to censorship.
In the course of my article I tried to outline the historic paths taken by art biases in this century, against modernism early on, then in a reversal, more recently against traditional forms.


The Philadelphia Orchestra At Carnegie, Minus Concrete
The Philadelphia Orchestra, the remains of several maple trees and a new season were on the agenda at Carnegie Hall last night.
What this distinguished ensemble played was very nearly upstaged by what they were playing on.
I refer first to the phantom concrete substratum found under the stage this summer and subsequently removed, and then to the fresh new lumber that has been nailed over the void.
So if the repertory (Brahms Piano Concerto No. 1; Beethoven Seventh Symphony) and the conductor (Wolfgang Sawallisch) were tried and true, potentially new sounds that a new stage might project offered patrons a premiere of sorts.
Curious listeners hovered all evening over this high frequency or that one, buzzing happily among themselves at intermission.
It was like one of those bandage-removal scenes from hospital melodramas.
Will the blinded victim see again?
Keep unwrapping.


Patent Office Plans to Supply Abstracts Free on the Internet
Abstracts of the nation's vast patent data base will be made freely available via the Internet under a plan the Patent and Trademark Office said yesterday was a first step toward a dialogue with the public about the possible availability of the entire patent library.
Public access to Government information has become a hotly contested issue in Washington as the expansion of the Internet has made it possible for agencies to make data bases available at low cost.
The move toward free access, though, has been opposed by some private publishers who currently sell the information to specialized markets.


Investigators Are Stymied In Jogger Case
In the nine days since the body of Maria Isabel Pinto Monteiro Alves was found in a stream in the northeast corner of Central Park, at least six men have been brought in for questioning in the case.
Five were homeless.
The sixth, held for two days before he was released, was an admitted crack user who spends his days collecting and selling discarded bottles and cans.
But as of yesterday, all six men had been released, and the extensive police investigation into the murder was back to Square 1.


Number of Babies Born With H.I.V. Levels Off
FOR the first time in the history of the AIDS epidemic, the number of babies born nationwide with the virus that causes AIDS has leveled off, Government researchers report.
After increasing sharply in the 1980's, the percentage of childbearing women infected with the human immunodeficiency virus, or H.I.V., has remained relatively constant since 1989, the researchers found.


A Record Pace Is Continuing In Stock Funds
Will investors ever grow cautious? They certainly show no signs of doing so.
Mutual fund companies yesterday reported strong cash flows into funds in September, continuing the record-breaking pace of this summer.
"Over all, we are sustaining August's momentum, and August was the best month we have seen in over a year," said Joan Miller, a spokeswoman for State Street Research, a Boston-based fund group.


20,000 Smoke Alarms Donated To Community Losing Fireboxes
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and city fire officials went to Brooklyn yesterday to announce that a private company had donated more than $500,000 worth of smoke detectors to residents of a neighborhood where the city started deactivating fire-alarm call boxes last week.
The First Alert Corporation of Chicago donated 20,000 smoke alarms, which will be distributed through community groups in the Brooklyn neighborhood of East New York.


F.B.I. Doesn't Apply Different Standard to Women Agents
To the Editor:
The four veteran female agents at the Federal Bureau of Investigation who would not be identified for your Sept. 20 news article on bias in the agency do not speak for all women agents.
It is counterproductive to argue that male agents do not trust female agents in dangerous assignments and then argue to have the agency's physical and firearms standards lowered for women.


No Headline
"Should such a person be a police officer? No. In fact, do we wish there were no such person on the planet? Yes.
But the fact that Mark Fuhrman is a racist and lied about it on the witness stand does not mean that we haven't proven the defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt." -- MARCIA CLARK, deputy district attorney.  [ A18:1. ]


Algeria Goes to Vote
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 20 news article on Algeria is an example of the argument of critics who are trying to delegitimize the Algerian presidential election in advance.
To suggest that the election is widely expected to be manipulated by the Government does not hold in the face of evidence.


Fed Passes Again on Cutting Short-Term Rates
The Federal Reserve today left short-term interest rates unchanged, apparently believing that the economy was showing adequate growth again after a swoon in the spring.
This was the second straight meeting at which the Federal Open Market Committee, the central bank's main policy arm, passed up a chance to cut rates further since it reversed course in early July and lowered them for the first time since 1992.


Chili Pepper Fiesta
TASTE buds will get a workout in Brooklyn on Sunday.
The diverse flavors of chili peppers will be presented from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. (rain or shine) at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue, near Prospect Park.
There will be cooking demonstrations, garden tours, music and entertainment, plus foods to sample from Mexico, India, Thailand, Peru, Jamaica, Brazil and other countries.
Free.
Information: (718) 622-4433.


Woman's Body Is Found Near Queens Highway
The partly clothed body of a woman believed to be in her late teens or early 20's was found yesterday in a thicket off the Cross Island Parkway in Douglaston, Queens, the police said.
A motorist driving on the parkway between the exits for the Northern Boulevard and the Long Island Expressway noticed the body about 10 feet from the roadway, Sgt.
John Russell, commanding officer of 111th Detective Squad, said.


Quaker State Picks Temerlin McClain
The Quaker State Corporation said yesterday that it had selected Temerlin McClain in Irving, Tex., to handle advertising for its Quaker State motor oil and Slick 50 engine treatment, with combined billings estimated at $20 million.
Chiat/Day in Venice, Calif., previously handled the Quaker State brand, while Barkley &amp; Evergreen in Shawnee Mission, Kan., previously handled the company's newly acquired Slick 50 brand.
Stephen D. Blum, a spokesman for Quaker State, which is consolidating its corporate and motor oil division headquarters in Dallas, said Temerlin McClain was awarded the account without a review.


Sweet and Local, While It Lasts
TAKE advantage of the sweetness of local vegetables for this dish.
You can make Mexican vegetables with polenta year-round, but it will not taste as good for another 10 months.


Isringhausen Ponders Ups, Downs and Future
Jason Isringhausen was contemplating the success he has enjoyed during his rookie season in the major leagues.
His sparkling 9-2 record, with one more scheduled start on Saturday against the Braves, is not without a negative side.
In a market where expectations can quickly reach unrealistic proportions, Isringhausen figures to capture the imagination of a franchise and city looking for a new baseball hero.


CUNY Board to Vote on Plea for $94.6 Million Aid Increase
Trying to recoup some of the losses it suffered in this year's austerity budget, the City University board will vote today on a request for $94.6 million more in state aid.
The money would not be used to restore academic programs, but to help replace senior faculty members and to expand support programs for students.
The request calls for an increase in state aid to $717.3 million next academic year from $622.7 million this year.


Coleman Ends Long Career With Redskins
Linebacker MONTE COLEMAN, 37, a mainstay on three Super Bowl championship teams with the Washington Redskins, retired yesterday.
His 16 seasons with the team matched a feat accomplished by Sammy Baugh from 1937-52.
Drafted as a safety from Central Arkansas in the 11th round in 1979, Coleman played in a club-record 216 games, making 56 1/2 sacks, 17 interceptions and 1,009 tackles.
He was not offered a contract for this season. (AP)


The Drought Is Fickle
Relief from the searing sun has been grudging and decidedly uneven for New York farmers this season.
Most western counties escaped the worst drought, but the Hudson Valley, the Albany region and spots in the state's center suffered heavily.
Yesterday's sprinkles on New York City only punctuate how dry it has been.
Consumers, most of them oblivious to the random havoc that nature inflicts on food providers, will find smaller apples, less appealing corn and other vegetables -- but often, thanks to fickle nature, sweeter grapes.


Sunshine Biscuits' Account in Review
Sunshine Biscuits, the maker of Hydrox cookies and Cheez-It crackers, said yesterday that it had placed its account in review.
The account had been at Waring &amp; LaRosa Inc. in New York for the last six years until that agency resigned it last week.
Though the billings in the last year were estimated to be less than $1 million, the company said the billings would grow to $5 million.


Panel Backs New Fees on Student Loans
As one Republican stayed away, the Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee voted 8 to 7 on party lines today to charge colleges for every loan their students take out as part of a $10.8 billion cut in the Federal student loan program.
The missing Republican, Senator James M. Jeffords of Vermont, said later that he would fight the proposal on the Senate floor.
Asked why he had stayed away from the committee meeting, where he could have killed the plan, he said he was "steadfast against any cuts in education" but had promised the panel's chairman, Senator Nancy Landon Kassebaum of Kansas, that he would not block her efforts to get the proposal to the Senate as part of Republican efforts to balance the budget.


Hornets Come to Terms with Zidek
The Charlotte Hornets said yesterday that they have signed GEORGE ZIDEK, their first-round draft pick, to a contract.
Terms were not released.
Zidek, a 7-foot center from the 1995 National Collegiate Athletic Association champion U.C.L.A., averaged 10.6 points and 5.4 rebounds in 33 games last season.
He was also a first-team Academic All-American as a senior. (AP)


She Trusts in TV's Redeeming Power
When Suzanne Stone (Nicole Kidman) sees the paparazzi's flashbulbs, she feels a wave of exhilaration -- even at the funeral of her husband, and even though she happened to help put him in his grave.
Details, details: nasty as they are, they can't shake Suzanne's faith in her own tirelessly cultivated celebrity.
At last she has won the media attention she regards as life's sweetest reward.
Because Suzanne believes in the redeeming power of television, she has made herself its candy-colored creature, turning her job as a weather girl into the apotheosis of empty fame.
Her whole life revolves around that idea of glamour.
When she serves dinner, it's famous food ("This is the dish they serve in Johnny Carson's favorite restaurant in Hollywood") and she's star enough to avoid actual cooking.
When she gets married, it's in a veil copied from Maria Shriver's.
And even when she's in private, she remains a coyly decorative public person.
"What's the point in doing something good if nobody's watching?" Suzanne wants to know.


A Tree Survives; Foes Do Not; After 3 Centuries, A Town Shores Up A Symbol of Its Heart
It is a Methuselah among trees, a gnarled and furrowed cottonwood that has lived four times as long as its kind was meant to live.
George Washington rode past it on the way to his Newburgh headquarters and Franklin Delano Roosevelt, whose house was across the Hudson River, liked to stop his Ford Phaeton and gaze at it when he visited his Delano relatives.


Even Perot's Detractors Praise Him for a Masterful Political Move
Ross Perot's announcement that he will establish a third party was described today, even by his detractors, as a masterly maneuver that allows Mr.
Perot to insert himself as a power broker into the 1996 Presidential campaign and shake up the calculations over who will make it to the White House.
For one thing, politicians and analysts agreed, Mr.
Perot can now seize some of the limelight from the political comer of the moment, Gen.
Colin L. Powell.


Wine Talk; Trampling Out the Vintage
There isn't much to do in the evening in the Douro Valley, so after dinner here at the Quinta do Noval, guests wander into the vat house to watch vineyard workers stomp the grapes.
The guests, friends of the owners and sales representatives from around the world, stare at the workers who are treading slowly, knee-deep in grapes and juice.
The workers, most of them from villages even more remote than this mountain fastness in north-central Portugal, stare back at the guests, creatures from another world.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL REPORT
Army
The Cadets, who play Rice at West Point on Saturday, may have their best team since 1988, when they went to the Sun Bowl and lost to Alabama, 29-28.


Williams Misplays Flight Plan
Bernie Williams sauntered into the airport in San Juan, P.R., today after finally seeing his 13-day-old daughter, stared up at a computer screen listing flight times and was stunned.
The flight he was scheduled to take to Chicago was actually leaving at 10:05, not 10:30 as he thought.
It was already 10:05.
Williams knew he was in deep trouble.
"I told myself that someone was going to be mad about this," said Williams, who laughed about his hectic day.


Morgan Stanley Reports 72.7% Quarterly Profit Rise
Morgan Stanley Group Inc., one of Wall Street's biggest securities firms, reported a hefty increase yesterday in its profit for the three months that ended Aug. 31, buoyed by strong revenue from investment banking activities and better returns on merchant-banking investments.
Net income in the quarter jumped 72.7 percent, to $209 million, or $2.45 a share, compared with $121 million, or $1.31 a share, in the period that ended July 31, 1994.


Seeing a Garden as a Chalkboard
THE technical firepower of Greystone's teaching kitchens is impressive, but the soul of the school is found in a half-acre organic garden, nearby on the banks of the Napa River.
From this small plot, students are expected to derive crucial lessons not only on topics like sustainable agriculture, bio-diversity and seasonality, but also culinary adaptability.
Designed by Jeff Dawson, the garden director of Fetzer Vineyards, the Greystone garden contains 148 varieties of fruits and vegetables, among them many heirloom varieties, which are the regionally adapted strains that were bred before the age of hybrids.


Cure-All? Not Yet
Current claims about melatonin make it sound as if this once-obscure hormone might be a cure-all for everything form low sex drive to the ravages of age.
But books on melatonin go far beyond established evidence.


Informant Said to Agree To Plea Deal
Mark E. Whitacre, the former executive with the Archer-Daniels-Midland Company who blew the whistle on possible price-fixing at the company, has agreed to plead guilty to at least two felonies involving other criminal activity, people who have been briefed on the agreement said yesterday.
Under the plea deal, which was said to have been struck in early August, Mr.
Whitacre is required to cooperate with the growing number of investigations involving the giant agricultural company, these people said.
They include a fraud investigation involving corporate money some executives received in overseas bank accounts as well as several inquiries into possible price-fixing involving several agricultural products.


METRO DIGEST
POLITICAL FIGHT LOOMS OVER CHANCELLOR
The president of New York City's Board of Education, Carol A. Gresser, said she would oppose Mayor Giuliani's latest choice to be schools chancellor, Leon M. Goldstein, the president of Kingsborough Community College in Brooklyn.
Her announcement set the stage for an intense political fight.
Mrs.
Gresser cited the questions that have been raised about Mr.
Goldstein's political ties to Democrats in Brooklyn and his conflicting answers about his age, marriages and health, among other concerns.  [ Page A1. ]


Broken Hand Is Barrier For Matteau's Return
Two seasons ago, he was one of the main heroes of the Rangers' run to the Stanley Cup.
Last season, he was one of any number of underachievers in a subpar campaign.
So Stephane Matteau had something to prove coming into this year's training camp.
He will now have to wait four weeks to make his point.


Child Is Fatally Shot Playing With a Gun
A boy was killed yesterday after he apparently shot himself playing with a gun inside his family's apartment in the Bronx, the police said.
The boy, Jose Pena Jr., who would have turned 3 today, died from a shot to the upper chest shortly after 5 P.M., said Doram Tamari, a police spokesman.


Food Notes
Apples, Apples Everywhere
The greenmarkets are overflowing with apples and are likely to be so through late fall.
Some that are at the peak of their seasons -- including Macoun, MacIntosh, Jonagold, local Delicious, Tydeman, Empire, Gala and Gravenstein -- range from 25 cents to $1 a pound.
Cooking With Pooh
Cinnamon toast, banana-honey sandwiches and a very simple but good chocolate cake made without eggs are a few of the recipes that a child could handle from "Winnie-the-Pooh's Teatime Cookbook" (Dutton Children's Books, 1993; $8.99).
It is just one of the items inspired by the books and poems of A. A. Milne, illustrated by Ernest H. Shepard, that will be flooding stores in anticipation of the 70th anniversary of the first Pooh book, next year.
A Walk-In Catalogue . . .
The new Williams-Sonoma store at 580 Broadway (Prince Street) is a giant emporium of bakeware, cookware, dinnerware, cutlery, cooking utensils, machines, cookbooks and food products.
There is even a bar with bits of bread and little cups for tastings of a very limited selection of vinegars and oils.
It is like walking into the Williams-Sonoma catalogue.
With 5,600 square feet of selling space, it is the chain's largest store.  . . .
And a Paper Catalogue
For the kitchen that would not be complete without caramel rulers, molds for oeufs en gelee or a bouillon strainer, these and other more mundane utensils are included in the new 36-page catalogue available from Lamalle Kitchenware, 36 West 25th Street.
Copies from (800) 660-0750.
A Brooklyn Wine Tasting
A wine tasting will be held from 2 to 6 P.M. on Sunday at the Picnic House in Prospect Park.
The event, to benefit a forest area in the park, will also include food from Cucina and Cousin John's restaurants in Brooklyn and a silent auction.
Tickets, $35 each in advance ($40 at the door), can be purchased from the sponsors, the Prospect Park Alliance, 95 Prospect Park West, and Paley's Wines and Spirits, 88 Seventh Avenue, in Park Slope.
Lunch by Four Chefs
On Oct. 7, Millbrook Vineyards in the Dutchess County community of Millbrook, N.Y., will serve a lunch prepared by four chefs from the Hudson Valley region.
Each course will be complemented by a different wine, and explanations of the pairings will be presented by Bryan Miller, the food writer.
Reservations, at $55 each, are necessary: (914) 677-8383.
Cooking Classes in Japanese
This fall, Peter Kump's School of Culinary Arts is offering two daytime courses taught in Japanese.
"Techniques of Western Cooking" will be in three sessions, on Oct. 5, 12 and 19, for $300.
"Cooking for American Holidays" is being given in two sessions, on Nov. 2 and 9, and costs $250.
Registration from (212) 410-5152.
Long Island Foods
On Sunday from 2 to 5 P.M. a marketplace and tasting of Long Island products has been organized by the nonprofit Long Island Food Experience at the Crescent Beach Club and Pine Island Grill, 333 Bayville Avenue, in Bayville.
Tickets, $35, can be reserved at (516) 674-3441.
The group was founded by chefs to benefit the island's agriculture and aquaculture.
Off the Menu Coming to Union Square
Steve Hanson has taken over the handsomely ornate white marble space at 31 Union Square West (16th Street) that has been Metropolis restaurant for the last 10 years.
Before that, it was a bank.
Mr.
Hanson, who is also an owner of Coconut Grill on the Upper East Side, Isabella's on the Upper West Side and Park Avalon on Park Avenue South, plans a seafood restaurant with oyster and sushi bars.
The restaurant, as yet unnamed, is due to open this winter.
New Jersey a la Zagat
Zagat has come out with a new guide, to restaurants in New Jersey.
The guide, $9.95 and based on a survey of diners, offers evaluations of about 750 restaurants in the state.
Top honors for food went to Chez Madeleine in Bergenfield and the Saddle River Inn in Saddle River.
Feasting on Oysters
Oysters will be on the menu on Oct. 18 at the James Beard House, 167 West 12th Street, in Greenwich Village.
An oyster feast prepared by Guida Ponte, a chef at Legal Seafoods in Boston, will begin at 7 P.M.; $75 for members and $95 for nonmembers.
Reservations, (212) 675-4984.
Plans for Le Cirque
Although Sirio Maccioni, the owner of Le Cirque, has been negotiating for months to move the restaurant to the New York Palace Hotel, at 50th Street and Madison Avenue, he is not planning to abandon the space that Le Cirque now occupies at 58 East 65th Street.
"I have a lease until 2025 and I have three sons, so I will do something in that space," he said.
"It may be a good time to make it a little different." Chefs on the Move
Raphael Edery, the owner of Restaurant Raphael on West 54th Street, has hired David McInerney to be the chef.
Mr.
McInerney was most recently the chef at One if by Land, Two if by Sea, on Barrow Street in Greenwich Village . . .
John Loughran, who has cooked at the River Cafe, among other restaurants, has become the chef of Butler's, 1407 Broadway (41st Street) . . .
Petrossian's new chef is P. G. Gustafsson, formerly of Snaps, which has closed.


Taiwan Issue Held U.N.'s Attention
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 21 news article on Taiwan's lack of representation at the United Nations fails to report on a number of key observations from the opening of the 50th anniversary session of the General Assembly concerning the debate on the creation of an ad hoc committee to study Taiwan's situation.
First, 157 agenda items were debated and approved for consideration in 40 minutes.
The Taiwan agenda item, the only item receiving a substantial, three-hour debate, was excluded for "lack of consensus."


Allianz Life Fine Sought
The California Insurance Department announced on Monday that it would seek a $5 million fine against the Allianz Life Insurance Company over sales practices that the department said had led consumers to buy life insurance while believing that they were investing in retirement savings plans.


Jury Is Asked to Ignore Sideshow And Look at Simpson Evidence
Deputy District Attorney Marcia Clark told jurors in the O. J. Simpson trial today that if they stuck to the evidence and looked beyond both the "sideshows" presented by defense lawyers and the racism of one of her own witnesses, they had to conclude that Mr.
Simpson was a murderer.
Exhaustively and, at times, exhaustedly, Ms.
Clark sought to show that Mr.
Simpson had 78 unaccounted-for minutes on June 12, 1994, and that he used them to drive to Nicole Brown Simpson's condominium at 875 South Bundy, where he killed her and then stabbed to death a star-crossed good Samaritan named Ronald L. Goldman.


You Don't Need a Rabbi To Certify Kosherness
To the Editor:
Rabbi Moshe Bernstein (letter, Sept. 20) seems to misunderstand the word "kosher." He states that for a restaurant to call itself kosher without a certificate of kashrut is not good business and may not be kosher (which I take to mean ethical in this context).
On the first point, there are many people who enjoy kosher food who might feel at home there.
A rabbi can give a restaurant a certificate, but whether or not the food served is kosher depends on objective criteria.


Accounts
Genesco Inc., Nashville, to GSD&amp;M, Austin, Tex., a unit of Gold Greenlees Trott P.L.C., as the first agency to handle advertising for the Larry Mahan boot line.
GSD&amp;M was also awarded the account of the company's Laredo Western and Code West boots, previously handled by  Rail Europe Inc., White Plains, to Penchina/Biederman, Kelly &amp; Shaffer, New York, a joint venture of Penchina &amp; Co. and Biederman, Kelly &amp; Shaffer, for its United States account, handling Eurostar, the high-speed train that travels through the English Channel tunnel.
The billings were estimated at $1 million.
Color Tile Inc., Fort Worth, a unit of Investcorp International, to SFM Media Corp., New York, to handle the media planning and placement part of its account, which had been at Grey Advertising, New York.
Grey had also handled the creative part, which was awarded recently to Harris Drury Cohen, Fort Lauderdale, Fla.


International Briefs; Merck of Germany Prices Stock Offering
The German drug and chemical maker E. Merck said yesterday that it would sell its first shares to the public for 46 to 56 marks, or $32 to $39, a price range that will bring in less than the company had hoped.
The company, which has no connection to Merck &amp; Company of the United States, is planning Germany's largest initial offering ever next month.


Dorothy Dickson, Musical Star Of British Stage, Is Dead at 102
Dorothy Dickson, an American-born musical comedy performer who captivated British audiences in the 1920's and 30's and became a member of the country's theatrical and social elite, died on Monday at her home in London.
She was 102.
Until her friend Michael Thornton, the British biographer, tracked down her birth certificate, it had been assumed that Miss Dickson was born on July 20, 1900, the date given in a standard reference work.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
4.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.68
5.75
4.29
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.27
5.14
4.71
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.36
5.27
5.16
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.25
6.24
7.59
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.57
6.58
7.84
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.55
7.55
8.68
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.11
6.12
6.55
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  FRAMEWORK FOR BOSNIA PEACE The three enemies who have fought over Bosnia for nearly four years took a step towards peace, laying the foundation for what the United States hopes will become a unified Government for Bosnia.
A1
U.S. and Russia at odds over the policing of the Bosnia accord. A10


One of the Bachs, Weber And Grieg, in the Round
At a time when many classical musicians are packaged as shamelessly as any pop star, the estimable concerts of the Jupiter Symphony, founded in 1979 by the conductor Jens Nygaard, are a great relief.
Monday afternoon's concert at the Good Shepherd Presbyterian Church, 152 West 66th Street, was no exception.
As a conductor, Mr.
Nygaard deftly balances boldness and insight.
His performance of C. P. E. Bach's Symphony in C major owed nothing to the authentic-instrument movement: this was full-bodied playing, yet the rhetoric of the music was lucidly revealed.


At the F.C.C., Friction Over Westinghouse
A member of the Federal Communications Commission accused the agency's chairman and a senior White House official today of putting pressure on Westinghouse Broadcasting to offer more educational television as a condition for approving Westinghouse's plan to acquire CBS Inc.
The accusations were made in a letter by Commissioner James H. Quello to Senator Larry Pressler, the South Dakota Republican who is chairman of the Senate Commerce Committee, and mark the latest sign of friction between Mr.
Quello and the F.C.C.'s chairman, Reed E. Hundt.


After a birdie, double bogey or hole in one, golfers are encountering subterranean messages.
FOR sheer ingenuity in the advertising business, few people can beat Jim Keenan and John Hoyt.
Corporations and entrepreneurs are increasingly planting advertising in surprising places.
An ad can be spread across a blimp, tucked away in the middle of a movie scene or disguised as fashion in T-shirts and baseball caps.
But only a few promoters, like Mr.
Keenan and Mr.
Hoyt, have passed beyond that into chutzpah.


Dodgers Just Can't Touch the Rockies
Rockies 7, Dodgers 3
Larry Walker hit two home runs and Bret Saberhagen won for the first time in nearly eight weeks last night as the Colorado Rockies moved back into first place in the National League West by beating the Los Angeles Dodgers, 7-3, at Dodgers Stadium.


Who Uses Internet? 5.8 Million Are Said to Be Linked in U.S.
Measuring the Internet population is a daunting challenge given the amorphous nature of cyberspace, with its lack of borders and its culture of anonymity.
The latest attempt comes from O'Reilly &amp; Associates, a publisher of computer books and Internet software, in a report to be published today.
And the results look conservative: 5.8 million American adults are connected directly to the Internet.
Another 3.9 million American adults use only commercial on-line services, like America Online, Compuserve and Prodigy.


BOARD PRESIDENT OPPOSES GIULIANI ON A CHANCELLOR
The president of New York City's Board of Education, Carol A. Gresser, said yesterday that she would oppose Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's latest choice to be schools chancellor, Leon M. Goldstein, the president of Kingsborough Community College in Brooklyn, setting the stage for an intense political fight.
"I just can't do it," Mrs. Gresser said in an interview yesterday.


A Rabies Warning Is Issued
Health officials are warning residents of Cape May County to stay away from stray cats and dogs and wild animals, because they may be infected with rabies.
Seventy-seven cases have been confirmed in the county this year, far more than in any other county in the state, while elsewhere, the incidence of the disease has been dropping, a state health official said.
But officials said there was no reason to panic.
The last reported rabies case in a person in New Jersey occurred in 1971, said Dana Sullivan, a spokesman for the New Jersey Department of Health.
TERRY PRISTIN


Afro-Cuban Improvisations
Afro-Cuban music and all its offshoots are so generous that even when a show focuses on the improvisatory talents of the musicians, the audience is still on the performers' minds.
At S.O.B.'s on Monday night, four timbale players came out for what passes as an art show in the world of salsa, and it was still a party.
The four drummers, backed by three singers, a four-piece horn section and standard rhythm section, placed their improvisations within the form of a song and within the framework of dance rhythms.
The timbalero and band leader Jimmy Delgado put the evening together, and his band provided backup.
He opened the show, and halfway through his first tune the trombonist Jimmy Bosch began a solo.
The three trumpeters joined him, improvising a rocking polyphony.


Steinberg Death Won't Affect Personnel
The death of General Manager Dick Steinberg on Monday will not affect the New York Jets' organizational structure, the team president, Steve Gutman, said yesterday.
After stomach cancer was diagnosed in Steinberg last December, he retained the title of vice president and general manager, but his duties involving personnel matters were divided among Dick Haley, the director of player personnel; James Harris, the assistant general manager; and Pat Kerwin, the director of player administration.
Ultimately, all decisions are run past Coach Rich Kotite for review, Gutman said.


Prosecutor Eager to Present Capital Case in Girl's Death
Even before the body of a 7-year-old girl was removed from a shallow grave outside Kingston on Monday, the Ulster County District Attorney, E. Michael Kavanaugh, confidently declared that he had the state's first capital case on his hands.
Mr.
Kavanaugh, an outspoken supporter of the death penalty, moved quickly to build what he believes is an airtight case.
Forensic experts from the F.B.I. were called in.
And the prosecutor said the girl had been killed during a kidnapping, a scenario that would meet New York State's narrow definitions of first-degree murder under its new death penalty law.


U.S. HOLDS TRADER IN BANK'S BIG LOSS
Japanese and American authorities were trying today to unravel how a Japanese-born bond trader working for Daiwa Bank in New York lost $1.1 billion over the last 11 years, without raising the suspicions of regulators in either country or his employer, one of Japan's largest commercial banks.
The trader, Toshihide Iguchi, an executive vice president in the bank's New York operations, was arrested Saturday night at his home in Kinnelon, N.J., and is being held without bail, awaiting a formal indictment.


Senators Refuse to Save National Service Program
The Senate today defeated an attempt to save one of the political crown jewels of President Clinton's Administration: the national service program Americorps.
By a vote of 52 to 47, the chamber defeated a Democratic-drafted amendment that would have restored $425 million in financing for the organization that oversees the two-year-old program, the Corporation for National and Community Service.


Humanities Endowment Rises Above Politics
To the Editor:
In "Art by Committee" (Op-Ed, Sept. 21) Lynne A. Munson continues the special pleading, argument by anecdote and guilt by association that have characterized most criticism of the National Endowment for the Arts and the National Endowment for the Humanities.
She ought to be well aware that the two endowments use quite different grant review processes.


Block to Rockefeller Center Deal Is Seen
A sufficient number of shareholders object to a deal between Rockefeller Center Properties Inc., the real estate investment trust that is preparing to take ownership of Rockefeller Center, and an investor group led by Sam Zell, the Chicago financier, to vote it down, according to some of the trust's large shareholders.
Several big shareholders -- including the Leucadia National Corporation, the investment firm Gotham Partners L.P., and Goodman &amp; Company Ltd., a Canadian asset management concern -- have suggested over the last two weeks that the real estate investment trust, or REIT, pursue a shareholder rights offering instead.


The Pride of Naples
To the Editor:
To many uninformed spectators, like Jason Epstein in "A Removable Feast" (Op-Ed, Sept. 23), the Feast of San Gennaro may appear to be a disposable relic of Mafia-controlled tourism in Little Italy.
But the feast is not merely a revenue source for sausage vendors.
San Gennaro is the patron saint of Naples.
The feast is thus an annual reminder that many Italian-Americans trace their roots to southern Italy, where the occasion has been celebrated since the Middle Ages.


Low-Fat Food: Feeding Frenzy For Marketers
The nation's waistlines may be wider than ever, but food companies, in anxious pursuit of the next Snackwell's, are counting on guilt-ridden Americans by the millions to gobble up a fresh bounty of low-fat foods.
This year, the industry has already introduced more than 1,300 low- and no-fat products, nearly as many as in all of 1994, when a record was set for the category.
"Fat-free looks like a keeper, not a fad," said Martin Friedman, editor of New Product News, a monthly trade magazine.


Beijing Thwarts U.S. Film Festival
Acceding to a "request" by the Chinese Government, the director Zhang Yimou has dropped plans to attend the New York Film Festival, which has scheduled his film "Shanghai Triad" for its opening night on Friday.
Government officials asked Mr.
Zhang not to attend after festival officials refused to cancel their showing of "The Gate of Heavenly Peace," a documentary film dealing with the crackdown in Tiananmen Square in Beijing in June 1989.
Mr.
Zhang had no part in making the documentary.
The Chinese Government has asked rather than ordered Mr.
Zhang not to attend, but in practical terms there is little difference since Mr.
Zhang depends on the good will of the Government to make his films.
"I was told the film was insulting to China and that it was made by Americans," said Richard Pena, the chairman of the selection committee for the festival, speaking of "The Gate of Heavenly Peace."


International Briefs; Electrolux in Poland
The Swedish maker of household appliances Electrolux A.B. said yesterday that it would begin producing washing machines in Poland.
The decision to start production of its Zanussi brand is part of a joint venture with the Polish company FNE Swiatowit.
No financial details of the arrangement were disclosed.
Sales of Electrolux appliances in Poland have risen 60 percent this year, the company said.
About 50,000 washing machines a year will be produced at the Polish factory, with production starting in the second quarter of next year. (Bloomberg Business News)


A Papal Plug From the Transit Authority
Mike Holly, backpack slung over his shoulder, paused by the new poster in the Times Square subway station, gave it a quick look and kept going.
And what did it say?
"It says you should come see the Pope in Central Park," he said.
Well, sort of.


International Briefs; SCOR's Profit Jumps As Reinsurance Revives
SCOR S.A., France's second-largest reinsurer, said yesterday that its profit in the first half of the year more than doubled as the recovery in the reinsurance industry gathered steam.
Profit jumped to 206 million francs, or $41 million, from 99 million francs a year ago, largely on the strength of increased business in Europe and Asia.


Personal Health; Debate aside, melatonin can reset the body's clock.
WHILE researchers debate how far-reaching melatonin's benefits to the human body may be, no one argues about one function of the hormone: its ability to reset the body clock.
Research interest in melatonin began with the discoveries that light suppresses its secretion and that, like light, the hormone has a strong influence on a person's circadian rhythm, as scientists call the body clock, which influences when people are likely to fall asleep or wake up, among dozens of other internal rhythms.
Perhaps, scientists reasoned, just as light can shift the clock, melatonin might be used to help reset a clock out of sync with a person's surroundings.


An Unusual Path to Big-Time Trading
Standing mute yesterday in Federal District Court in Manhattan, his wrists shackled, his feet shuffling, Toshihide Iguchi hardly looked like the kind of bold trader who some Wall Street rivals said could buy and sell hundreds of millions of dollars of Treasury bonds in a matter of seconds.
Mr.
Iguchi was arraigned on charges of forgery and falsifying bank records.
His former employer, Daiwa Bank Ltd., says he has acknowledged that he began unauthorized trading of United States Treasury bonds 11 years ago, creating losses that the bank puts at $1.1 billion.


Nuns to Leave Cloister for Papal Visit
The white-robed nuns of the Monastery of St.
Dominic arise in the darkness of their simple cells to begin their daily ritual of devotion to God and prayer for His world.
Voices echoing in choral prayer or eyes closed in private meditations, they reflect on the lives that lie just beyond their thick, stone walls: people desperately ill, unemployed or lonely.
In the tradition of mystics and monks, the 21 cloistered Dominican nuns have set themselves apart from the world, which in their case is a down-at-the-heels neighborhood where young men spend hours standing on corners and where stolen cars speed crazily through the night.
But on Oct. 4, these nuns and some 100 other cloistered religious will be allowed to venture into the city and pray with Pope John Paul II at Sacred Heart Cathedral.


Desegregation Hearing Tonight
The State Department of Education will hold the first of a series of public hearings tonight at Leonia High School on proposals to desegregate Dwight Morrow High School in Englewood, which is 97 percent black and Hispanic.
A study released in July offered several possible remedies, including the creation of a regionalized school district that would draw white students from several communities and the establishment of a magnet school with specialized programs.


Tax Credit Helps Poor Families Survive
To the Editor:
Re "A Credit That's Fair"(Op-Ed, Sept. 21): Despite E. Clay Shaw Jr.'s assertion that the $23 billion cut in the earned income tax credit will "promote equity," the opposite is true.
When incomes for millions of workers have fallen or stagnated, this cut will escalate America's growing income inequality.
The earned income credit, created in 1975, is a refundable tax credit for low-income workers so they don't have to raise their children in poverty.
For millions of struggling families it goes a long way.
Because it is available only to people who work, it is strong inducement to get and keep a job.
In the middle of a national debate over moving people from welfare to work, it is hard to understand why Republicans would make such large cuts in this work incentive.


Some Groups Face Inquiry In the House
House Republicans who want to pass a law limiting political activity by recipients of Federal grants have begun asking detailed financial questions and scheduling hearings to investigate nonprofit groups, most of which oppose their plans.
Representative David M. McIntosh, the Indiana Republican who heads a subcommittee of the House Committee on Government Reform and Oversight, said in an interview today that the first hearing, scheduled for Thursday, would review the finances of a half-dozen nonprofit groups, most of which are opposed to legislation that would sharply limit their political activities.


Annals of the Bureaucracy
New York City appears poised for a monumental triumph in the history of government bureaucracy.
The cook-chill crisis is about to be resolved.
In the real world "cook-chill" is a method of making pre-cooked meals, the kind the airlines serve.
In its bureaucratic incarnation, the term refers to a plan to prepare food for the inmates at prisons on Rikers Island.
To City Hall insiders, this is the Big One, a 20-year-old Mount Everest of legal tangles -- the court agreement that launched a thousand intergovernmental meetings.


Former Bank Officer Is Indicted
A former vice president of Riverside Savings Bank in Riverside was indicted yesterday for his role in a $1.8 million bank loan scheme, the United States Attorney's office said.
The indictment accuses the bank officer, Michael Hogan, of arranging the loan for Shannon Hills Farms, a real estate development company in Bernards Township in Somerset County, on condition that $50,000 be diverted to bank customers who were having trouble meeting their loan obligations.


What Peace Role for Russia? Rumblings of Battles to Come
Even before a peace agreement can begin to rebuild Bosnia, there are warning signals from both Moscow and Washington that diplomatic and political battles are looming over how the accord will be policed, and by whom.
The Clinton Administration would like to find a role for Russia, but the United States insists that, whatever the composition of the force that would patrol the peace, the command of the military operation should rest with NATO.


A Step Closer to Bosnian Peace
Diplomacy is often a matter of timing and momentum, and the Clinton Administration is now using both to maximum advantage as it presses to end the murderous Bosnian war.
Yesterday Bosnian, Croatian and Yugoslav foreign ministers reached further agreement on the principles that will govern the constitution of a new Bosnia divided between Croats and Muslims on one side and Serbs on the other.


Montreal Journal; For Youths, Fire That Drove Quebec Burns Low
As a second-year law student at McGill University, Helene Jutras lives quietly with her boyfriend, Chris, and her two cats, Milady and Rimbaud, and is usually found in her favorite chair boning up on torts, writs and contracts.
But last December, instead of cramming for her year-end exams, she wrote a book.
It is a slim volume, provocatively titled "Quebec Is Killing Me," in which she lets off steam about the shortcomings of the province she was born in 20 years ago.


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
A Couple Who Separate and Grow (In Therapy and With a Mime)  "Reinventing Daddy" Theater Off Park
Gary Bonasorte's "Reinventing Daddy" recalls those sensitive, pointedly edifying cartoons for children one sometimes stumbles across on Sunday morning television.
This ingenuous sliver of a fable, which has faint echoes of "Mary Poppins" and "The Little Prince," concerns the abusive Daddy (Jeff Robins) and his resentful wife, Honey (Meg Kelly), who are separated by a magical windstorm.


An Anxious West Bank City Awaits the Fine Print
At the center of Ramallah, six streets converge into a grand traffic jam.
Ever since the Palestinian police quit several years ago in protest against the Israeli occupation, the stretch taxis and cars just stand and blare their Italian horns.
The question on Al Amanarah Square, now that an agreement has been reached on Israeli withdrawal, was much the same as in the rest of this West Bank city of about 70,000 abutting on Jerusalem -- will things start moving once Palestinians take over control?


Moynihan Stands Alone in Welfare Debate
For the last several weeks, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, long one of the nation's leading spokesmen on welfare policy, has weathered criticism that he is out of step with the times as he warned of the dire consequences of dismantling the Federal welfare system.
But in an interview this week, Mr.
Moynihan, a New York Democrat, said he had a bit of "hard news" to deliver that would begin to back up his claim.


Iran's Universal Truths Under Dust and Poverty
The ending of "The Jar," a small Iranian film, is pretty much the same as that of the Michelle Pfeiffer hit "Dangerous Minds," in which a beleaguered schoolteacher threatens to call it quits.
Don't be fooled by that.
Nothing else about the two movies is similar.
In fact, "The Jar," which opens today at Film Forum 1, might be a case study of a typical film from Iran, whose cinema is increasingly respected.
"The Jar" takes an extremely limited story -- a large urn holding a rural school's drinking water cracks and must be replaced -- and uses it to create a vision of an entire segment of the culture.
The style is slow and precise, focusing on details that reveal the life and attitudes of the village.
Visually, it unfolds like a picture book, with broad, prettily composed views of the desert landscape and cramped houses.
Directed by Ebrahim Foruzesh, "The Jar" is an accomplished film best appreciated by viewers with a large appetite for foreign cultures and little taste for action.


Henderson Is Signed by Hawks
The former Indiana University forward ALAN HENDERSON, selected 16th over all in the National Basketball Association draft, signed a three-year contract with the Atlanta Hawks yesterday.
The Hawks also signed the former Purdue guard CUONZO MARTIN, the 57th overall pick, to a one-year deal.
Terms of the contracts were not disclosed.


Saving the Coast Guard Center
Fourteen members of New Jersey's Congressional delegation urged President Clinton yesterday to keep the Coast Guard Training Center in Cape May open.


Turbulence Examined as Factor in USAir Crash
Federal investigators trying to learn why a USAir jet crashed near Pittsburgh last year said after a flight test today that turbulence from a larger jet flying ahead of a plane like the one that crashed was more concentrated and stronger than expected.
USAir Flight 427, a Boeing 737-300, was following a larger Boeing 727 on approach to Pittsburgh International Airport on Sept. 8 when it unaccountably fishtailed to the left and corkscrewed about a mile to the ground, killing all 132 people on board.
The crash is one of only four unexplained crashes on the Safety Board's books in the last 28 years.


For Elliott, Silence And Work Are Golden
There are times when players are in a zone, but they are quiet about it.
They do their jobs.
Praise their teammates.
Keep their mouths shut.
They play at a high level, even if their team is losing.
They are players like the Giants' Jumbo Elliott.
He is already part of football's no-man's land: the offensive line.
The position may be the most thankless and anonymous in football.
Yet Elliott has stood out at tackle this season.
He has already been to one Pro Bowl, and if his performance continues, he could make another one at season's end.


U.S. Backs War-Crimes Lawsuit Against Bosnian Serb Leader
As the United States announced a preliminary agreement today to settle the war in the Balkans, the Clinton Administration has separately endorsed a lawsuit that would put the leader of the Bosnian Serbs on trial for war crimes -- in New York.
In a brief filed with the Federal appeals court in New York last week, the Clinton Administration supported the right of two women to sue the leader, Radovan Karadzic, for suffering caused by what they claim is his participation in war crimes, torture and genocide.


FOOTBALL: A Show-Stopper Puts Her Best Foot Forward; Sarah Mergenthaler, 16, Attracts Crowds as First Female Kicker at Marlboro High
Football practice at Marlboro High School is a performance.
After last year's Cinderella season, in which the once-lowly Mustangs shocked the Shore Conference with a 10-1 record and a state championship, their preparation for Friday night's game at Wall Township draws a crowd.


The Biggest Trial in Postwar Italy Puts National Psyche in the Dock
Giulio Andreotti, the enigmatic political power-broker who served seven times as the Italian Prime Minister, went on trial in a heavily guarded prison courtroom here today, faced with charges that he had secretly acted as political godfather for the Sicilian Mafia.
Silence fell in the cavernous courtroom, a bunker built 10 years ago for Italy's spectacular Mafia trials, as the familiar bespectacled figure, with his hunched shoulders and ironic smile, took a seat as the sole defendant in a case that for the first time will examine the links between politics and organized crime in modern Italy.


Kasparov, Stung by a Loss, Comes Back Swinging and Wins
One day after being overwhelmed and embarrassed by a younger, much less experienced opponent, Gary Kasparov roared back yesterday to even the world championship match with powerful, imaginative attacking play.
It was as if the real world champion had abruptly replaced some impatient, insecure understudy who had been playing in his place.
Thus, with total revenge accomplished against Viswanathan Anand and the 20-game series tied at 5-5 at the halfway point, Kasparov could afford to crow a bit shortly after his victory: "I feel better. I'm back in business."


AT&amp;T Announces New Computer Line
AT&amp;T's ailing computer subsidiary is expected to announce a new line of high-performance business computers today that the unit hopes will set the stage for a turnaround before it is spun off as an independent company in 1997.
The new Worldmark line drastically reduces the cost of so-called massively parallel computers, which divide tasks among several different microprocessors running simultaneously.
Such computers can perform only specialized applications because a limited amount of software is available to run on them.
But they are increasingly being used by businesses to search large data bases to cull information about potential or existing customers.


Gang Tie Investigated In Prosecutor's Killing
The killing of Boston's leading prosecutor of street gangs has set off an intensive investigation, including the possibility that he might have been marked for death by gang members.
The police said today that they were investigating whether the victim, Paul R. McLaughlin, 42, an Assistant Massachusetts Attorney General, was gunned down as part of a gang-organized contract killing, though they also said they were not ruling out that Mr.
McLaughlin's death was the result of a random robbery.


COMPANY BRIEFS
SPRECKELS INDUSTRIES, Pleasanton, Calif., a sugar and industrial manufacturer, has hired the investment banking firm Schroder Wertheim &amp; Co., New York, to help identify possible options, including a sale or merger.
FEDERAL REALTY INVESTMENT TRUST, Bethesda, Md., said it had purchased the Bristol Shopping Plaza in Bristol, Conn., for about $19 million.
CASINO RESOURCE CORP., Elkhorn, Wis., said it had agreed to buy the Palace Casino in Biloxi, Miss., from Maritime Group Ltd. for $12 million.


Suicides Prompt a Review
A task force appointed after two teen-agers took their own lives at Bergen Pines County Hospital earlier this year has concluded that hospital employees, especially those working on weekend shifts, need better training to minimize the risk of patient suicides.
The panel also said that juvenile patients should be moved to where they can be more closely monitored and that treatment teams need to communicate better with one another.


Experimental Evidence Is Lacking for Melatonin as Cure-All
TO read current claims about melatonin, even people unconcerned about their health might be readily drawn into the swell of Americans who are already taking it nightly.
This once-obscure hormone is said by some proponents to reverse the ravages of age, intensify the sex drive and bolster the immune system to ward off cancer, Alzheimer's disease, autism and AIDS.
No longer known only to devotees of nutritional supplements, melatonin is fast becoming today's hottest health topic, thanks to the publicity being given to a stream of new books with titles like "The Melatonin Miracle" describing it as a potential panacea and fountain of youth and to an optimistic article last month in Newsweek, emphasizing hopes for melatonin and played down or dismissed skeptical questions.


International Briefs; Club Med Financing
The French tour package operator Club Mediterranee said yesterday that it planned to raise 900 million French francs, or $180 million, in new capital, partly to finance its expansion in Asia.
Club Med operates 110 vacation villages around the world and hopes to add about a dozen villages in the next five years.
The company said the increase in capital would also be used to finance the acquisition of the minority interest in its United States unit, Club Med Inc. (Bloomberg Business News)


For the Last Piece of Steel, an Evergreen Crown


Austen Tale of Lost Love Refound
"Persuasion" stands in Jane Austen's career as "The Winter's Tale" does in Shakespeare's: it is a lyrical, autumnal story of lost love, with the unexpected reward of a happy ending.
The heroine of "Persuasion," Anne Elliot, tossed away love at the age of 19, convinced by the sound maternal advice of her friend Lady Russell that a penniless naval officer was no match for the daughter of a baronet.
The story begins eight years later, when Anne is 27 and therefore on the verge of 19th-century spinsterhood.
Perfectly portrayed by Amanda Root in Roger Michell's lovely and subtle film, Anne is a plain, thin-lipped, intelligent woman who wears a perpetual look of worried resignation.
The boundless possibilities she foresaw at 19 seem to have vanished, though her love for Frederick Wentworth remains.
When the newly rich Wentworth and her well-born cousin William re-enter her small social circle, "Persuasion" throws Anne Elliot one, and maybe two, late chances at marriage.


International Briefs; BASF-Ciba Venture
The German chemical company BASF A.G. said yesterday that it was planning a cooperative venture with Ciba-Geigy A.G., the Swiss drug maker, to produce textile dyes.
BASF said the companies would coordinate production of dyes while retaining separate research and development and marketing operations for any resulting products.
Exact details have not been worked out.
The companies said the venture would enable them to make the best use of their factories in North America, Europe and Asia. (Dow Jones)


Officers in Schools Would Not Be Armed
Clearing up a point of ambiguity, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton says that if the Police Department takes over the school system's security force, as Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has advocated, officers deployed in school buildings will not be armed.
Speaking at a news conference on Monday in which he described several programs to reduce crime outside school buildings, Mr.
Bratton said Police Department oversight of the school security force would enhance efforts to fight crime in the schools.


International Briefs; Irish Government Sells Stake in Life Insurer
The Irish Government said yesterday that it had sold its 15 percent stake in the life insurer Irish Life P.L.C. for 215 Irish pence, or $3.44, a share.
The Irish Finance Department had previously said it would sell its 46 million shares, and it began doing so after the Dublin-based company reported on its performance for the first half of the year.


Market Place; Gateway 2000 is prospering even as its market shrinks.
FOR the investor looking for a pure play in direct marketing of personal computers, there is only one choice: Gateway 2000 Inc.
Shares in Gateway have doubled in price in recent months, but even at these levels some analysts say they remain attractive.
Like its larger rival, the Dell Computer Corporation, Gateway 2000 was formed in the mid-1980's to offer personal computers on a made-to-order basis, using "800" numbers and overnight delivery.


Payment in Copter Downing In Iraq Brings Bitter Dispute
To keep peace with important allies, Defense Secretary William J. Perry last year ordered the Pentagon to pay $100,000 to each of the families of 11 foreign citizens killed in the accidental downing of two Army helicopters by two American fighter jets over northern Iraq in April 1994.
The families of 14 American service members killed received much less from the Pentagon: burial costs, $6,000 in death benefits and monthly payments of at least $790 to surviving spouses and children, following standard policy for all military deaths.
All but one of the American victims also carried military life insurance that paid $200,000 to their families.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the uproar in Australia over a local novelist's fabrication of her upbringing misstated the pen name under which she wrote the book "The Hand That Signed the Paper." The name was Helen Demidenko, not Susan Demidenko.


Study Ties Chronic Fatigue Syndrome to Abnormality in the Control of Blood Pressure
A small study being published today in The Journal of the American Medical Association strongly links chronic fatigue syndrome to a common abnormality in the way the body regulates blood pressure.
Many patients with the syndrome respond to treatment entailing increased salt and fluid intake in combination with standard drugs to regulate blood pressure, the researchers who carried out the study at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore said yesterday.


Statement of School Board President on Leon Goldstein
Following is a statement issued yesterday by School Board President Carol A. Gresser about the candidacy of Leon M. Goldstein for schools chancellor.
I am unable to support Leon Goldstein as chancellor of the New York City Board of Education.
In saying this I mean no disrespect.
It is an honor for Mr.
Goldstein to have reached the final stage of interviews for this distinguished position.
Nevertheless, of the three educators who are our finalists, Mr.
Goldstein is the only one with absolutely no experience as a primary or secondary educator, the only one who does not possess the requisite state school district administrator's license and the only one who has never been responsible for even a small public school system.
Mr.
Goldstein, on the face of it, possesses the fewest qualifications of the three candidates to administer the most complex and challenging school system in the world, at perhaps the most critical juncture in its history.


Treasury Prices End Mixed As Fed Holds Line on Rates
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed yesterday, after the Federal Reserve's Open Market Committee left interest rates unchanged at its policy meeting.
Bonds were initially higher in early trading after the Conference Board reported its consumer confidence reading had fallen in September to 97.4, below the average trade forecast of 100.
In August it was 102.4.
Analysts said the report suggested signs of waning consumer optimism that could restrain growth.
People buy things when they feel confident; when they do not, manufacturing slows and inventories rise.


Excerpts of Arguments Of Simpson Prosecutors
Following are closing arguments, excerpted by topic, by two Deputy District Attorneys, Marcia Clark and Christopher A. Darden, given yesterday in Los Angeles in the trial of O. J. Simpson in the slayings of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman, as transcribed by The New York Times: MARCIA CLARK The Mark Fuhrman Issue
Let me come back to Mark Fuhrman for a minute, just so it's clear.


Sports of The Times; 'He Taught All of Us About Life'
NEARLY two weeks ago, the last time that Dick Steinberg would be at the Jets' complex, Rich Kotite happened to glance up at the general manager's office on the second floor during practice that afternoon.
"He was standing at the windows watching the special teams," Kotite, the Jets' coach, remembered.
"When he saw me, he gave me a thumbs up."


Academic Mystery: An Educator's Resume
On his resume, Leon M. Goldstein, the president of Kingsborough Community College and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's favorite to be chancellor of the New York City schools, says he did "graduate work toward a Ph.D." at New York University in 1965.
Yesterday, however, the university said it had no record that he was ever enrolled in a Ph.D. program at the school.


Wetteland Gives Yankees Some Breathing Room
John Wetteland planned to unleash fastballs at David Hulse in the tense eighth inning tonight.
Nothing but fastballs.
Why bother with another pitch when the Yankees were clinging to a 5-4 lead and the Brewers had runners on first and third?
Wetteland's first fastball sailed out of the strike zone and he almost second-guessed his strategy.
He thought about sneaking in a curveball, but quickly went back to his initial plan and buzzed two high fastballs past the hitter.
The awesome pitches and the weak swings told Wetteland he could strike Hulse out, and he did.


Clinton Favorite Threatened
The national service program started at President Clinton's initiative is left out of a Senate appropriations bill.
Page D22.


Corrections
An article in some editions yesterday about Ross Perot's plans to form a third political party misstated the year of his campaign for the Presidency as an independent.
It was 1992, not 1994.


Smith's New President Applauds Her Mentors
Anyone attending the inauguration this weekend of Ruth Simmons as Smith College's ninth president will be likely to note the presence of such luminaries as Toni Morrison, the Nobel Prize-winning author; Johnnetta Cole, the president of Spelman College; Cornel West, the scholar, and Henry Louis Gates, the writer and chairman of the Afro-American studies department at Harvard.
But they might miss the people who Ruth Simmons believes are the most important -- those responsible for her becoming the first black president of one of the country's most elite women's colleges.
They are her nine brothers and sisters: Elbert, Wilford, Atherine, Albert, Arnold, Nora, Clarence, Ozella and Azella.
Her eighth-grade teacher, Modria Caraway.
Her high school drama teacher, Vernell Lillie.


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
Domestic Disharmony As a Serbian Microcosm  'Dark Is the Night' La Mama E.T.C.
Midway through "Dark Is the Night," a play by Aleksandar Popovic, a Serbian writer, a college student enters his quarreling family's living room and turns on the television set.
The rest of the scene is played against the background of a Bugs Bunny cartoon.
The Looney Tunes theme makes a fitting anthem for the chaos that has engulfed the Balkans for the last four years.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Sept 22
Sept 15
Sept 23
1995
1995
1994
Gasoline production, daily
7.8
7.8
7.4
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.3
3.4
Gasoline stocks
196.0
194.7
210.0
Distillate stocks
131.3
133.5
142.1
Crude imports, daily
7.3
8.0
7.1
Product imports, daily
1.5
1.4
1.7
Crude stocks
307.0
307.5
328.0
Crude production, daily
6.5
6.5
6.6
Refinery utilization (%)
94.0
95.7
93.6
Source: American Petroleum Institute


To Pay Some Debts, U.N. Will Try Borrowing From World Bank
The United Nations, facing its most severe financial crisis in half a century, will try for the first time to borrow money from the World Bank to pay some of its debts, the organization's highest-ranking financial officer said today.
Joseph Connor, a former chief executive of Price Waterhouse who is now United Nations Under Secretary General for Administration and Management, said today that a World Bank loan was only one of many ideas being explored "to lift from our shoulders the burden of debt."


Hansen Memorial
A memorial tribute to Al Hansen, one of the first happenings artists and a founder of the Fluxus art movement, is to be held on Saturday at 2 P.M. at Judson Memorial Church, 55 Washington Square South, Greenwich Village.
Among those scheduled to participate are Phoebe Neville, Anne Tardos and Geoff Hendricks, who is to perform original works as well as recreate some of Mr.
Hansen's early happenings.
Mr.
Hansen's grandson, Beck, an alternative-rock artist, is also to perform.
Mr.
Hansen died in June at the age of 67.


ENEMIES IN BOSNIA DEVISE STRUCTURE FOR A GOVERNMENT
The three enemies that have fought over Bosnia for more than three years took another step toward peace today, agreeing on the structure of what the United States hopes will become a unified Government for Bosnia.
After days of intense negotiations, the Foreign Ministers of Bosnia, Croatia and Serbian-dominated Yugoslavia endorsed a two-page statement calling for a group Presidency, a Parliament and a Constitutional Court -- in which the Bosnian Government and its Bosnian Croat allies will share power with a newly created Serb republic.
But the document left many questions unanswered about how such a government would actually function.


Layoffs at Plasma Physics Lab
The Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory, which operates the most powerful experimental hydrogen fusion machine in the world, is laying off 246 workers in anticipation of expected drastic funding cuts by Congress.


Painful Reminder of Loss


Fixated on a More Jewish Anne Frank
AN OBSESSION WITH ANNE FRANK Meyer Levin and the Diary  By Lawrence Graver  254 pages.
University of California Press. $28.
Somerset Maugham once judged himself to have been in the first rank of the second-raters, which, given the small number of first-rate writers, is not such a bad place to occupy in literary history.
The same good-but-not-great judgment probably applies to Meyer Levin, the author of "Compulsion" and "The Settlers," who has faded from the collective awareness.
And for that reason it is too bad, in a way, that we now have Lawrence Graver's absorbing "An Obsession With Anne Frank," in which Levin emerges, even in the author's sympathetic understanding of him, as a paranoid, a crank, a man, as one of his friends said, "isolated" in his own "cage of self-concern."


Lucas and 76ers Give Maxwell a Shot
JOHN LUCAS, the Philadelphia 76ers' coach and general manager, added another talented but troubled player yesterday by signing the former Houston Rockets guard VERNON MAXWELL, suspended for 10 games last season after he hit a fan.
Maxwell's signing came five days after the 76ers added RICHARD DUMAS, a promising forward whose brief National Basketball Association career has been marred by two drug suspensions.
The 76ers are also expected to announce the signing of the former North Carolina star JERRY STACKHOUSE at a news conference today.
He was the third overall pick in this year's draft.
Lucas said the team is gambling on Maxwell and Dumas to help Philadelphia, 25-57 last season, get better in a hurry.


Dunkin' Donuts To Messner Vetere
The Dunkin' Donuts unit of Allied Domecq said yesterday that it had named Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer Euro RCSG in New York to handle its account, with billings estimated at $25 million.
The account was handled for the last 18 years by Ally &amp; Gargano in New York, which was eliminated from the review in July.


Foreign Affairs; Whose Balkan Menu?
On May 6, 1995, Croatia's President, Franjo Tudjman, was seated at the head table at a state dinner in London celebrating V-E day.
Considering the fact that many Croats supported the Nazis in World War II his presence was highly controversial, but what he did with his menu was even more controversial.
Mr.
Tudjman's dinner partner, Paddy Ashdown, a British politician, had asked Mr.
Tudjman to draw for him a map of how he thought Bosnia would look in 10 years' time.
So on the back of the menu Mr.
Tudjman drew a circle, approximating Bosnia today, and then drew an S-shaped line dividing that circle roughly in half.
The western half, he indicated, would all go to Croatia and the eastern half would all go to Serbia.
On the S-shaped dividing line he scribbled: "Future Border Serbia/ Croatia."


Save West Point Prep
Congressional plans for scaling back or eliminating the prep school that supplies many of the Army's minority officers are wrongheaded.
The U.S.
Military Academy Preparatory School at Fort Monmouth, N.J., is doing a yeoman job integrating the officer corps, making the Army more representative of America -- and a model of how an integrated enterprise ought to work.
Tampering could undo two decades of progress and destroy a vital source of opportunity for minority youths.
The prep schools were created in 1916, when Congress authorized the Army to nominate enlisted men as cadets for West Point.
The Air Force and Navy have the schools as well, but the Army's has clearly been the most successful.
In recent years the Army prep school became a finishing program for West Point applicants who barely missed getting in.
A favorable evaluation of its efforts appears in the forthcoming Twentieth Century Fund book "Overcoming Race: Army Lessons for American Society," by Charles Moskos and John S. Butler.


A Framework for Bosnia: Text of an Accord by Three Governments
After agreeing on Sept. 8 to a set of broad principles to govern a peaceful settlement of the war in Bosnia, the Governments of Bosnia, Croatia and Yugoslavia (representing the Bosnian Serbs) agreed today on additional principles.
A summary of the Sept. 8 principles is followed by the text of those accepted today.
Previously Agreed Principles
Bosnia and Herzegovina will continue its legal existence with its present borders, but the country will consist of two substates -- the existing Bosnian-Croatian federation and a new Republika Srpska, or Serbian republic, each with the right to develop special relationships with neighboring countries.
Fifty-one percent of the country will be allocated to the Bosnian-Croat federation and 49 percent to the Bosnian Serbs.
Principles Agreed Upon Yesterday
Each of the two entities will honor the international obligations of Bosnia- Herzegovina, so long as the obligation is not a financial obligation incurred by one entity without the consent of the other.
It is the goal that free democratic elections be held in both entities as soon as social conditions permit.
In order to maximize the democratic effectiveness of such elections, the following steps will be taken:
Both governments will immediately pledge their full support, starting immediately, for (a) freedom of movement, (b) the right of displaced persons to repossess their property or receive just compensation, (c) freedom of speech and of the press, and (d) protection of all other internationally recognized human rights in order to enhance and empower the democratic election process.
As soon as possible the O.S.C.E. (or other international organization) will station representatives in all principal towns throughout the Federation and the Republika Srpska in Bosnia and Herzegovina and publish monthly reports as to the degree which (a) the obligations listed in all of the Agreed Basic Principles have been fulfilled, and (b) social conditions are being restored to a level at which the election process may be effective.
Within 30 days after the O.S.C.E. delegations have concluded that free and democratic elections can be properly held in both entities, the governments of the two entities will conduct free and democratic elections and will fully cooperate with an international monitoring program.
Following the elections, the affairs and prerogatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina will be vested in the following institutions, in accordance with all of the Agreed Basic Principles.
*A parliament or assembly, two-thirds of which will be elected from the territory of the Federation, and one-third from the territory of the Republika Srpska.
All parliamentary actions will be by majority vote provided that the majority includes at least one-third of the votes from each entity.
*A Presidency, two-thirds of which will be elected from the territory of the Federation, and one-third from the territory of the Republika Srpska.
All Presidency decisions will be taken by the majority vote, provided, however, that if one-third or more of the members disagree with a decision taken by the other members and declare that decision to be destructive of a vital interest of the entity or entities from which the dissenting members were elected, the matter will be referred immediately to the appropriate entity's/entities' parliament.
If any such parliament confirms the dissenting position by a two-thirds vote, then the challenged decision will not take effect.
*A cabinet of such ministers as may be appropriate.
*A Constitutional Court with jurisdiction to decide all questions arising under the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina as it will be revised in accordance with all of the Agreed Principles.
The parties will negotiate in the immediate future as the further aspects of the management and operation of these institutions.
The foregoing institutions will have responsibility for the foreign policy of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The parties will negotiate further to determine the extent to which these institutions will also have responsibility for other matters consistent with all of the Agreed Basic Principles.


Company Accused of Fraud In School's Asbestos Cleanup
An environmental consulting company based in Manhattan, its president and its laboratory director have been indicted on larceny and fraud charges after falsely certifying that a school in Woodside, Queens, had been cleared of asbestos, the Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, said yesterday.
The school, Intermediate School 125 on 47th Avenue in Woodside, was forced to close for two months last spring when high levels of asbestos were found throughout the five-story building -- in some spots at 10 to 20 times permissible levels -- just days after the company certified that the school had been decontaminated, Mr.
Morgenthau said.


Tenet Healthcare Corp.(THC,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Aug 31


SENATE G.O.P. PLAN FOR MEDICARE USES BENEFIT CUTBACKS
The Congressional Budget Office said today that Senate Republican proposals to overhaul Medicare would achieve their goal of saving $270 billion in seven years not so much through innovative health policies as through the time-tested techniques of curbing payments to doctors and hospitals and raising costs to beneficiaries.
The budget office said the Republicans would save $49.7 billion through greater use of health maintenance organizations and other forms of managed care.
But it said the proposals would achieve most of the savings -- $42.6 billion -- through new limits on Federal payments to H.M.O.'s for elderly people already enrolled or expected to enroll under current law, not through additional enrollment in such private health plans.


Irish Peace Won't Come at Point of a Gun
To the Editor:
If making peace in Northern Ireland were as straightforward as Thomas L. Friedman suggests (column, Sept. 20), we would have got there long ago.





Apogee Enterprises Inc.(APOG,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Sept 2


China Cancels A Sale to Iran, Pleasing U.S.
In a move that is likely to speed up the recovery in the troubled relationship between Washington and Beijing, China told the United States today that it had decided to cancel its contract to sell two nuclear power reactors to Iran.
Foreign Minister Qian Qichen told Secretary of State Warren Christopher of his Government's decision during a nearly two-hour meeting at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, a senior Administration official told reporters after the meeting.


G.O.P. Pushes Medical Savings Accounts to Replace Health Insurance
One of the rules of thumb of personal finance is that consumers should buy insurance only against expenses they could not easily afford.
Another rule, of course, is that people should set money aside for rainy days.
Thus, car owners who can afford, say, a $1,500 repair bill are advised to save money on automobile insurance premiums by buying a policy with a deductible that high.


Will Regulators Penalize Daiwa? No Answers Yet
By waiting nearly two months to tell regulators that it had learned of a $1.1 billion loss from unauthorized trading, Daiwa Bank Ltd. apparently violated Federal and New York State regulations, banking lawyers say.
But whether it will face punishment beyond a requirement to improve its internal controls is unclear.
New York banking regulations require all entities supervised by the state, including branches of foreign banks, to report "immediately" any embezzlement, larceny, forgery, fraud, dishonesty or similar misconduct, regardless of whether it is determined that a crime has been committed.
Federal regulations are similar.


Giuliani, Irked, Hardens Defense Of Choice for Schools Chancellor
In an intensified defense of his latest choice of Leon M. Goldstein to be New York City's schools chancellor, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday called criticism of Mr.
Goldstein's political connections "cheap shots and misinterpretations."
The Mayor praised Mr.
Goldstein's record as president of Kingsborough Community College in Brooklyn and dismissed questions about his close ties to Democratic politicians in Brooklyn -- several of whom hold jobs at the college -- as well as a series of discrepancies in his statements about his age, marriages, health and education.


Schnitzer Steel Ind.(SCHN,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Aug 31


Morrison Restaurants Inc.(RI,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Sept 2


Helene Curtis Industries(HC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Aug 31


Now, It's Saks For the Home
SAKS FIFTH AVENUE may not sell furniture, but it has just come out with its first home furnishings catalogue.
It features small rugs, mirrors, lamps, gifts, occasional tables, linens, china and glassware.
One bargain is a $90 hooked-wool rug (left), 30 by 40 inches, with apples and pears.
It was designed by a Wisconsin artist, Tracy Porter.
Catalogues, free, are available by calling (800) 345-3454.


Merger to Aid Desegregation Is Denounced
The Leonia High School gymnasium is called the Lion's Den after the school symbol, and it must have seemed like one tonight for three state officials gathering reaction to a court-ordered plan to desegregate the schools in nearby Englewood by busing in children from Leonia.
Residents of this small, middle-class suburb, consisting mostly of white and Asian families, jammed the bleachers and filled the hallway outside the gymnasium.
They cheered as public officials and townspeople fired the opening salvos in what promises to be a protracted and bitter struggle over the proposed merger of several predominantly white Bergen County school districts with the predominantly black and Hispanic classrooms in Englewood.


Hunt Manufacturing (HUN,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Sept 3


C.I.A. May Dismiss Chief Officer Involved in Guatemala
Breaking with the past, the Central Intelligence Agency will dismiss, demote or discipline up to a dozen officers, including the former chief of covert operations in Latin America, for shielding suspect agents and stifling reports of human-rights abuses in Guatemala, Government officials said today.
The Director of Central Intelligence, John M. Deutch, is weighing an internal review board's recommendations to dismiss the former Latin American division chief and a former station chief in Guatemala, and demote or discipline as many as 10 other officers.


In Haiti, Democracy, Not Aristide, Is on Trial
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 19 news article reporting on whether or not President Jean-Bertrand Aristide of Haiti will stay in office beyond next February to compensate for three years in exile after an illegal coup ousted him describes the Haitian public's obvious support of President Aristide: "Wherever he goes, excited crowds wave three fingers at him and cry out for 'three more years!' "


With No Place to Run, Giants Brace for 49ers
When a tiger is resting quietly in its cage, it is not smart to jab a stick at it.
Or, at the very least, run away after doing it.
The Detroit Lions on Monday night gave the San Francisco 49ers a stick to the midsection.
Now the 49ers will be looking to lash back, and it just so happens the Giants are standing in front of the cage.
Too late to drop the stick or run.
Time to just stand and fight.
After San Francisco played its worst game of the season against the Lions -- their worst game is better than a lot of teams' best game -- it seems certain the 49ers will now play their best to try to rebound from the loss.


Rhodes Inc.(RHD,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Aug 31


Surge in Ad Revenue For TV Predicted
The Television Bureau of Advertising said yesterday that it expected significant increases for television advertising revenue in 1996, citing the Summer Olympics, the Presidential election and a "a reasonably healthy" economy.


Harry D. Goldman, 92, Judge Who Named Monitors for Attica
Harry D. Goldman, a retired judge who appointed monitors to protect inmates at Attica prison after a riot in which more than 40 people were killed, died on Thursday at his home in Rochester.
He was 92.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Marriott Intl.(MAR,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Sept 8


The Mob's Tale of Sorrow About Las Vegas
CASINO Love and Honor in Las Vegas By Nicholas Pileggi 363 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $24.
You have to step back a little from Nicholas Pileggi's text to appreciate fully what he has accomplished in his new book on organized crime, "Casino: Love and Honor in Las Vegas." Viewed in the proper perspective, Mr.
Pileggi's story is a morality tale about two men who tried to begin their lives anew by moving to Las Vegas, that "city with no memory," as Mr.
Pileggi calls it, "the nation's only morality car wash."
One of the men was brains, the other muscle, but each left his lasting mark on America's gambling capital.
The brains was Frank (Lefty) Rosenthal, a sports handicapper from Chicago who had a genius for figuring the odds in any sort of game and who left nothing to luck, even if assuring his edge meant bribing one of the competitors (or so it was charged).
Mr.
Rosenthal's contribution to Las Vegas was the introduction to casinos of "sports books," implemented by rooms full of television sets in which bettors could watch and wager on almost any sporting event going on at the moment.


A New Nation's First P.O.W.'s
It was a routine inspection of a decrepit structure in a city park, but it brought back an ugly, all but forgotten episode in America's fight for independence.
At the base of a monument in Brooklyn's Fort Greene Park, a municipal blacksmith opened a crypt containing the bones of more than 11,000 heroes who died on British prison ships in New York harbor.
Their resting place is the Prison Ship Martyrs' Monument, a heavy Doric column on a rise looking out over the harbor where they perished.
During the Revolution they were confined on ships when Manhattan prisons filled.
Most were American regulars, but some appear to have been slaves sent to war in place of their masters and foreigners who fought beside them.


How Lawyers Can Regain the Public's Respect
To the Editor:
What explains the epidemic of lawyer-bashing you describe in "More Scorn and Less Money Dim Law's Lure" (front page, Sept. 22)?
Something old and something new.


Domesticating Fiber-Optic Lights
FIBER-OPTIC lighting, which has been in commercial use in the United States for about 10 years, is now being introduced for homes.
It is not only very energy efficient, but also a safe way to illuminate gardens, swimming pools (above) and other places where moisture is a problem.
Because it generates no heat and filters out ultraviolet rays, it is perfect for lighting valuable artwork.
David Ruckert, the president of Fiberstars, a Fremont, Calif., company that has adapted fiber-optic lighting, explains that it employs a cable to transmit light waves.
The cable (top) is actually a tube filled with dozens of thin plastic fiber-optic strands, which carry the light.
One end of the tube is attached to an illuminator box, which normally holds a halogen bulb.
Light from this source can illuminate more than 100 feet of tubing and serve several fixtures.
Because there is no electricity in the cable itself, there is no danger of shock.


Pataki, a Son of Hungary, Is Embraced as Its Rich Uncle
The Prime Minister suggested on Monday that the Governor could help create an American Marshall Plan for Hungary.
The Interior Minister asked him on Tuesday to help the nation fight organized crime.
The mayor of one small town asked him for help in getting an airport, while the mayor of another thought Mr.
Pataki might drum up investors for a riverside resort project.
Gov.
George E. Pataki spent the final hours of his visit to the country of his ancestors today much the way he spent the previous four days: listening to petitioners.


Security Devices in a New Bill


American Homestar Corp. reports earnings for 1st qtr to Aug 31


How Lawyers Can Regain the Public's Respect; To Change Divorce
To the Editor:
"Detoxifying Custody Fights" (editorial, Sept. 22) suggests a way to remove the rancor from the divorce process.
Connecticut heads off bitter, costly trials by transforming lawyers and therapists from hired guns into court-supervised conciliators.
Why not extend the principle to every phase of divorce and orient all professionals, including accountants and other expert witnesses, toward acting as problem solvers, rather than as pit-bull adversaries?


Prince Is Bad, Rat-Catcher Polite
Unlike many a film that adults deem good for children, "Prince Brat and the Whipping Boy" is actually something children might want to see.
It has a brisk pace, a storybook look, a bad-boy prankster and enough cheerful mischief to keep small fry in the audience happily occupied.
Previously shown on the Disney Channel and opening today for a big-screen run at the Lincoln Square, "Prince Brat and the Whipping Boy" is about a beastly boy who happens to be royalty and thus has prerogatives that most children lack.
Prince Horace of Brattenburg (Nic Knight) is entitled to pick another boy to endure his spankings for him.
And it is with great glee that he chooses a spunky orphan named Jemmy (Truan Munro) for this role.
Horace is such a stinker that he gets into as much trouble as possible in hopes that Jemmy will have to pay for it.
"It wouldn't be proper to whip a prince, would it?" he asks smugly when the spanking issue comes up.


Research Network on Cancer
The New Jersey State Commission on Cancer Research and the State Department of Health plan to establish a statewide cancer registry network that will be made available free to all hospitals in the state, health officials announced yesterday.
A $52,000 grant from the Fannie E. Rippel Foundation will pay for computer software and training for hospital workers using the system and researchers collecting the data, the officials said.


Threat Is Seen in Pension Shift
Escalating its opposition to a Republican plan to allow companies to use money from pension plans that have a minimum cushion of funds, the Clinton Administration contended today that passage of the measure would reduce the retirement security of millions of Americans, endanger the economy and inspire predatory corporate takeovers.
"We are going to see raids on pension assets that will make the train robberies during the days of Jesse James pale in comparison," said Robert B. Reich, the Labor Secretary who also serves as chairman of the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, insurer of 58,000 private-sector pension plans.


It's Folk Art In King Size
THE Fall Antiques Show is back at the Seventh Regiment Armory, on Park Avenue at 67th Street, where it began in 1979 (with tickets at $3.50 and Martha Stewart's debut as a big-time caterer).
The show of 75 dealers of folk art, American antiques and decorative objects from the beginning of the century opens today and runs through Sunday.
After that first year, because of a dispute with the armory's management, the show was set up on a Hudson River pier.
But this year, Sanford L. Smith, the producer of the annual show, has scaled down the number of dealers -- from 110 to 75 -- and attempted to improve the quality of the objects presented.
"The pier had more of the image of a flea market and had become more downscale," Mr.
Smith said.
"At the pier, we felt the level of the show was falling and that we were losing a lot of heavy hitters."


Alison Steele, Disk Jockey, Dies; The Pioneer 'Nightbird' Was 58
Alison Steele, whose sultry voice and iron will helped her become one of the first women in the country to be hired as a disk jockey, died yesterday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 58.
Ms. Steele, who lived in Manhattan, died of cancer, her family said.


Throwing a Tantrum Out of Sheer Giddiness
Throwing a Tantrum Out of Sheer Giddiness It was a battle between the geeks and the brats when Whale and Blur performed a sold-out concert on Tuesday night at the Academy.
Whale is a self-consciously awkward group of students from Sweden playing a mix of new-wave, punk and funk with studied stiffness.
Blur, from England, mixes new-wave, punk and pop, topping it all with a lead singer who delivers his lines like a child throwing a tantrum, though not because he's angry but because he's giddy.
Before its first album, "We Care" (Virgin), was released, Whale seemed like a joke band with a sophomoric, nonsensical pseudo-rap hit.
But on "We Care," Whale turns a joke into a nebulous new-wave concept on the order of Devo, and backs its clowning with the studio tricks and punk-meets-rap energy of the Beastie Boys.
At the Academy, the band played fast, clunky rhythms on guitar (there is no lead guitar in Whale's music) as Cia Berg sang surreal come-ons.
Between and during the band's free-flowing art-funk songs, the band walked stiff-legged around the stage like robots and mumbled purposefully stupid greetings to the audience, following the advice of its song "Kickin,' ": "Let's not get too serious."


Where to Find It
FOR a while in the late 1980's, when compact disks and CD players swiftly saturated the audio market, record turntables appeared destined for the same fate as manual typewriters and rotary-dial telephones.
That never happened, much to the delight of audiophiles who insist that vinyl records offer a richer sound than CD's and to the cheers of music lovers with irreplaceable record collections.
But finding new and used turntables today is considerably more challenging than it was a decade ago.
"The LP is dead as a mass-market medium," said Ivan Berger, technical editor of Audio magazine.
In 1983, when CD players were still new and costly, Audio listed 62 international turntable manufacturers and 251 turntable models in its annual equipment survey.
This year, there are 41 manufacturers and 110 models.


Quality Food Centers (QFCI,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Sept 9


Material Sciences Corp.(MSC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Aug 31


E.P.A. Backs Plan to Allow Cleaner Cars In Most States
The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency today approved specifications for a "clean car" that, if it wins support from auto makers and officials in New York and Massachusetts, could result in emission standards for 49 states far cleaner than Federal rules require but not quite as clean as what some of the states are planning.
Environmental agency officials said the plan, which has been under negotiation for more than a year, was the E.P.A.'s last best hope for a nationwide improvement in controlling car pollution.
It is also the auto makers' best hope to avoid a Federal requirement that they sell a fixed quota of cars powered by electricity.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  National League  FLORIDA MARLINS -- Purchased the contracts of Jeff Alkire, pitcher, and Doug O'Neill, outfielder, from St.
Paul of the Northern League.
Assigned Alkire and O'Neill to Portland of the Eastern League.
NEW YORK METS -- Signed Dallas Green, manager, to a one-year contract extension.
South Atlantic League  PIEDMONT PHILLIES -- Announced the resignation of Jack Swallow, general manager, effective Oct. 1.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  CLEVELAND CAVALIERS -- Traded Mark Price, guard, to the Washington Bullets for a 1996 first-round draft choice.
PHILADELPHIA 76ERS -- Signed Jerry Stackhouse, guard, to a three-year contract.
Football  National Football League  GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Signed Joe Wood, kicker, from the practice squad.
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Released Tim Watson, safety. Signed Martin Bayless, safety.
Canadian Football League  CALGARY STAMPEDERS -- Signed Jackie Kellogg, defensive back.
Hockey  National Hockey League  NEW JERSEY DEVILS -- Re-signed Scott Niedermayer, defenseman, and Stephane Richer, forward, to multiyear contracts.
WINNIPEG JETS -- Sent Andre Faust, left wing, to Springfield of the AHL.
Released Vyacheslav Butsayev, center.
College
RUTGERS -- Announced Rob Hodgson, basketball guard, has transferred from Indiana, and will be eligible to play on Dec. 16.


Sudbury Inc.(SUDS,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Aug 31


Norand Corp.(NRND,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Aug 31


Fuller (H.B.) Co.(FULL,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Aug 31


NATO Sees Progress on Formula to Let Russia Join Bosnia Force
NATO diplomats said today that a committee was making progress on resolving the issue of how countries from outside the alliance could take part in any military operation to enforce a peace settlement in Bosnia.
The United States wants NATO in command of any such operation as a condition to sending up to 25,000 American soldiers to Bosnia -- about half the estimated force -- to take part in it.


Religious Differences Aside, 2 Men Await Pope's Soup Kitchen Visit
For two years now, they have eaten breakfast together each morning at Our Daily Bread, this city's largest soup kitchen, and most days, the hour passes with only the mildest of chitchat.
Once in a while, though, Douglas Tillery and his friend Alphonso Alvarez Jr. start talking religion.
Then look out.
Mr. Alvarez is a Buddhist, Mr. Tillery a Baptist who would like to convert him.


Super Rite Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Sept 2


Korean Grocer Is Killed in Failed Holdup
Sung Ju Hung left his native South Korea six years ago, having the same dreams that are shared by many of his fellow immigrants: to work hard enough so that someday he would be able to buy his own grocery store.
Working the rough late shift at a delicatessen in Far Rockaway, Queens, he had nonetheless already gained some of the trappings of a stable American life, like a modest apartment in Flushing for his wife and baby daughter, whose second birthday he had celebrated last week.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
4.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.25
5.73
4.61
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.24
5.27
4.50
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.35
5.36
5.15
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.26
6.25
7.57
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.57
6.57
7.81
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.57
7.55
8.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.15
6.11
6.55
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Trudging in Beckett's Vacuum
The 10 grim but bawdy gray-faced dancers who shuffle along in Maguy Marin's "May B" are not happy campers.
They are, rather, fugitives from the bleak world of Samuel Beckett, to whom Ms.
Marin, a French choreographer, pays an uncanny right-minded tribute.
But anyone looking for an evening of Beckett won't find it at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, in Chelsea).
"May B" is pure Maguy Marin, and her triumph is to evoke the spirit of Beckett's universe on her own terms.


Sudbury Inc.(SUDS,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Aug 31


Economic Scene; An argument that big ego is behind a lot of mergers.
FIRST they put them together and then, most notably in the cases of ITT, Sears and AT&amp;T, they take them apart.
Is there more behind the recent frenzy of corporate coupling and uncoupling than the restless ambition of managers and their investment bankers?
That's what Mathew L.A.
Hayward and Donald C. Hambrick of Columbia University seem to think.
They argue that simple megalomania is a common disease in the executive suite.
In a recent paper presented to the Academy of Management, they found statistical evidence that the premiums paid above market price to acquire new companies were tied to what the two researchers labeled the hubris of the bosses.


Auditors Can't Catch All Corporate Rogues
To the Editor:
Floyd Norris's Market Place column (Business Day, Sept. 22) rightly condemns corporate managers who manipulate accounting books by overstating asset values and by understating expenses of operating a business.
What is misleading is the implication that outside auditors are blameworthy for failing to detect such fraudulent practices.


Coach Gets 17 Years for Rape
PAUL HICKSON, Britain's head swimming coach at the 1988 Seoul Olympics, was jailed for 17 years yesterday for raping two women and indecently assaulting 13 while coaching them at school and college.
Hickson, 48, whose 1988 Olympic swimming team captured three golds, was said to have committed a catalogue of sex offenses spread over a 15-year period while he ran swimming clubs in Norwich, England, and Swansea, Wales, before he became national coach.


Donaldson Co.(DCI,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to July 31


Congressional Roundup; Service Program Set Back
On a near-party-line vote of 55 to 45, the Republican-controlled Senate today approved an $80.9 billion spending bill for veterans and housing programs that would eliminate one of President Clinton's major initiatives, the national service program known as Americorps.
The margin of the vote was significant, falling far short of the two-thirds needed to override a veto that President Clinton has vowed if the bill came to him with deep cuts in housing programs for the poor and the homeless, reductions in veterans programs and major changes in environmental laws.


Sun Television &amp; Appliances Co.(SNTV,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Aug 26


Former Essex Official Admits Kickback Role at Housing Site
The former Register of Essex County pleaded guilty today to accepting kickbacks and conspiring to use her influence as a director of a low-income housing complex to award millions of dollars in contracts to security guard companies.
The former official, Larrie West Stalks, 69, admitted in Federal District Court in Newark that she used her influence as a member of the board of directors of the 420-unit Hill Manor apartment building in Newark to hire companies operated or owned by Anthony Zecchino, a Newark businessman who has since been convicted of racketeering and murder, prosecutors said.


Rapid Gains Are Reported On Genome
Researchers are reporting rapid progress in deciphering the human genome, the DNA library carried in each human cell.
In articles being published today in the scientific journal Nature, laboratories in the United States, France and Britain describe two rival approaches to making sense of the vast amount of genetic information encoded in the three billion DNA base pairs that make up the human genome.


Bank Can't Lend to U.N.
After officials here said this week that the United Nations was exploring the possibility of obtaining loans from the World Bank to ease the organization's financial crisis, the World Bank said today that its rules would not permit such lending.
The World Bank is part of the United Nations system, and officials had taken the view that it would have the authority to assist the organization.
But in a statement issued in Washington, the bank said today that the United Nations had not raised the issue "and there is no precedent for loans of this kind."


How Lawyers Can Regain the Public's Respect; Unhappy Career Truth
To the Editor:
"More Scorn and Less Money Dim Law's Lure" (front page, Sept. 22) omits an inauspicious factor that will continue to lure people to law school: pre-law advisers are not telling students the truth about practice.


James Grottola, 57, Printers' Local Head
James Grottola, the president of New York Typographical Union No. 6, died on Tuesday at his home in Commack, L.I.
He was 57.
The cause of death was apparently a heart attack, his family said.


Shift at Top: Du Pont Gets A New Chief
The Du Pont Company said yesterday that John A. Krol will become its chief executive at the end of the year, replacing Edgar S. Woolard Jr., who will remain as chairman.
Mr.
Woolard, 61, said he was stepping down as chief executive because he had fulfilled his goals of revamping E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company, the nation's largest chemical concern, and because he felt the time was right to pass the baton to Mr.
Krol, who is 58 and has been vice chairman for three years.
Mr.
Woolard said his health was fine and had nothing to do with his decision.


AT HOME WITH: James Finn Garner; On Pens and Needles
THERE is a feel of 50's sitcom bliss to dinner time at James Finn Garner's house, one of dozens of narrow houses on a quiet street on Chicago's North Side.
Mozart plays softly on the kitchen radio.
Six-month-old Liam snoozes in a baby seat next to the dinner table.
And Mr.
Garner and his wife, Lies (pronounced "lease"), eat shish kebabs and discuss what went wrong with their garden.
To complete this scene of mealtime domesticity, peaches and shortcake, Lies Garner's specialty, appear for dessert.
But when she pops open the aerosol can of Reddi-wip and "schluroops" a dollop on her husband's slice, the two erupt in laughter.


Restoring the Children's Zoo, Seriously; Fairy Tales Are Out, Unless Fairies Really Exist and Have Tails
In the golden dew of municipal memory, the Central Park Children's Zoo remains a toddler's paradise, a place where goats, ducklings, a talking crow and other child-sized beasts roamed amid fairy-tale sculptures.
"It was like magic," Anne Millard, who brought her three now-grown children there, said.
"The roosters cock-a-doodle-dooed, the goats ate your hat off, and the rabbits you could touch."


EASTERN COLLEGE REPORT
Big East Conference
For the first time since the Big East started playing football in 1991, the conference has no teams in the top-25 polls of writers/broadcasters or coaches.
For the first time in 10 years, Miami, the Big East's annual champion, is not ranked in the top 25.


Lawyer for Colombia's Chief Wounded in Ambush
A group of armed men this morning attacked a car carrying the lawyer who has defended President Ernesto Samper during a congressional investigation into whether the President knowingly accepted campaign contributions from drug traffickers.
The lawyer, Antonio Jose Cancino, was hit by two bullets in the arm but was not in serious condition, said doctors at the hospital where he was treated.
Two of his bodyguards were killed and a third was seriously wounded.


Kaufman &amp; Broad Home Corp.(KBH,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Aug 31


Rhodes Inc.(RHD,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Aug 31


Lintas Shops Get A Johnson Account
Johnson &amp; Johnson has named Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas in New York and its sibling, Lintas Worldwide, to handle its consolidated worldwide personal products business.
Though the billings on the account, for brands like Stayfree pads and O.B. tampons, were not disclosed, Adweek estimated the worldwide business at $40 million to $50 million.


N.L. West Seesaw Tips To Dodgers
Dodgers 7, Rockies 4
Eric Karros homered and scored three times and Tim Wallach hit two sacrifice flies as the Los Angeles Dodgers beat the Colorado Rockies, 7-3, last night to reclaim a half-game lead in the National League West.


From the Mind Of an Architect And Thinker
RARELY can one study an architect's creative process, but that's the purpose of an exhibition opening tonight at the Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art.
"Adjusting Foundations" is the first solo show of Cooper Union's popular dean of architecture, John Hejduk, who has been teaching there for 31 years.
Orchestrated by Kim Shkapich, the director of the school's architecture archives, the show includes nearly 200 original drawings, watercolors, models and photographs, many of which appear in his book of the same title, to be published next month by the Monicelli Press ($35).


International Multifoods (IMC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Aug 31


Renovations On Erie Canal Get Approval
Despite concerns repeatedly raised by Gov.
George E. Pataki, a state committee today gave final approval to a $146 million plan to revive recreational travel along the Erie Canal by adding small-boat piers, bicycle paths, hiking trails, outdoor cafes and other amenities.
The three members of the Canal Corporation Board unanimously approved the plan to renovate a 524-mile stretch of the 170-year-old canal system from Troy to Tonawanda, as well as connecting waterways that reach Lake Ontario and Lake Champlain.


What Sent the Nearings To a Wilderness Life
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 19 obituary on the writer Helen Nearing implies that Mrs.
Nearing and her husband, Scott, made a free, conscious and thoughtful decision in 1932 to leave the groves of academe in search of the good life in the wilderness of Vermont.
Two books I read on a recent vacation -- "Witness to a Century" by George Seldes and the Nearings's own "Maple Sugar Book" -- paint a different picture.


Drug Firms at Odds Over Patent Extensions
By the time the Senate Finance Committee resumes consideration of the Federal budget's multibillion dollar issues Thursday, some of the nation's largest drug companies will have spent and lobbied heavily against one amendment that hardly amounts to budget dust.
But while its impact on the Federal budget may be minuscule, the measure means a fortune to the drug companies.


President of American Express Abruptly Resigns
In a surprise move, Jeffrey E. Stiefler, president of the American Express Company, abruptly tendered his resignation yesterday, telling the company he was leaving at the end of the month.
Mr.
Stiefler, who is 48, is a long-time associate of Harvey Golub, the company's chairman and chief executive.
The two men spent much of the 1980's together at the company's IDS subsidiary, the Minneapolis-based mutual fund and financial planning company that is now called American Express Financial Advisors.


Midpriced Hotels Look Abroad
For decades, American luxury hotel chains like Hilton and Hyatt have been familiar sights in foreign capitals and resorts, homes away from home for top business executives and well-heeled travelers.
But now, a second foreign invasion by American hotel and motel chains is under way, carrying decidedly middle-brow names like Comfort Inn, Days Inn and Holiday Inn Express -- and with prices that are midrange or even lower.


Calendar: Flower Show And Seasonal Festivals
Flower Competitions  Planting Fields Arboretum, Planting Fields Road, Oyster Bay, L.I.; (516) 922-9200, or on weekends, (516) 922-9201.
A fall show featuring flower competitions, landscaped gardens, a crafts fair and plant sale will begin Saturday and will continue through Oct. 9.
Open 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: Saturday or Sunday, $7; Monday through Friday, $6.


Schnitzer Steel Ind.(SCHN,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Aug 31


Heilig-Meyers Co.(HMY,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Aug 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13 FAMILIARITY BRED ACCORD Having been virtually locked up together for more than two months, Israeli and Palestinian negotiators found themselves bound in a common cause that required them to overcome ingrained hatreds to produce an agreement.
A1 SOME WARMING WITH CHINA China told the United States that it had decided to cancel its contract to sell two nuclear-power reactors to Iran, but it declined an invitation from President Clinton for President Jiang Zemin to come to Washington next month.
A1 LIBYA DEPORTS MORE PALESTINIANS Libya has expelled thousands of foreign workers, especially Palestinians, and the United Nations reports that Libya is building a border camp to house thousands more.
A10 DISCIPLINE AT THE C.I.A.
The C.I.A. will dismiss, demote or discipline up to a dozen officers for shielding suspect agents and stifling reports of human-rights abuses in Guatemala, officials said.
A3 BOSNIA PLAN IS VULNERABLE News Analysis: The gulf between the content of the American peace initiative for Bosnia and the situation on the ground is large enough to suggest it is vulnerable.
A12 NATO PROGRESS ON BOSNIA NATO diplomats said a committee was making progress on resolving how countries from outside the alliance could take part in any military operation to enforce a peace settlement in Bosnia.
A13 Grozny Journal: Losing the war but keeping a sense of humor.
A4 National A16-24, B9-12 MEDICARE PLAN ASSESSED The Congressional Budget Office said Senate Republicans would reach their goal of saving $270 billion in Medicare costs over seven years not so much by innovation as by the traditional methods of cutting payments to doctors and raising premiums.
A1 SIMPSON TEAM'S TURN O. J. Simpson's chief lawyer opened his final argument to the jury, criticizing the state's case as a "rush to judgment" and an "obsession to win at all costs." A1 GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN AVERTED Congressional leaders and the White House agreed on a plan to keep the Government from shutting down for lack of money when the fiscal year ends.
A1 PAPAL LUNCH IN SOUP KITCHEN When Pope John Paul II has lunch after Mass in Oriole Park stadium, he will be joined at a soup kitchen by 20 participants in local Roman Catholic charity programs.
A16 NEW CHASE ON BORDER A new 10-foot-high steel wall along the border with Mexico in California has given immigration agents an edge over border crossers but has not ended the cat-and-mouse game with them.
A16 GREEN LIGHT FOR 'CLEAN CAR' The Environmental Protection Agency approved specifications for a "clean car" that could mean emission standards for 49 states far cleaner than the law requires.
A16 JUSTICES TO REVIEW CENSUS  The Supreme Court agreed to review the Government's refusal to adjust the 1990 census, which some large cities contend missed a disproportionate number of blacks and poor people.
A18 PEROT TAKES ON CALIFORNIA  Ross Perot began his effort to elect a third-party candidate by filing for a place on the ballot in California, one of the most daunting tasks such a candidate can face.
The libretto is again an art form of choice.
C1 Philharmonic reports progress in contract talks.
C13 'Murder One' slumps as the Simpson case draws more viewers.
C20 Film: "Prince Brat and the Whipping Boy." C13 Music: The Philadelphians.
C14 Whale and Blur.
C16 The Pop Life C16 A night of guitar.
C17 Dance: Maguy Marin.
C13 Books: "Casino," by Nicholas Pileggi.
C17 TV: "New York News." C13 David Frost interviews Gen.
Colin Powell.
C18 The Home Section C1-11 It's folk art in king size.
C1 Sports B13-19 Baseball: Yanks inch closer to post-season.
B13 Concern about McDowell.
B13 Mets reward Green.
B13 Columns: Rhoden on Vernon Maxwell.
B13 Obituaries D22 Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27 Editorials Too high a price.
Reform of the U.N. is overdue.
Candidates, shortchanged.
A new nation's first P.O.W.'s.
Letters William Safire: New evil empire.
Maureen Dowd: Grand funk railroad.
Susana MacLean: The victim gets the blame in Central Park.
Dorothy Nelkin: Biology is not destiny.
Chronicle D28 Bridge C17 Crossword C14


Stock Prices Take a Wild Ride Down but Rebound at Close
Led by technology issues, stock prices tumbled sharply enough yesterday to set off the New York Stock Exchange's 50-point "circuit breaker" rule, but bounced back before the close.
Nevertheless, the three major market indicators all finished on the downside.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 3.25 points, to 4,762.35; the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index dropped 0.37 point, to 581.04, and the technology-laden Nasdaq composite index declined 11.51 points, to 1,026.54.


For Pataki, Popularity Is Found To Be Still Lagging in Voter Poll
Gov.
George E. Pataki finished his ninth month in office with his popularity still lagging among the state's voters, particularly those in New York City, according to a poll released today.
The poll, conducted by the Marist College Institute for Public Opinion in Poughkeepsie, found that only 39 percent of voters queried approved of the job that Mr.
Pataki was doing.
Six percent of those surveyed said they had no opinion.


Passion That Whips the Blood
This is the week the bloodthirsty chess world has been waiting for.
After eight consecutive draws between the world chess champion, Gary Kasparov, and the challenger, Viswanathan Anand -- an unprecedented streak of standoffs -- the two men traded victories, concluding the first half of their 20-game match with the fireworks that had been anticipated from the start.
The two decisive games, Mr.
Anand's breakthrough on Monday and Mr.
Kasparov's stunning riposte the next afternoon, unleashed cheers for the first time among spectators on the 107th-floor observation deck of the World Trade Center, where the match is being held, as well as further expectations of rousing, risk-taking play in games to come.


End Seen for Rule That AT&amp;T Must Disclose Its Price Plans
The Federal Communications Commission plans to free the AT&amp;T Corporation from the last vestiges of price regulation, in exchange for commitments from the company to protect rates for low-income customers and people in remote rural areas, agency officials said today.
The plan has the support of the agency's chairman, Reed E. Hundt, and the full five-member commission is expected to vote in favor of it at the agency's meeting on Oct. 12.


No One Advocates Bad Bilingual Education
To the Editor:
New York's Bilingual 'Prison' " (editorial, Sept. 21) says a Board of Education report finds that "new immigrants instructed in English alone performed better than students in bilingual education." Many educators and researchers have written that the study was flawed and the conclusion unwarranted.


British Court to Seek Trader's Extradition
A British magistrates court has summoned the former Barings trader Nicholas W. Leeson to face fraud charges by bondholders of the collapsed Barings P.L.C. in what represents the former trader's last chance to return to Britain.
Two weeks ago the Serious Fraud Office turned down a request by Mr.
Leeson to plead guilty to fraud charges in a British court to avoid extradition to Singapore.
The City of London Magistrates Court issued eight summonses against Mr.
Leeson, 28, requiring him to appear on Oct. 30 to face allegations brought by the group of bondholders.
The court said that it would ask the British Government to make a formal extradition request to the German Government.


Japan Panel Urges Reform Of Nation's Bank System
In an effort to clear up the bad-loan problem that is threatening Japan's financial system, the Government moved today toward establishing an institution similar to the Resolution Trust Corporation, which was used to deal with the savings and loan crisis in the United States.
The recommendation to form an institution to take over and dispose of the bad debts held by home mortgage companies was contained in a blueprint for reform of Japan's banking system that was released today by an advisory committee to the Ministry of Finance.
The committee also recommended the use of public money to help shore up the financial system in limited cases.


Neither Blisters Nor Brewers Stop Cone and Yanks
David Cone knew he could make life much simpler for David Cone this weekend if he pitched like David Cone today.
His strategy was practical and obvious; his performance was precise and opportune.
As a result, Cone may have earned himself and his weary Yankee teammates an important day off on Sunday.
Because Cone, who fashioned a no-hitter for four and two-thirds innings, stifled the Milwaukee Brewers in a nifty 6-3 victory, the Yankees crept closer to clinching a wild-card position and qualifying for the post-season for the first time since 1981.
The Yankees can secure the fourth playoff spot in the American League by Friday night, and if they do, Cone would not have to pitch on Sunday.


Sun Television &amp; Appliances Co.(SNTV,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Aug 26


Whitman Denies Forcing Official Out
The Governor boasts in a speech that turning the Department of Motor Vehicles' district offices over to private management is working.
The spokesman for the Department of Motor Vehicles bluntly contradicts her.
The next day, the spokesman is dismissed.
Was it spite, a purge of truth tellers, as state Democrats promptly charged, or just the bungled ouster of a hapless employee in a manner that could not have embarrassed the Governor any more if it had been designed to do so?
Whatever the case, the hubbub over the dismissal of Robert Thompson last week is keeping alive the argument over the value of privatizing public services just when Christine Todd Whitman would like to claim success for the centerpiece of her drive for a "leaner, smarter government."


Cintas Corp.(CTAS,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Aug 31


Market Place; The S.E.C. tries to insure that investors get better stock prices.
TWENTY years after Congress mandated competition among securities markets, the Securities and Exchange Commission yesterday made its most determined effort yet to make that competition work to the benefit of investors.
The S.E.C. voted to issue a proposal to require that the various markets that trade stocks in this country act to assure that investors have a reasonable chance of getting better prices than they have often gotten.
A principal aim is to make sure that orders from investors can be seen by other investors who might want to take the other side.


Super Rite Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Sept 2


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A listings guide employs guerrilla tactics to find a niche in New York.
TIME OUT inside and outside the subways.
Time Out on construction sites.
Time Out on college campuses.
Time Out in commuter rail stations.
Time out, already!


Tenet Healthcare Corp.(THC,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Aug 31


Slayings Point to Serial Killer, Police Say
Concerned that a serial killer may be on the loose, the police announced yesterday that detectives have linked the strangulation murders of two prostitutes and the sexual assault of a third prostitute in Manhattan this year to a single attacker.
Rapes and assaults of prostitutes are common because they are particularly vulnerable to such crimes, and there have been several other cases of serial killers preying on them, most notably that of Joel Rifkin, who has confessed to killing 17 women in the New York City area, most of them prostitutes.


Gencorp Inc.(GY,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Aug 31


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about price-fixing and fraud investigations involving the Archer-Daniels-Midland Company misstated the legal status of talks between a former executive of the company, Mark E. Whitacre, and the Justice Department.
There has been no plea bargain agreement between them.
A corrective article appears today on page D1.


Mary, Mary, You're Turning Into Quite a Lou Grant
A Manhattan warehouse explodes and goes up in flames, killing a veteran firefighter as a journalist watches in horror.
In the newsroom of The New York Reporter, the managing editor is shouting at an intern that he wants 500 words on body piercing by 5 o'clock.
The paper's gossip columnist, a sort of Cindy Adams in "Terminator 2" mode, arrives with a black eye, wailing indignantly that her Asian taxi driver "crashed his cab while I was in it." Welcome to E.N., emergency newsroom.
The new series begins tonight on CBS under the title "New York News."
Wobbling somewhere between "The Mary Tyler Moore Show" and its spinoff "Lou Grant," this would-be "Front Page" actually does have Mary Tyler Moore in its cast.
Playing the tough editor in chief, Louise Felcott, known to staff members as the Dragon, Ms.
Moore has something of a cameo role, popping up once in a while to warn the newsroom that she's "trying to save this ship from sinking." One bizarre scene places her in the paper's bathroom, her hand reaching out from under a stall door in a plea for some toilet tissue.
Mary Richards, we hardly knew ye.


Sports of The Times; Clean Slate For Maxwell In Philly
Vernon Maxwell spent most of yesterday afternoon looking at houses.
Accompanied by his wife, Resharita, Maxwell explored neighborhood after neighborhood in Philadelphia.
What struck him was an air of toughness about the city.
Philadelphia was nothing like Houston, where he had spent the last four seasons playing with the Rockets.
It was not like San Antonio, where he played most of his first two seasons.
Maxwell said he didn't really know anyone in Philadelphia, didn't know where to hang out -- a shocking statement from Maxwell, whose downfall began when he became as well known for late-night socializing as for his tenacious style of play.


Bridge
Almost all the great players of the past have remained mentally alert to the end of their lives and some, like Oswald Jacoby, Waldemar Von Zedtwitz and B. Jay Becker, were able to win major titles at an advanced age.
Charles Goren was the only conspicuous exception to this generalization.
This suggests a major advantage for bridge players.
A recent study of a group of elderly nuns suggests that those who keep their minds active live longer than those who are less educated or have become stagnant.
The doctor who conducted the study thinks that brain exercises help the elderly remain mentally active.


Conservatives May Join Perot
If the New Jersey Conservative Party succeeds in getting 10 percent of the vote on the November ballot, the organization may change its name and affiliate with the party that Ross Perot says he intends to form, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
If enough people vote for Conservative Party candidates in this fall's State Assembly, the party can qualify for an official line on the ballot in future elections and participate in primaries.
TERRY PRISTIN


Dress Barn Inc.(DBRN,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to July 29


A 'Piecemeal' Peace
After a second agreement between the warring parties on the principles for governing Bosnia, the gulf between the content of an American peace plan and the situation on the ground is large enough to suggest that the process is increasingly vulnerable.
Moreover, growing conflict over territory between Bosnia's nominal Muslim and Croat allies and the internal divisions in the Bosnian Government over what, if any, peace it wants are undermining the quest for a settlement, senior American officials said today.


Philharmonic Negotiators Stay at Table
The musicians and management of the New York Philharmonic resumed negotiations on Tuesday and negotiated all day yesterday in the hope of averting a strike, threatened by the musicians for tonight.
Deborah Borda, the executive director of the Philharmonic, said yesterday afternoon that "we are making progress, and we are hoping that we can settle." Judy West, the spokeswoman for Local 802 of the American Federation of Musicians, said that reports from the union negotiators were encouraging.


Eco-Ideas Make Waves With Style
WHEN Surain and Robert afSandeberg bought the place, it was a dark, cramped sty where the former tenants nurtured snakes, turtles, dogs and tropical birds.
"I still remember what it smelled like," Mrs. afSandeberg said, grimacing.


Sniper Is Sentenced for '94 Shootings in Which a Man Died
With his victims detailing their pain and loss, the sniper who terrorized Long Island last year was sentenced to 35 years to life in prison today.
"I stand before you disabled, and the physical scars and emotional pain will be with me forever," said Kathryn Spatafora, who was seriously wounded when the sniper, Peter Sylvester, fired through the window of a Burger King where she worked as a waitress on Nesconset Highway in Stony Brook.


A History Lesson: The Politicization of Giuliani
THERE are times, given the public's notoriously short memory, when a history lesson is in order.
This seems like one of those times, what with a Republican Mayor embracing a loyal confederate of the Brooklyn Democratic organization in his quest for control of the school system, a candidate for schools chancellor better known for his politics than his scholarship.
Herewith then a brief review course for students majoring in the politicization of Rudolph W. Giuliani, the prosecutor turned Mayor who has gone through some interesting changes along the way, the kind that explain why some call politics the art of the possible, while others consider it the province of the adaptable only.


Oxford Industries(OXM,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Sept 1


Micron Electronics Inc. reports earnings for 4th qtr to Aug 31


Wolverine World Wide Inc.(WWW,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Sept 9


What Presence! What Prices!
SISTER PARISH once thought $40 was an appallingly high price for an upholstered chair.
So, she probably would have been revolted to step into the salesrooms of Sotheby's and see the prices her own objects are expected to bring when they go on sale tomorrow morning.
It is estimated that a pair of Italian tole urns painted with scenes of Oriental women could bring from $20,000 to $30,000 and that a Queen Anne gilt mirror could fetch $25,000 to $35,000.


Quick &amp; Reilly Group Inc.(BQR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Aug 25


Excerpts of Closing Arguments on Murder Charges Against O. J. Simpson
Following are closing arguments, excerpted by topic, by Deputy District Attorney Christopher A. Darden, and by the chief defense lawyer, Johnnie L. Cochran Jr., given yesterday in Los Angeles in the trial of O. J. Simpson in the slayings of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman, as transcribed by The New York Times:


Corel Corp.(COSFF,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Aug 31


Writers Enchanted by the Freedom of Opera
After 21 novels, many volumes of poetry and essays, and at least 13 plays, Joyce Carol Oates has written the libretto for an opera, "Black Water," based on her novel about the Chappaquiddick incident.
Doris Lessing so liked writing the libretto for her first opera, "The Making of the Representative for Planet 8," from her novel by the same name, that she has written a second opera, drawn from another of her novels, "The Marriages Between Zones Three, Four and Five."
The novelist Ishmael Reed is writing an opera about Jesus, "Gethsemane Park," with music by Bobby McFerrin.
Thulani Davis, the poet and playwright who wrote the libretto for "X," about Malcolm X, is finishing another opera, "Amistad." Manuela Hoelterhoff, a Wall Street Journal critic who received the Pulitzer Prize in 1983, wrote "Modern Painters," which had its premiere at the Santa Fe Opera last summer.
She is now writing her second opera -- about James J. Angleton and the C.I.A.


Moon's Charity Is Questioned
Far more money goes to keeping WARREN MOON's Crescent Moon Foundation afloat than gets into the hands of students, an Associated Press review of the charity's 1989-93 tax returns shows.
Financial records for 1994 were not available.
In fact, only 18 percent to 39 percent of Crescent Moon's annual revenue pays for the group's programs, which include college scholarships.
That breakdown merits Crescent Moon an unfavorable rating from the Better Business Bureau of Metropolitan Houston for the past three years.


Corrections
An article on Monday about Congressional efforts to curb immigration referred incorrectly to the arrival of Lourdes Rivera, whose case was used as an example of people on waiting lists to become citizens.
Ms.
Rivera and her two sisters entered the United States in 1983 and overstayed their tourist visas, becoming illegal immigrants; they did not enter the country illegally.


McDowell's Backache Is a Headache
Jack McDowell was supposed to throw a baseball for the first time in six days today to test a strained muscle in his back that has bothered him for almost a month.
Instead, McDowell underwent a bone scan to determine if he had a stress fracture and if that was stagnating any potential progress.
Although the results showed that McDowell did not have a stress fracture, the Yankees are concerned about whether the right-hander will be able to pitch if they reach the post-season.


Nu Horizons Electronics Corp.(NUHC,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Aug 31


No Headline
"It's completely thrilling to hear people sing your words. For a poet, it's what poetry is all about. It's empowering -- 50 people in an orchestra, 3,000 people in a room. The words are carried on ethereal wings!" THULANI DAVIS, the poet and playwright, on writing operas.  [ C18:3. ]


It's No More Baby-Sitting for Green: The Mets Are His Baby Now
Jason Isringhausen was walking out of the Mets' clubhouse before yesterday's doubleheader, when he caught the eye of Manager Dallas Green, who was holding court with reporters.
Isringhausen, the 23-year-old right-hander with a 9-2 record, wore one of those looks that said, "What's he going to say now?" as if he feared the worst.


Stackhouse Signs With 76ers
The Philadelphia 76ers signed their top pick, JERRY STACKHOUSE, to a three-year contract.
"The word to describe Jerry Stackhouse is 'ferocious,' " said JOHN LUCAS, the 76ers' coach and general manager.
Under the league's new salary cap, Stackhouse, chosen third over all in the N.B.A. draft, will receive a top rookie salary of $6.855 million over three years.


Gtech Holdings Corp.(GTK,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Aug 26


Timothy Jenkins, Met Tenor, Is Dead at 44
Timothy Jenkins, a tenor who sang at the Metropolitan Opera for more than a decade, died on Thursday in Durham, N.C.
He was 44 and lived in Amarillo, Tex.
He died of a heart attack while exercising in preparation for a performance, his manager, Merle Hubbard, said.


Governor Backs Bond Campaign
With Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman as their featured speaker, supporters of the $340 million Green Acres bond issue proposal kicked off their campaign yesterday on behalf of the land-preservation measure, which will be Question No. 4 on the November ballot.
"We need to preserve our historic sites, our environmental resources and our farmlands as an investment in our physical, spiritual and economic health," the Governor said at a news conference at Monmouth Battlefield State Park.


A 20-Year Sentence for 1982 Chelsea Killing
A New Jersey businessman implicated on videotape by a dead accomplice 13 years after a grisly Chelsea murder was sentenced yesterday to a minimum of 20 years in prison.
Although his lawyer said dozens of letters submitted by clergy, police, firefighters and others had asked the court to heed the virtuous life led by William Seals after the slaying, District Attorney Daniel J. Bibb urged the judge to grant Mr.
Seals no leniency for the crime he committed when he was a teen-age cocaine addict.


Libyan Refugee Camp Stirs Concern on Ouster of Palestinians
The eviction by Libya of thousands of foreign workers prompted new concerns here today as United Nations officials reported that the Libyan Government was establishing a makeshift refugee camp to house as many as 1,500 newly deported Palestinians.
The Palestinians, the first of whom who were expected to arrive at a remote border crossing tonight, are only the latest among the Egyptian, Sudanese and other foreign workers ordered out of Libya in large numbers this mmonth.
But with other countries showing great resistance to allowing the Palestinians entry, the expulsion was expected to add considerably to the number of refugees stranded at a bleak border crossing between Egypt and Libya.


Green and Johnson Manage To Survive
Dallas Green, New Wave manager. Davey Johnson, hot commodity.
Those are two descriptions one could have bet would never be applied to the aforementioned managers.
They were both at Shea Stadium yesterday as Johnson's Reds and Green's Mets met in a doubleheader in the last gasps of the regular season, proving that an exile and a mastodon can, indeed, have the last laugh.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the views of Quebec's youths on an Oct. 30 referendum calling for separation from Canada referred incorrectly at one point to the side that is behind in the polls.
It is the side favoring separation.


Now David Frost Takes His Turn With Powell
David Frost makes his contribution tomorrow night to the Colin L. Powell book-promoting, candidacy-testing campaign.
It's an amiable encounter, with a view of the White House, that produces no revelations but that confirms General Powell's ability to be steadily engaging and calculatedly above the season's political squabblings. (A confession of reviewer identification: The French version of "My American Journey" is titled "L'Enfant du Bronx," which is what I am, too.)
"I'm being very, very careful," the general says early, and then proceeds to demonstrate.
He says that with his strong family and educational opportunities, he was not deeply hurt by racism as a boy in the Bronx, but came to identify with other blacks when he traveled the nation and the world as an Army officer.
That presumably leaves him with a commendable racial sympathy unmarred by a threatening racial anger.


Grady Sutton, 89, a Comic Foil to Fields, Hepburn and Lombard
Grady Sutton, one of W. C. Fields's favorite foils as a character actor in "The Bank Dick" and other films, died on Sept. 17 at the Motion Picture and Television Country Home and Hospital in Woodland Hills, Calif.
He was 89.
Mr.
Sutton was one of those supporting players whose face was familiar but whose name was often forgotten.
Although his roles were brief and he was seldom mentioned in reviews, he had his ardent admirers, beginning with Fields.
He appeared in more than 180 movies, also clowning on screen with Harold Lloyd, Laurel and Hardy, Katharine Hepburn and Carole Lombard, among others.


COMPANY BRIEFS
WAL-MART STORES INC., Bentonville, Ark., the nation's largest retailer, plans to cut about 1 percent of the employees at its headquarters to save money.
About 80 to 100 people are expected to be laid off.
DSC COMMUNICATIONS CORP., Plano, Tex., received a four-year $200 million contract to supply Nynex Corp. with fiber-optic communications systems.
The contract extends a two-year agreement signed in 1993.


MDS Health Group reports earnings for 3d qtr to July 31


President Casinos Inc.(PREZ,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Aug 31


CHRONICLE
TASLIMA NASRIN, the Bangladeshi writer who has been in exile since a warrant for her arrest was issued last year accusing her of defaming Islam, came to New York this week, still vowing not to be silenced.
Speaking in a fragile but determined voice at a news conference yesterday at the PEN American Center office, Ms.
Nasrin said: "I assure you I will uphold my ideals. I will never back down. I will not compromise with the fundamentalists who want to plunge us back into medieval darkness."


Congressional Roundup; Immigration Curbs Voted
Turning aside pleas that it would be helping to break up families, the House Judiciary Committee today approved a measure severely restricting the ability of grown children of American citizens to immigrate to the United States.
The 17-to-12 vote was largely along party lines; all those voting in favor were Republicans.


Convicted Killer Admits Slaying Woman, 78
In a move that surprised even his own lawyer, Reginald McFadden pleaded guilty to murder yesterday, telling a Nassau County judge that he killed a 78-year-old woman in a rage after he got lost walking to a railroad station.
Mr.
McFadden is the convicted killer who went on a three-month crime spree after he was pardoned by the Governor of Pennsylvania.
Only five weeks ago, he was convicted of rape and kidnapping after serving as his own lawyer in a trial in Rockland County.


Congressional Roundup; Two Chairmen Fail to Gain Committees' Support for Major Changes in Farm Policy
A serious crack appeared today in the facade of Republican unity as the chairmen of the House and Senate Agriculture Committees both failed to persuade their colleagues to back measures that would make the broadest changes in American farm policy since the Depression.
The setbacks underlined the difficulty that the leadership faces in trying to persuade rank-and-file members to resist pressures from a variety of special interests while meeting the budget's target of reducing Federal farm subsidies by $13.4 billion over seven years.


Wolverine World Wide Inc.(WWW,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Sept 9


Accounts
*
Uniroyal Tires, Greenville, S.C., owned by Michelin, to Trone Advertising, Greensboro, N.C., to handle its account, previously handled by Wyse Advertising, Cleveland.
The billings were estimated at $2 million to $3 million.


Taking Flight at Cape Canaveral


Primary Candidates, Shortchanged
Congress made sure there would be plenty of money for the Presidential public financing system in 1996 when it raised the voluntary tax checkoff a year ago from $1 to $3.
Yet thanks to an absurd accounting rule imposed in 1991 by President Bush's Treasury Department, the Federal Election Commission expects a shortfall in the Federal matching funds that candidates had hoped to receive in January.
The Republicans in particular are counting on this transfusion to get them through the critical first stages of the primary season.
The Treasury rule, in essence, requires the Election Commission to set aside enough money to provide grants for the party conventions and the general election campaigns before allocating funds for the primaries.
Everyone expects that there will be enough money for the entire program by next April 15, when the tax checkoffs will have replenished the Treasury.
But because all the money is not now in hand, candidates in the early primaries will be needlessly shortchanged.


Vallen Corp.(VALN,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Aug 31


Conference Upsets Arts Groups
Officials of arts groups say they are upset that the New Jersey State Council on the Arts is spending $266,000 on a three-day conference this week while their groups are having difficulty staying afloat.
"It's a lot of money to spend on a conference," said Elizabeth Murphy, producing director of the Passage Theater.
Nina Stack, a spokeswoman for the arts council, which is sponsoring the event, the Arts in Focus III, along with New Jersey Network, said the conference was needed to plan long-term strategies for the survival of arts organizations.
More than half of the money used to pay for the conference was raised from private donations, arts officials said.


Space Shuttle Is Set for 16-Day Research Flight
One of the longest space shuttle missions, a planned 16-day flight to conduct research in fluid physics, materials science and biotechnology, is set to get under way on Thursday morning.
The launching of the space shuttle Columbia, with a crew of seven and a 23-foot-long laboratory in its cargo bay, is scheduled for 9:35 A.M.
Meteorologists forecast a 60 percent chance of favorable weather.


Wausau Paper Mills Co.(WSAU,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Aug 31


Marcus Corp.(MCS,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Aug 17


As Bosnian Army Takes Serb-Held Town, Protectors Become the Protected
Each evening, in an apartment on Ibre Hodzic Street, three women, two Serbs and one Muslim, gather around a radio to hear the evening news from Sarajevo.
The three friends struggle, as they have for more than three years, to make sense of the latest diatribes unleashed by the Serbs or the Bosnian Government, the political agreements that might augur peace, and the advances and defeats that mark the ebb and flow of war.


A Disney Division Selects Foote, Cone
The Disney Interactive division of the Walt Disney Company in Glendale, Calif., has named the San Francisco office of Foote, Cone &amp; Belding to handle the creative part of the account for its Edutainment unit, which had been at Kresser Stein Robaire in Santa Monica, Calif., for the last year.
The billings have not been determined.


High Court to Rule if Lotus Could Copyright Commands
Accepting a case with important implications for the computer software industry, the Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether the Lotus Development Corporation had a valid copyright in the series of commands used to operate its pioneering Lotus 1-2-3 spreadsheet program.
The closely watched case is an appeal by Lotus from a ruling last March by the Federal appeals court in Boston, which held that the commands were not, as Lotus argued and as a Federal district judge had found in 1993, "literary works" entitled to copyright protection, but were simply a "method of operation" ineligible for protection under Federal copyright law.


Negotiators, Arab and Israeli, Built Friendship From Mistrust
There was a moment in the final, crisis-ridden hours of the negotiations on the West Bank that brought home to the heads of both the Israeli and the Arab teams what they had really achieved in their long months together.
It had nothing to do with the bitterness in Hebron or positioning of a roadblock in Jenin.
What happened was that the head of the Palestinian team, Ahmed Korei, known to everyone by his nom de guerre Abu Alaa, suddenly collapsed on Friday and was taken to a hospital.


Ameron Inc.(AMN,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Aug 31


Jones Talks to N.F.L. Owners
Jerry Jones, the Dallas Cowboys' owner, met for four and a half hours in Washington yesterday with Commissioner Paul Tagliabue, some fellow owners and several lawyers to discuss his rogue sponsorship deals with Nike, Pepsi and Dr Pepper.
The National Football League sued Jones last week, alleging that the deals violated its revenue-sharing compact.
Jones wants to break up NFL Properties, the licensing and sponsorship subsidiary, and let the teams market themselves.


Hidden Change in Foreign Aid Bill Sets G.O.P. Against G.O.P.
A disagreement has broken out among Senate Republicans over an amendment quietly stuck into the foreign aid bill that would withdraw most-favored-nation trading status to any country that does not back sanctions against the Burmese military Government.
While floor managers of bills often insert amendments that have unanimous support, several lawmakers criticized Senator Mitch McConnell, the Kentucky Republican who managed the foreign aid bill, for inserting an amendment, without unanimous backing, that could have huge repercussions.


Battle Over Bonanza For Drug Companies
An army of lobbyists has been enlisted to do battle in Congress over a provision in an international trade treaty that has created a windfall for the makers of patent drugs.
Millions of dollars in profits are at stake for a handful of companies because the provision extends the time they may sell their prescription drugs without competition from low-cost generic alternatives.
The immediate arena for battle is the Senate Finance Committee, which is considering amending the section in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade extending the life of drug patents.


Micron Technology (MU,N) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Aug 31


Scholastic Corp.(SCHL,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Aug 31


Hartco Enterprises reports earnings for 2d qtr to July 29


Samsonite Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to July 31


A Little Whimsy Never Hurts
WE'RE trying to reflect the kind of spirit our children brought into our lives," said Steve Vaubel, a Brooklyn jeweler, who, with his wife, Anita, designs whimsical drawer pulls like "Boaters," left ($55). They have designed 80 pewter pulls that work on doors of all kinds (or as coat hooks). There are hippos and hares, tepees and melting skyscrapers, and even court jesters. Available at Inside/Out in East Hampton, L.I.; (516) 329-3600.


Devils Sign Niedermayer to Three-Year Contract
One down, two to go.
That's how the Devils felt today after signing of Scott Niedermayer to a new three-year deal, leaving goaltender Martin Brodeur and Claude Lemieux, the most valuable player of the Stanley Cup playoffs, still without contracts.
Lemieux's case is in the hands of the arbitrator George Nicolau, who held a two-day hearing last week, and Brodeur's future is in the hands of Lou Lamoriello, the Devils' president and general manager.


A Third-Party Quest: The First Hurdle Is the Hardest
Getting on the Presidential ballot in California as a third-party candidate through the petition method has historically been so daunting that the last person to try was Henry Wallace in 1947.
He made it, but just barely, and it took him six months.
Now comes Ross Perot, who announced on Monday night that he planned to build a third party for an as-yet-undesignated Presidential candidate.
Mr.
Perot, with his billions of dollars and his instant army of volunteers, begins his quest with California, the toughest state in the nation to mount a third-party drive.
It requires the most signatures and affords the least amount of time.
He has less than a month to succeed.


New Plan Realty Trust (NPR,N) reports earnings for Year to Jul 31


N.F.L. Recalls a Compassionate Steinberg
Much of the pro football world -- players, coaches and executives -- paid a final tribute today to Dick Steinberg, the former Jets general manager.
Steinberg died Monday of stomach cancer at age 60.
Four buses carried the Jets' players, coaches, administrators and support staff from the team's Hofstra University base in Hempstead to funeral services here at Gutterman's Funeral Parlor.
Steinberg was well-liked by business adversaries and associates, and the 350 people at the services included officials from 13 National Football League teams.


BUSINESS DIGEST
S.E.C.
Seeks to Assure Investors of Benefits The S.E.C., 20 years after Congress mandated competition in securities markets, is seeking to make it work for investors' benefit.
The commission would require that stock markets give investors a reasonable chance of getting better prices than they often have.
One aim is to make sure that orders can be seen by other investors who might want to take the other side.
With today's fragmented markets that does not always happen.
Floyd Norris: Market Place.  [ Page D8. ] Time Warner to Shed Rap Label  Time Warner will sell its 50 percent stake in Interscope Records, the Los Angeles label whose violent and sexually degrading gangsta rap lyrics have stirred political controversy.
Consolidates OS/2 Work  I.B.M. will relocate 1,100 software developers and other personnel from Boca Raton, Fla., to Austin, Tex., consolidating OS/2 development in a single location.  [ D2. ] Du Pont Names a New Chief  Du Pont said John A. Krol would become its chief executive, replacing Edgar S. Woolard Jr., who will remain as chairman.  [ D4. ] American Express President Quits  Jeffrey E. Stiefler, president of American Express, abruptly resigned.
Analysts said his star had been waning.  [ D4. ] Magazine Enters Crowded Field  The New York edition of Time Out magazine, the London listings guide, has entered a crowded field, but the investors behind its $10 million introduction are budgeting about $1 million for a series of advertisements intended to mimic New York attitudes.


Essay; New Evil Empire
Security will be especially tight at the House Judiciary Committee's hearing room tomorrow morning, as a former Chicago mobster testifies about the penetration of organized crime into the booming world of "legitimate" gambling.
William Jahoda, under Federal protection, will get the camera attention, but the story will be the Federal Government's first step toward focusing the nation's attention on gambling, the new evil empire


Time Warner to Sell Stake in Rap Label
Time Warner Inc. said yesterday that it would sever its ties to Interscope Records, the Los Angeles label whose gangsta rap performers plunged the giant media company into a politically charged controversy over violent and sexually degrading lyrics.
Under the terms of the deal, Time Warner will sell back its 50 percent stake in Interscope to the label's founders, Ted Field and Jimmy Iovine.
The companies would not say how much Time Warner would receive for its interest, but executives familiar with the deal said the company would recoup its $100 million investment during the next several years.


House G.O.P. Plans Vote on Bank-Securities Law
The House Republican leadership tentatively agreed tonight to vote this fall on legislation aimed at eliminating the legal barriers separating the nation's banking and securities industries, Congressional aides said..
But the leaders also decided to strip the bill of a controversial provision that would have allowed banks to merge with insurance companies.
Insurance agents have vigorously opposed the provision, fearing that banks would eventually start selling insurance in their branches and drive the agents out of business.


School Board Seeking Inquiry Into Statements by Goldstein
When a mathematics professor formally asked Leon M. Goldstein, president of Kingsborough Community College, to approve the reappointment of a professor several years ago, Mr.
Goldstein responded: "What's in it for me?" according to the professor.
"I couldn't believe it," said Dr.
Bernard Eisenberg, the former math professor at Kingsborough who recalled the incident yesterday.
"I gave President Goldstein a number of reasons why he should approve the appointment. And he said, 'No, no, no. What are you going to do for me?'


Arrow International Inc.(ARRO,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Shoney's Inc.(SHN,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Aug 6


No Plea Deal Struck in Case Of Informant
The Justice Department said yesterday that it had not struck a plea agreement with Mark E. Whitacre, the former executive with the Archer-Daniels-Midland Company who became an informant in a Federal investigation of possible price-fixing at the company.
The New York Times erroneously reported yesterday that a plea deal had been struck between Mr.
Whitacre and the Justice Department.
Mr.
Whitacre has confessed to crimes stemming from money he obtained from Archer-Daniels and is cooperating with an investigation of the transactions, people who have been briefed on the situation said.
But no deal has been accepted.


People
*
Ronnie Cohen was named president of Ayer Direct, New York, a unit of N. W. Ayer &amp; Partners that was formerly known as Worldwide One on One.
She succeeds Len Short, who left to join Charles Schwab &amp; Co., San Francisco, as head of internal advertising and brand management.
Ms.
Cohen was previously an executive vice president and director of marketing and business development at Wunderman Cato Johnson, New York, a unit of Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. *
Anthony R. Brescia was named to the new position of group account director for the BellSouth account at Merkley Newman Harty, New York, a unit of the Omnicom Group.
He was previously an executive vice president and senior account director at BBDO Worldwide, New York, also part of Omnicom.


I.B.M. Plans to Consolidate OS/2 Development in Texas
In a move aimed at shoring up its struggling OS/2 operating system software, I.B.M. will relocate 1,100 software developers and other personnel from Boca Raton, Fla., to Austin, Tex., the company told employees yesterday.
The move will consolidate OS/2 development in a single location, something that many analysts said was long overdue.
Virtually all the software competitors of the International Business Machines Corporation, notably the Microsoft Corporation, develop their products in one place, while I.B.M.'s OS/2 efforts have been divided between Florida and Texas for years.


CHRONICLE
Whither Humphrey, the cat who lives at 10 Downing Street?
London newspapers and television newscasts were filled with reports this week of the presumed death and then the reappearance of Humphrey, Prime Minister John Major's premier mouser.
After hearing of the black-and-white cat's demise, officials at the Royal Army Medical College, half a mile away from Downing Street, realized that a cat that had wandered in there was in fact Humphrey, The Daily Telegraph reported.
On Tuesday night Humphrey, 7, was returned to his rightful home amid a blaze of cameras and microphones.


McCormick &amp; Co.  (MCCRK,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Aug 31


Official From Boston Chicken Named I.B.M.'s Chief Strategist
Running a big computer company is no different from, say, running a successful fast-food chain, or at least that is what Louis V. Gerstner Jr. apparently believes.
Yesterday, Mr.
Gerstner, the chairman of I.B.M., named J. Bruce Harreld, the president of Boston Chicken Inc., to be I.B.M.'s chief strategist.
Mr.
Harreld, who is 44, will oversee the company's overall direction and will report to the chairman.
He is the latest in a list of outsiders, starting with Mr.
Gerstner, who have joined the top ranks of I.B.M. in the last three years.


Clampdown at Border Is Hailed as Success
Border Patrol agents call it squeezing the balloon.
For the past year, aided by a big infusion of Federal money, manpower and technology, they have been squeezing as never before, choking off illegal crossings from Mexico at the busiest section of the border.
The immediate effects are unmistakable at the five-mile Imperial Beach section of the border that has historically been the scene of one-quarter of all illegal land entries into the United States and a symbol of the nation's difficulties in controlling its frontiers.


Counterfeit Clothing
In raids on factories, warehouses and shops in New York City and Los Angeles, customs agents attacked a Korean organized crime ring that manufactured clothing, handbags and sporting goods overseas for sale here under counterfeit labels.


Visitors to a Carnegie Without the Concrete
The Philadelphia Orchestra, the remains of several maple trees and a new season were on the agenda at Carnegie Hall on Tuesday night.
What this distinguished ensemble played was very nearly upstaged by what they were playing on.
I refer first to the phantom concrete substratum found under the stage this summer and subsequently removed, and then to the fresh new lumber that has been nailed over the void.
So if the repertory (Brahms Piano Concerto No. 1; Beethoven Seventh Symphony) and the conductor (Wolfgang Sawallisch) were tried and true, potentially new sounds that a new stage might project offered patrons a premiere of sorts.
Curious listeners hovered all evening over this high frequency or that one, buzzing happily among themselves at intermission.
It was like one of those bandage-removal scenes from hospital melodramas.
Will the blinded victim see again?
Keep unwrapping.


A Pooh Exhibition To Hum About
THE World of Pooh," an exhibition that opens today for a six-month run at the Children's Museum of Manhattan, is a cheery paean to A. A. Milne's classic Winnie-the-Pooh stories and poems, some of which are now 71 years old.
Mr.
Milne based his characters on his son Christopher Robin's chubby, cuddly stuffed bear and other toy animals.
E.
H.
Shepard, a family friend, drew the original folksy illustrations while visiting the Milnes at their house in Sussex, England.


Take Supplies To Mass Sites, City Advises
New York City officials offered a few words of advice yesterday: Everyone planning to see the Pope should bring food and drink, and everyone coming to Manhattan for any reason next week should not bring their cars.
Vendors will not be allowed to hawk their wares to crowds awaiting the Pontiff's Masses inside Central Park and at Aqueduct Race Track in Queens, so the faithful -- particularly people with medical problems -- should bring whatever they need to sustain themselves, Gus Pappas, a spokesman for the city's Emergency Medical Service, said at a news conference at City Hall.


Suspended Principal Returns
The high school principal who was suspended after he was quoted in a newspaper article as referring to opponents of his policies as "some nasty bastards" will return to work today, and no further disciplinary action will be taken against him, the Superintendent of Glen Rock's schools, Dario Valacarcel, said yesterday.
At a meeting of the Glen Rock Teachers Association yesterday, the principal, Lawrence Schein, acknowledged using "totally inappropriate language for which I am genuinely sorry" when he was interviewed for a Sept. 17 article in The Sunday Record of Hackensack.


Guilty Plea in Bank Holdup
Martin Ernesto Rivas, an illegal alien from El Salvador living in Scotch Plains, pleaded guilty yesterday in Federal court to robbing a bank in Westfield of $3,922 on July 21, The Associated Press reported.
He acknowledged, but did not specifically plead to, robbing another bank in Scotch Plains of $547 on July 18.
In both instances, he gave a teller a note and displayed what appeared to be a bomb, but it was only paper, tape and wire, said Aidan P. O'Connor, an Assistant United States Attorney.


Corrections
A chart on Monday about an agreement on the transfer of parts of the West Bank to Palestinian control misstated the deadline for the Palestinians to honor a pledge to remove from their charter articles calling for the destruction of Israel.
The Palestinians' commitment is to amend the charter within two months after the inauguration of an elected Palestinian council, not within two years.


Great Atlantic &amp; Pacific Tea Co.(GAP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Sept 9


Shoney's Inc.(SHN,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Aug 6


Celebrating an Instrument in a Night of Guitar
"New York Guitars," a new recording released recently by CRI, posits the existence of a New York school of avant-garde guitarists.
An argument can be made for the school's existence, but the 10 tracks, and the nine guitarists who appeared at CBGB's 313 Gallery on Tuesday night to celebrate the release of the album, don't make the case.
There was one central distinction among those who did play: some are self-conscious primitives; others are sophisticates.


METRO DIGEST
GIULIANI DEFENDS CHOICE FOR CHANCELLOR In an intensified defense of his latest choice of Leon M. Goldstein to be New York City's schools chancellor, Mayor Giuliani called criticism of Mr.
Goldstein's political connections and qualifications "cheap shots and misinterpretations."  [ Page A1. ] On campus and off, his critics say, Leon M. Goldstein plays all the political angles.  [ B8. ] There are times, given the public's notoriously short memory, when a history lesson is in order.
Metro Matters by Joyce Purnick.  [ B8. ] NEW YORK CITY  CHESS PASSION WHIPS THE BLOOD This is the week the bloodthirsty chess world has been waiting for.
The spokesman for the Department of Motor Vehicles bluntly contradicts her.
The next day, the spokesman is dismissed.


RESULTS PLUS
CYCLING  Briton Wins Pursuit
Graeme Obree of Britain won the 4,000-meter individual pursuit race in the world cycling championships yesterday at Bogota, Colombia, on the second day of racing in one of cycling's premier events.
Obree, 30, finished with a time of 4 minutes 24.182 seconds, beating Andrea Collinelli of Italy in the final at Luis Carlos Galan Velodrome.
Collinelli finished in 4:25.677. (AP) TENNIS  Rosset and Hlasek Lose
The two Swiss crowd favorites -- Marc Rosset and Jakob Hlasek -- both lost mirror matches yesterday at the Swiss Open in Basel.
Petr Korda upset the sixth-seeded Rosset, 7-6 (8-6), 6-3, in the indoor event, while Greg Rusedski beat Hlasek, 7-6 (7-2), 6-3.
The top-seeded players, Boris Becker and Yevgeny Kafelnikov, Davis Cup opponents last weekend, both advanced.
Becker defeated Byron Black, 6-4, 6-3, and Kafelnikov rallied to beat Guy Forget, 6-7 (6-8), 6-4, 6-4.
In other matches, No. 4 Thomas Enqvist beat Todd Woodbridge, 6-2, 6-3; No. 8 Stefan Edberg defeated Cedric Pioline, 7-5, 4-6, 6-2, and Jason Stoltenberg routed Mats Wilander, 6-2, 6-2. (AP) BERASATEGUI IS UPSET IN SICILY: Top-seeded Alberto Berasategui of Spain was upset, 6-2, 7-5, by Magnus Norman of Sweden yesterday in the second round of the Sicily International in Palermo. (AP)


The Pop Life
Letting It Out in the Lyrics
In the last five years, Ani DiFranco has released six recordings of tough, free-thinking, semi-autobiographical acoustic songs on her own Righteous Babe label and performed close to a thousand concerts.
Along the way, she has attracted a large and loyal following, one that has bought more than 150,000 copies of her records and purchased every ticket to her two-night stand at Irving Plaza, which ends tonight.
"I'm not being pushed by some major-label marketing machine," Ms.
DiFranco, who is from Buffalo, said by telephone from a tour stop in Massachusetts.
"I've been paying my dues since before puberty, when I was 9 playing in bars. It wasn't until a few years ago that I was finally able to show up at a concert without wondering whether anyone else was going to show up."


A Mets Story: Two Rookie Pitchers Triumph in Sweep
Robert Person thought his dream of pitching in the major leagues was finally going to come true Tuesday night when he was scheduled to be the Mets' starter against the Cincinnati Reds.
But a steady drizzle soaked Shea Stadium, forcing a postponement and making Person wait until yesterday to make his big-league debut.
While the extra day's wait was nerve-racking, Person made the most of the opportunity when it finally arrived by pitching seven strong innings and collecting two hits in the Mets' 5-4 victory in the first game of a doubleheader.


Agents Raid Production Lines in Queens for Fake Labels
In raids on factories, warehouses and shops in New York City and Los Angeles, customs agents attacked a Korean organized crime ring that manufactured clothing, handbags and sporting goods overseas for sale here under counterfeit labels.
Some items were smuggled here already bearing counterfeit famous brands, law enforcement officials said, and others came in legally, getting false labels here and then being sold on the streets.


Cavaliers Trade Price to Bullets
MARK PRICE, a four-time All-Star point guard and the National Basketball Association's career leader in free-throw accuracy, was traded to the Washington Bullets yesterday for a 1996 first-round draft pick.
The Bullets, who had the worst record in the Eastern Conference last season, had been seeking a veteran point guard to run their talented but young frontcourt of RASHEED WALLACE, JUWAN HOWARD and CHRIS WEBBER.


Bond Prices Are Steadied By a Strong Note Auction
Treasury prices recovered in late trading yesterday, paring losses after an auction of new five-year notes turned out better than expected.
The price of the 30-year Treasury bond slipped 1/32 , to 10329/32 , leaving its yield unchanged at 6.57 percent.
The yield, which moves in the opposite direction of the price, had risen as high as 6.64 percent in trading yesterday.


Culbro Corp.(CUC,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Sept 2


Transat AT reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 31


G.O.P. and Clinton Reach Deal to Halt Federal Shutdown
Leaders of the Republican-controlled Congress today reached an agreement with the White House on a plan that will keep the Government from shutting down for lack of money next week while they try to thrash out differences over the 1996 Federal budget.
The agreement provides a reduced allowance, for six weeks, to a drove of Federal agencies whose 1996 appropriations bills are either mired in Congressional debate or facing imminent vetoes by President Clinton.


National Data Corp.(NDC,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Aug 31


No Tyson, No King: Round 1 to Mathis
Mike Tyson missed his flight from Cleveland, Don King was at jury selection downtown in his Federal fraud trial, so Buster Mathis Jr. was left at a midtown restaurant to hype his Nov. 4 fight against the former heavyweight champion.
Buster Sr.'s 25-year-old progeny engaged in standard news conference opponent-baiting and vows of warfare.
He toyed with the expectation that he will be batting practice for Tyson.
"Good!" he said.
"Just say I can't fight. Write it. Tell Mike Tyson not to train for me. I love it."


Isles Keep Options Open on Redden, Top Prospect
Ask Wade Redden if he thinks he is ready to play in the National Hockey League right now and he will give you a forthright answer.
"It's tough to say," said Redden, an 18-year-old defenseman and the Islanders' second overall pick in this summer's N.H.L. draft.
"Some shifts go real good, others I make mistakes and things don't go right. I think I'm a little nervous now."


Lennar Corp.(LEN,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Aug 31


Safeguards for Drinking Water
The House Resources Subcommittee on National Parks, Forests and Lands will take testimony today on legislation to buy more than 17,000 acres of privately owned land in Sterling Forest, which straddles the New Jersey-New York border, to preserve water sources.
Water from the forest flows into reservoirs in North Jersey that supply drinking water to 1 in 4 New Jerseyans.
One bill would allocate $17.5 million for the purchase.
Another would set aside an additional $7.5 million.


Rutgers Gets Indiana Transfer
ROB HODGSON, the third leading scorer in New York State history with 2,532 points, has decided to transfer from Indiana University and attend Rutgers, where he will play for Coach BOB WENZEL as a freshman this season.
The 6-foot-7-inch Hodgson, who can play small forward and shooting guard, averaged 29.7 points, 15.2 rebounds and 3.7 assists as a senior at William Floyd High School in Shirley, L.I., two seasons ago.


Scholastic Corp.(SCHL,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Aug 31


CellStar Corp.(CLST,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Aug 31


Samsonite Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to July 31


Transat AT reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 31


Liberties; Grand Funk Railroad
"I like your pin," President Clinton said, pointing to my marcasite brooch.
"Where'd you get it?"
He said he had often prowled the backwoods of Arkansas to find antique jewelry for Hillary.
"When I was in my 20's, I loved cameos," he said, smiling dreamily.
"I gave Hillary a lot of cameo pins."


RCSB Financial Inc. reports earnings for 3d qtr to Aug 31


Wausau Paper Mills Co.(WSAU,NNM) reports earnings for 4th qtr to Aug 31


Reform of the U.N. Is Overdue
Secretary of State Warren Christopher, who can be diplomatic to a fault, cut quickly to the point in his address before the 50th anniversary session of the United Nations General Assembly this week.
To win back the ebbing trust and support of Americans, he told the delegates, the U.N. must reform its financial ways.
Mr.
Christopher urged the U.N. to eliminate outdated or duplicative agencies and programs, streamline its patronage-swollen headquarters bureaucracy and subject all parts of the organization to the scrutiny of inspectors general with the authority to end financial waste.


Simpson Trial Undermines 'Murder One'
In a case of life intimidating art, CNN's coverage of the closing prosecution arguments in the O. J. Simpson trial grabbed millions of additional viewers Tuesday night, some of whom were surely stolen away from ABC's "Murder One," the new drama series widely compared to the real-life Simpson case.
CNN's Nielsen rating between 10 and 11 P.M.
Eastern time on Tuesday was 5.1, more than 5 times what the cable channel usually scores in that time period. (With CNN, each rating point represents 641,000 households.)


Simpson's Lawyer Tells Jury That Evidence 'Doesn't Fit'
Johnnie L. Cochran Jr. repeatedly told jurors at the O. J. Simpson trial today that "if it doesn't fit, you must acquit." The chief defense lawyer was talking not just about an infamous leather glove, but the prosecution's entire case against the former football star.
Salting his closing argument with references to a "rush to judgment" and "obsession to win at all costs," Mr.
Cochran derided the prosecution's case as a pastiche of distortions, contortions and fantasies, with anything potentially exculpatory conspicuously ignored.
Its case, he said, could be reduced to two words, for which he offered definitions: "speculative" and "cynical."


Miller Draft Said To Stay With Bates
The Miller Brewing Company has decided that its Miller Genuine Draft beer account, with billings estimated at $75 million, will remain at the Bates U.S.A. unit of Bates Worldwide in New York, advertising executives with knowledge of the decision said yesterday.
The executives said Miller, a unit of the Philip Morris Companies, had decided to keep the account at Bates following a review that was narrowed to Bates, the St.
Louis office of D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles and Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York, a unit of the WPP Group.
The account includes light and red versions of Genuine Draft as well as the parent brand.


Gene Therapy Shows No Benefits in 2 Studies
Two rigorous studies of gene therapy have found that it failed to benefit patients with cystic fibrosis or Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
The diseases are caused by mutated genes, and in each case the hope was that if a good gene could be added to cells that lack it, it might correct the defect in those cells.


Folk-Art Award Winners Are Honored
A White House ceremony to honor the winners of the 1995 National Heritage Fellowship Awards yesterday turned into a concert that had the guests, including Hillary Rodham Clinton, on their feet, clapping along to the gospel music of Clarence Fountain and the Blind Boys of Alabama.
"When my husband finds out how much fun we had here today, he'll be asking why he wasn't here," said Mrs.
Clinton, who along with Jane Alexander, the chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Arts, handed out the awards for folk and traditional art.


Riley Pulls a Big Man Off Bench
Pat Riley, it turns out, wound up just like the rest of us.
Besides a salary-like per diem and 10 percent of the company stock, all he wanted was a couple of guys who could shoot.
In Miami, it has taken him less than a month to embrace the kind of unrelenting gunner he refused to consider for four years in New York.
Bob McAdoo happens to be 44, old even by Knick standards, so Riley did the next best thing.
He made McAdoo a coach.


High Court to Hear Case on Government's Refusal to Adjust Census
Entering a long-running dispute over the 1990 census, the Supreme Court today agreed to review the Government's refusal to adjust the census results to correct an acknowledged undercount that missed a disproportionate number of black and Hispanic residents of large cities.
The Court gave itself a head start on its 1995-96 term, which does not begin officially until next Monday, by adding nine new cases to its argument calendar.
Among the other new cases is an appeal by two Los Angeles police officers who were convicted after a Federal trial of violating Rodney G. King's civil rights and who are now challenging an appeals court's refusal to permit a reduction in their sentences below the level specified by Federal guidelines.


Fire Engulfs Warehouse in Queens


Classical, Strictly
COULD it be the influence of his cousin the Prince of Wales?
The designer David Linley says no, but his new wood desk accessories, including a $125 walnut column pencil pot, are strictly classical in inspiration.
English craftsmen make the pieces by hand in English hardwoods.
Available next month at Alfred Dunhill stores.
For information: (800) 776-4053.


Hebron Protest Proclaims an Independent City


INSIDE
C.I.A. to Discipline Officials Over Guatemala
Breaking with the past, the Central Intelligence Agency will dismiss, demote or discipline up to a dozen officers for shielding suspect agents and stifling reports of human-rights abuses in Guatemala, Government officials said.
Page A3.
Vulnerable Plan for Bosnia
The gulf between the content of an American peace plan for Bosnia and the situation on the ground is large enough to suggest that the process is increasingly vulnerable.
Page A12.
Turner Still Leads the Band
Ted Turner says he is content to play second fiddle at Time Warner.
No wonder.
Executives say he has a $100 million, five-year deal.
Page D1.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Science Times on Tuesday about a conference on genetics and criminal behavior misstated the political views of Support Coalition, a self-described "psychiatric survivors liberation movement" whose members participated in a protest.
It says it is nonpartisan, not Marxian.


Microsoft-Visa On-Line Plan Draws the Ire of Competitors
Microsoft and Visa International proposed an industry software standard for on-line payments and financial transactions yesterday, but opposition from key companies could lead to a standards war that impedes the rollout of electronic commerce over the Internet.
The standard, which is based on Visa's current credit-card transaction technology used in thousands of stores, restaurants and other establishments around the world, is intended to guarantee the security and privacy of payments and purchases made via computer networks.


Too High a Price
Right now, it would be worth a great deal to end the war between Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and the New York City schools system.
But it is not worth making Leon Goldstein chancellor.
Mr.
Goldstein, the president of Kingsborough Community College, lacks the stature for the job.
There is no evidence he is either the strong manager or educational visionary the school system needs.
Indeed, he is best known as a savvy operator who dispenses patronage through his campus.


Flitch Captures Lawrence And Heads Home for Winter
The great gathering of horses for next month's Breeders' Cup continued yesterday at Belmont Park, where the 3-year-old colt Flitch restored some luster to his career by winning the 103d running of the Lawrence Realization.
But the race was the 11th in a demanding year for Flitch, who will skip the Breeders' Cup and go home for the winter, as will most horses still in training.


Turner Pay Pact Said to Top $100 Million
Ted Turner claims he has no trouble playing second fiddle.
That's small wonder.
In the orchestra Time Warner is creating, second fiddle can pay a whole lot more than first violin.
As the new vice chairman of Time Warner Inc., Mr.
Turner is to receive a five-year compensation package worth well in excess of $100 million, according to several executives who are familiar with the details of the plan.


Vallen Corp.(VALN,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Aug 31


International Briefs; Alcatel's Stock Falls After a Surprising Loss
Shares in the French industrial giant Alcatel Alsthom fell almost 13 percent yesterday after the company said on Wednesday that it had an unexpected first-half loss and announced a restructuring program.
In Paris trading, the shares fell to 428 francs, from 489.7 on Wednesday.


Mean Season Starts With One-Upmanship
So now we are trapped in the Mean Season: Just when we want to be rooting for Don, Troy and Buster's kid, here come Steinbrenner, Jones and King to blot out the sun.
It is the mean-spirited nature of sports entrepreneurs not only to exploit their boy toys, but also to snatch their glory.
Which is why, after months of welcome silence, George Steinbrenner is suddenly granting news media audiences to hear him rip his ballplayers, a typical ploy.
If the Yankees ride the wild card into the playoffs, Steinbrenner will say he shook them into winning speed.
If they don't make it, he will have set up his scapegoats.
He is doing to individual players what he did to the entire South Bronx.


Dignity and Details
The accord is a combination of grand hopes and minute details that reflect the complexity of turning much of the West Bank over to the Arabs.
It acknowleges the "physical dignity of the Palestinian people," and specifies how many adzuki beans they can import from Jordan.
Article, page A13.


International Briefs; LVMH Earnings Climb
LVMH Moet-Hennessy Louis Vuitton S.A., the French luxury goods maker, said yesterday that its first-half profit rose 15 percent, despite higher corporate taxes in France and adverse currency exchange conditions.
The company, based in Paris, sells wines and spirits, luggage, perfumes and other products.
Net income was 1.46 billion francs, or about $298 million, compared with 1.27 billion francs in the corresponding period a year earlier, the company said.
Not including one-time items, profit from operations rose 10 percent, to 2.92 billion francs. (Dow Jones)


Beijing, Trying to Bully Film Festival, Misjudges
To the Editor:
The Chinese Government tried unsuccessfully to bully the New York Film Festival this week (Arts pages, Sept. 27).
Two films on China are scheduled: "Shanghai Triad" by the director Zhang Yimou is the opening night film Friday, and "The Gate of Heavenly Peace," an American documentary on the 1989 Tiananmen crackdown.
Insulted by the second, Beijing "asked" the festival to withdraw the documentary.
Having failed in that, Beijing then "asked" Mr.
Zhang not to attend his premiere in New York.
"Shanghai Triad" is the first film from China to open the film festival.
Most countries would understand that honor, but Beijing's confusion of art and politics transcends frontiers.
It is proving again that free expression is the greatest threat for repressive governments.


Cleric Who Said God Was His Broker Faces a Fraud Suit
The Rev.
Rufus Jackson claimed that the Lord was his investment adviser and had directed him to gather $1,000 each from 1,000 people, invest the money in real estate and earn huge returns.
It sounded divine, but, the authorities said yesterday, the scheme turned out to be devilish.
Mr.
Jackson collected more than $300,000, mostly from his working-class and retired parishioners at the Zoe Tabernacle Church in the Bronx, and invested none of it, Federal lawyers charged in a civil action filed yesterday in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
Instead, according to the suit, Mr.
Jackson used most of the money to pay personal and church expenses and to support various business interests, including a Southern food restaurant in Manhattan, a hot dog stand in the Bronx and a beauty salon operated by his daughter.


Home Video
Two weeks ago, rival electronics and entertainment companies announced agreement on a single content and production standard for the digital video disk (DVD).
For video consumers, the news reinforces the possibility that they will eventually watch movies on compact disks that resemble audio CD's.
Since some analysts say these disks, which are to be introduced late next year, could gradually replace videocassettes, here are some factors to consider.
First, DVD stores vastly larger amounts of information than the current CD-ROM.
That means a complete movie can be contained on one side of one disk (compared to several sides on laser disk).
The greater capacity also enables software makers to create multimedia titles with far more sophisticated audio and graphics, as well as movie-length stretches of full-motion video played on the full computer screen.


Diner's Journal
On its third night of business, I couldn't help wondering if Cibo, the restaurant on the ground floor of what was once the Daily News building, was full because this neighborhood desperately wanted a new restaurant or because the people who work here are so nice.
Cibo means food in Italian, so it is not surprising that the menu is a familiar Mediterranean blend of salads, pastas, grilled and roasted poultry and seafood.
While the room is modestly attractive and the prices are reasonable, little about the restaurant particularly stands out.


Top Court Begins Hearing School Desegregation Suit
So much has changed since a lawsuit was filed in 1989 seeking to link Hartford's heavily minority schools with those in its largely white suburbs.
Across the country, cities under Federal desegregation orders have sued to be released from them.
Connecticut's efforts to promote voluntary integration have been rejected by most of the state.
And the flight from Hartford's troubled schools has continued, even among the families whose children were plaintiffs in the suit, known as Sheff v.
O'Neill.
Of the 12 original children from Hartford still in school, 8 have left the city.


People
Ellen T. Goldman was named to the new position of chief operating officer at MWW/Strategic Communications, East Rutherford, N.J., succeeding Michael Lennon, who left to join Olympic Capital Partners, Seattle, as director for investment banking and operations.
Ms.
Goldman was previously chief financial officer at Cohn &amp; Wolfe, New York, a unit of Young &amp; Rubicam.
Fred Nelson was named to the new position of associate publisher for marketing at Worth magazine, New York, owned by FMR Corp.
He was previously an account manager at Time magazine, New York, owned by Time Warner Inc.


Tapping and Rapping Through the Night
Because the tiny Alterknit Theater at the Knitting Factory looks like a cabaret or coffeehouse rather than a conventional theater, it was wise of Karen Bernard and Jane Goldberg to present solos that resembled informal revue sketches when they danced there on Tuesday night.
Ms.
Goldberg delightfully combined tap dancing with stand-up comedy in "Rhythm and Schmooze." Ms.
Goldberg, who recently moved from New York to Miami Beach, was also a gracious hostess, serving the audience mango juice and Cuban cookies from Florida.


Keep in Mind
NEW YORK CITY URBAN STAR FEST, featuring talks on astronomy, exhibitions and viewings through large telescopes.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Tomorrow, 6 to 11 P.M. (Rain date, Sunday.) In Central Park, Sheep Meadow, 67th Street entrance.
Free.
Information: (800) 201-7275.
"SNOW WHITE AND THE EIGHT DWARFS," fairy tales told by Allynn Goowin.
Part of the Saturday Kids Series at the Queens Theater in the Park, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park. (Take the No. 7 subway train to Willets Point-Shea Stadium, where a theater van transports theatergoers to the park.) Tomorrow, 1 P.M.
Tickets, $6.
Information: (718) 760-0064.
"LETTERS TO A FOREST," the opening of a site-specific artwork designed by Melinda Hunt, acknowledging Prospect Park's restored woodlands through writings by Brooklyn schoolchildren and noted authors.
Tomorrow, 2 P.M., at the Long Meadow, between the Picnic House and the Ravine, Third Street entrance at Prospect Park West, Brooklyn.
Free.
Information: (718) 965-8999.
"THE LINCOLN ASSASSINATION," a new exhibition of objects and documents.
At the Forbes Magazine Galleries, 62 Fifth Avenue, at 12th Street, Greenwich Village; through Nov. 11.
Hours: Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Fridays and Saturdays (except holidays), 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.; Thursdays for group tours only.
Free.
Information: (212) 206-5548 or 206-5549.


Jets Try To Cure Bad Case Of Fumbles
The Jets, young, fragile and still trying to find themselves as a team, are beating themselves in many ways as they stagger through the first quarter of their season.
Their biggest problem is losing the ball, hardly a surprise to anyone who has watched them.
They have done it so often that almost half the opposition's points -- 48 of 102 -- have come after the Jets fumbled it away or threw it away.


The Spoken Word
A SPIKE LEE RETROSPECTIVE, American Museum of the Moving Image, 35th Avenue and 36th Street, Astoria, Queens.
The final weekend of a retrospective.
Tomorrow at 2 P.M., "Malcolm X" (1992) is screened, followed by a discussion with members of the film's production staff.
On Sunday at 2 P.M., "Jungle Fever" (1991) is screened, followed by a discussion with the film's special effects designers.
On Sunday at 5 P.M., an hour of music videos and commercials by Mr.
Lee close the program.
Museum admission, which includes screenings and discussion: $5; $4 for the elderly; $2.50 for children and students.
Information: (718) 784-0077.
"EDWARD HOPPER AND AMERICAN LITERATURE," City University Graduate Center, 33 West 42d Street, Manhattan.
A free event with readings and panel discussions featuring writers and professors.
Among those taking part are Joyce Carol Oates, Brian O'Doherty, Gail Levin and Morris Dickstein.
Today, 2 to 5:30 P.M.
Information: (212) 642-2684.
"WALT WHITMAN'S AMERICA," Posman Books, 1 University Place, at Waverly Place, Greenwich Village.
A reading by David Reynolds from his biography of the writer, and readings of Whitman's poetry.
Sunday at 3 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 533-2665.
PIERRE SALINGER, 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue, Manhattan.
Charlie Rose talks with the former Presidential press secretary, political adviser and author, who is now a vice chairman of Burston-Marsteller.
Sunday at 8 P.M.
Admission: $18.
Information: (212) 996-1100.
CARNEGIE HILL TALK AND WALK, National Academy of Design, 1083 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, Manhattan.
The history of the Upper East Side neighborhood will be discussed by the architects Steven W. Semes, Richard F. Sammons and Michael Dwyer; and by Henry Hope Reed, an author and a founder of the Classical America, an arts organization that promotes the classical tradition in the arts.
Sponsored by Classical America and Carnegie Hill Neighbors.
Sunday at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $25.
Reservations: (212) 753-4376.
"MAPS, COLLECT POND AND THE AFRICAN BURIAL GROUND," New-York Historical Society, 2 West 77th Street, Manhattan.
A talk on the excavation of the African burial ground in lower Manhattan, featuring Cheryl LaRouche, conservator of the African Burial Ground Project, and Claudia Milne, assistant archeologist of the Five Points Archeological Project.
Sunday at 1 P.M.
Donation, $3; $1 for children and the elderly.
Information: (212) 873-3400, extension 228.
NARRATIVE IMPULSE POETRY FESTIVAL, the New School for Social Research, 66 West 12th Street, Greenwich Village.
A two-day event, featuring a reading tonight at 8 with Joyce Carol Oates, Ana Castillo, Frank Bidart and other writers; and panel discussions and readings tomorrow from 1 to 9 P.M.
Admission: $25 for a series ticket, $8 for each event.
Sponsored by the New School, the Poetry Society of America and El Museo del Barrio.
Information: (212) 254-9628.
"WORKING THE PORT: A CONFERENCE AND FESTIVAL OF MARITIME WORK AND CULTURE," South Street Seaport Museum, 241 Water Street and Pier 16, lower Manhattan.
A daylong event with lectures, maritime crafts demonstrations and music.
Sunday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission to each activity: $5; $4 for museum members.
Reservations: (212) 748-8590.
"UNLEASHED: POEMS BY WRITERS' DOGS," the Drawing Center, 35 Wooster Street, SoHo.
A reading of works from the book, by its editors, Amy Hempel and Jim Shepard, and others.
Sunday at 3 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 924-3893.


College Fees And Tuition Increase 6%
College tuition and fees have risen by about 6 percent in this school year, according to an annual survey released yesterday by the College Board.
As a result, the annual cost at elite colleges and universities is approaching $30,000.
"When taken together with the expectation that Congress will reduce student grant and loan programs, many young people in our society face a deeply mortgaged future," said Donald M. Stewart, president of the College Board, a nonprofit association of 3,000 schools, colleges and universities.


Robitaille Gets 6-Year Contract
The Rangers secured the services of Luc Robitaille, one of the National Hockey League's most accomplished goal-scorers, into the next century last night when they signed him to a six-year, $19 million contract.
Robitaille celebrated the blockbuster deal with two assists in a preseason game against the Islanders but the Rangers fell, 4-3, in overtime at Madison Square Garden.


Art in Review
Bill Jensen  Mary Boone Gallery 417 West Broadway (near Spring Street) SoHo Through Oct. 21
Bill Jensen's newest paintings, which are some of his best, have the advantage of being less Jensen esque.
They show an artist jettisoning some timeworn riffs, among them a penchant for preciousness, subdued colors, tortured shapes and surfaces that equate awkwardness with sincerity, and reverential evocations of other artists' styles.


Hiatus for Ballesteros
STEVE BALLESTEROS is taking a five-month break from golf, hoping the pause will help cure back troubles and improve his sagging game.
The 38-year-old Spaniard, inspirational leader of Europe's victory over the United States last weekend in the Ryder Cup, won only one match in three at Oak Hill, wild off the tee and erratic with his iron play. (AP)


Michigan Passer Sidelined
Michigan quarterback SCOTT DREISBACH had a pin inserted into the thumb of his throwing hand Wednesday and will wear a cast for about four weeks.
Coach LLOYD CARR said BRIAN GRIESE, the son of BOB GRIESE, the former Miami Dolphins' star, would start for the eighth-ranked Wolverines against Miami of Ohio tomorrow.
Dreisbach tore ligaments and sprained the thumb during practice Tuesday. (AP)


With Tale of Racism and Error, Simpson Lawyers Seek Acquittal
A pair of O. J. Simpson's lawyers argued today that a combination of police racism, corruption and suspect scientific evidence offered jurors a rich tapestry of reasonable doubt, each of whose threads was enough to acquit their client.
They urged jurors to pluck at least one of those threads.
Indeed, they said, the jurors had no other choice.
Mr.
Simpson's chief lawyer, Johnnie L. Cochran Jr., told jurors that by setting Mr.
Simpson free, they would make themselves custodians of the Constitution and the conscience of the Los Angeles Police Department.
His colleague, Barry Scheck, then described the "contaminated, corrupted and compromised" physical evidence that was a "cancer infecting the heart of this case," and said the police planted some of that evidence as surely as former Detective Mark Fuhrman said "nigger."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14  ISRAEL AND P.L.O. SIGN ACCORD
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and Yasir Arafat signed an accord that transforms their reconciliation into a concrete plan to transfer much of the West Bank to Arab control.
A1  Jewish settlers in Hebron vigorously protested the accord.
A13  U.S.
FOREIGN POLICY SUCCESSES
News analysis: Despite President Clinton's early inclination to shun foreign policy, it has lately begun to provide him with a series of visible accomplishments.
A1  FIGHTING RAGES ON IN BOSNIA
The headlines may be filled with talk of peace in Bosnia.
But the impression at the front lines is quite different, with Bosnian Army troops battling their way toward the Serbian stronghold of Banja Luka.
A3  CANADA RETHINKS PEACEKEEPING
As the U.N. rethinks peacekeeping after its erratic performance in the Balkans, Canada is proposing a more efficient force.
A7  TENSIONS WITH CHURCH IN MEXICO
Tensions between the Mexican Government and the Roman Catholic Church are rising as the Government continues to crack down on priests who it says fan rebellion in the troubled south.
A8  A French mercenary led a coup in the Comoros Islands off Africa.
A5  Scientists said raw sewage killed 40,000 birds in Mexico.
A9  Buenos Aires Journal: Will tofu replace beef as a national dish?
A4  National A16-28  A TAPESTRY OF DOUBT
O.
J.
Simpson's lawyers argued that police racism, corruption and questionable scientific evidence offered jurors more than enough reasonable doubt to acquit him.
A1  HANDLING BIG SUGAR'S BUSINESS
The cooperative spirit usually shared by Congress and the sugar industry ebbed as deficit-conscious Republicans, but the industry still emerged a winner.
A1  KEEPING THE GOVERNMENT RUNNING
Conceding that the legislative pace had slowed in the last four weeks, Republicans pushed stopgap spending into place so that lawmakers could leave for a recess.
A1  A MOTIVE RECONSIDERED
The Boston police said the killing of a prosecutor who specialized in gangs might not have been the assassination they first thought.
A16  PRIVATE TOLL ROAD TO OPEN
The first privately financed toll road built this century will soon open in Virginia, offering commuters a quicker link between rural suburbs and Washington.
A16  ASPIRIN, ANGER AND HEART ATTACK
Regular aspirin use appears to reduce the risk of heart attacks brought on by outbursts of anger, researchers said.
A18  A MORE EXPENSIVE EDUCATION
College costs continue to rise, according to a survey by the College Board, with annual fees at elite institutions nearing $30,000.
A20  Metro Digest B1  GOLDSTEIN INQUIRY INCOMPLETE
The firm hired by the Board of Education to conduct background checks of its three finalists for chancellor said that it needed at least three more weeks to clear Leon M. Goldstein, the Mayor's choice for the job, because too many "serious questions" remained.
A1  Business Digest D1  Weekend C1-32  Philharmonic musicians let a deadline pass without striking.
C3  Books: Norman Mailer's biography of Picasso.
C1  Art: Mondrian retrospective.
C1  Leon Polk Smith.
C30  Art in Review C18  Inside Art C24  Jimmy DeSana's photography.
C21  French Renaissance drawings.
C26  Film: "Shanghai Triad." C1  "Moonlight and Valentino."C6  "The Big Green." C6  "Devil in a Blue Dress." C8  "Steal Big, Steal Little." C23  "The White Balloon." C28  "Dead Presidents." C28  Music: Glass's score for Cocteau's film "La Belle et la Bete." C3  David Bowie and Nine Inch Nails.
C3  Bachauer winner's recital.
C23  For Children C16  Theater: On Stage, and Off C2  "Too Jewish?" C8  Dance: Karen Bernard and Jane Goldberg.
C32  Restaurants C22  Television: TV Weekend D17  "The Germans." D17  Home Video D17  Sports B7-14  Baseball: Yanks aim to clinch.
B7  Steinbrenner speaks out.
B7  Basketball: Ewing labors hard to stay focused with Knicks.
B7  Columns: Araton on Angels B7  Hockey: Rangers sign Robitaille.
B12  Obituaries A29  Editorials/Op-Ed A30-31  Editorials  The missing man.
Defense budget games.
Open space for a megalopolis.
Letters  A. M. Rosenthal: Listening to Arafat.
Bob Herbert: Rescuing the truth.
Anthony Lewis: On another planet?
David Fromkin: We can go it alone.
We shouldn't.
Jude Wanniski: Bowing for dollars.
Chronicle B6  Crossword C30


QUESTIONS HOLD UP CHECK ON FINALIST TO BE CHANCELLOR
The investigative firm hired by New York City's Board of Education to conduct background checks of its three finalists for schools chancellor concluded yesterday that it could not yet clear Leon M. Goldstein, the Mayor's choice, because too many questions remained.
After several weeks of fact-finding that continued yesterday, the report outlined at least 11 inconsistencies, misrepresentations and potential conflicts of interest relating to Mr.
Goldstein's 24-year tenure as president of Kingsborough Community College in Brooklyn.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Market Jumps on Gains In Technology Stocks  The stock market rose on a surge in technology stocks, as buyers returned after Wednesday's early sell-off and late rebound.
The Dow industrials jumped 25.29 points, to 4,787.64, and the technology-heavy Nasdaq index soared 20.51 points to 1,047.05.
The S.&amp; P. index rose 4.83 points to 585.87.  [ Page D6. ] The dollar fell against most leading currencies, dropping to 99.22 Japanese yen, from 100.45 yen on Wednesday, and to 1.4200 German marks, from 1.4253 marks.  [ D13. ] Competing Bids for British Utility  Houston Industries and Central and South West, seeking a stake in Britain's consolidating electric-power industry, announced an agreement to acquire Norweb P.L.C. for $2.7 billion.
But a British water utility quickly topped their offer.  [ D3. ] Caremark to Buy Cigna Clinics  Caremark agreed to acquire the Cigna Medical Group, which operates 29 clinics in Los Angeles, from Cigna Health Care of California.
The transaction is expected to increase Caremark's 1996 revenue from management of physicians' practices to almost $1 billion nationwide, including about $600 million in Southern California alone.
Financial terms were not disclosed.  [ D5. ] News on Loan Lifts Mexican Stocks  The stock market in Mexico rebounded 1.64 percent after Government officials said that President Zedillo would tell President Clinton in Washington on Oct. 11 that Mexico would repay its $12.5 billion loan on schedule.  [ D3. ] Anadarko Plans to Drill in Red Sea  Anadarko said it would begin searching for oil in the Red Sea, using technology it developed in the Gulf of Mexico to find oil below salt formations.
Mr.
Garten had spearheaded the Administration's strategy to support American efforts to win contracts and business opportunities abroad.  [ D2. ] China Sentences Australian  James Peng, an Australian businessman who had textile and property interests in China, was sentenced in China on corruption and embezzlement charges to 18 years in prison and deportation.
Mr.
Peng's case has raised concern among business people working in China over the arbitrary nature of Chinese law and the dangers of crossing politically powerful officials.  [ D4. ]


A Judge and a Deadline: The Breast Implant Case
In his office at the Federal District Court here, Judge Sam C. Pointer Jr., who is overseeing the vast liability case involving silicone breast implants, steadily tapped papers bearing a settlement proposal the other day, as if ticking away the seconds until a legal time bomb was due to go off.
That unconscious gesturing was entirely fitting.
Developments in Judge Pointer's court in coming days will determine not only the immediate fate of claims by hundreds of thousands of women but also whether, and for how long, other courts will be burdened by them.


Book-Pricing Pact in Britain Near Collapse
Responding to the decisions this week by three of its largest members to discount their books for the first time, the trade group that represents most British publishers conceded today that it was unrealistic for it to administer and enforce the industry's voluntary book-pricing mechanism.
Publishers said the mechanism, known as the Net Book Agreement, was effectively dead.
Publishers still bound by the agreement, which has served to prevent books from being sold at discounts, are expected to decide in the next few days whether to drop out.


Art in Review
'The Magic of Play'  Main Waiting Room Grand Central Terminal Park Avenue and 42d Street Through Sunday
The cavernous spaces of Grand Central Terminal could use an infusion of playfulness, but they don't get much of it from "The Magic of Play," the photographic extravaganza organized by Diana Edkins and sponsored by Giorgio of Beverly Hills.
Despite its lighthearted theme, the show is remarkably somber.


Arafat and Rabin Sign Pact to Expand Arab Self-Rule
In a ceremony less emotional but more consequential than their stirring handshake two years ago, Yitzhak Rabin, the Prime Minister of Israel, and Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the P.L.O., signed an accord today that transforms their reconciliation into a concrete plan to transfer much of the West Bank to the control of its Arab residents.
At 1:16 P.M., under the gleaming chandeliers of the White House East Room and at the same dark wood table they had used for the signing of the first self-rule accord in September 1993, Mr.
Arafat and Mr.
Rabin signed hefty, blue-bound copies of the agreement.


Aspirin Diffuses Anger as Heart Risk, Study Says
Regular aspirin use appears to reduce the risk of heart attacks brought on by outbursts of anger, researchers said today.
The scientists said surveys of more than 1,600 heart attack patients at dozens of medical centers and hospitals across the country indicate that outbursts of anger more than double the risk of such attacks in the following two hours.


Getting to the Point


Inside Art
The Getty Goes Shopping
The J. Paul Getty Museum in Malibu, Calif., is dipping into its notoriously deep pockets.
But rather than buying Rembrandts, its latest multimillion-dollar shopping spree has been aimed at beefing up its holdings in 19th-century art, one of the weakest areas of the museum's collection.
Heading the shopping list is Monet's "Wheatstacks, Snow Effect, Morning," painted in Giverny in 1891.
This is one of the earliest examples in the artist's famous Haystacks series.
The Getty will not say what it paid for the sun-dappled landscape.
The work was sold to the museum by an unidentified European collector who had paid $8.5 million for it in 1989, at a Sotheby's New York sale of works from the collection of John T. Dorrance, the Campbell Soup heir.
The painting has been exhibited only twice, at the Galerie Paul Rosenberg in Paris in 1936 and at Acquavella Galleries in New York in 1976.
The Monet, along with several other acquisitions, went on view at the Getty yesterday.


Young Pianist's Prize Recital
Last year, Nicholas Angelich, a lanky 24-year-old from Cincinnati, took the Grand Prize in the prestigious Gina Bachauer International Piano Competition.
With his prize have come recital tours, appearances with orchestras and, on Monday night at Alice Tully Hall, a New York recital debut.
Expectations were high and the hall was nearly filled; the recital was a solid success.
Mr.
Angelich boasts a prodigious technique, but wields it with a poise uncommon in someone so young.
Yet his almost laconic virtuosity was not ideally suited to Schubert's late Sonata in C minor, a sprawling, complex and contrary work.
Mr.
Angelich's playing had grandeur and subtlety.
But too often this massively structured music seemed discursive and formless.
Even in the last movement, a relentless rondo with a recurring tarantella-like theme, Mr.
Angelich's playing, though limpid and tellingly voiced, lacked direction and taut rhythmic energy.


Arts Center to Be Privately Run
Officials of the Garden State Parkway voted yesterday to allow a private partnership to operate the Garden State Arts Center, one of New Jersey's premier entertainment venues.
Under terms of the lease agreement, the private operators, Pavilion Partners and Delsener/Slater Enterprises, will be expected to enlarge the amphitheater at the center to 17,500 seats by 1997 and guarantee the authority at least $1.65 million a year, the chairman of the Garden State Parkway Authority said.


Little-Known French Art: Renaissance Drawings
Just down the hall from the Metropolitan Museum of Art's ever-bustling galleries of Impressionist and post-Impressionist painting, a different kind of French art is temporarily on view in a show titled "The Renaissance in France: Drawings From the Ecole des Beaux-Arts, Paris."
You are forgiven if the term French Renaissance brings no familiar names or images to mind (though the Met did provide a preview of this work in its fine show of French prints last season).
In most art history surveys, the period is a foggy stretch between the great Limbourg Books of Hours in the early 15th century and Nicolas Poussin in the 17th.
It began almost a hundred years after Italy's great efflorescence and relied on imported Italian artists to get itself off the ground.


Police Search Woods Near Lyons for a Bombing Suspect


Reading Jefferson
To the Editor:
When John Patrick Diggins complains about whining over affirmative action (Op-Ed, Sept. 25), he manages to do quite a lot himself.
He supposes that he has "discovered" a contradiction between the first half of the Declaration of Independence that fosters egalitarianism and the second half that promotes a group-think of "victimology."


We Can Go It Alone. We Shouldn't.
The Republican leaders who dominate Congress, and some Democrats too, are openly skeptical of such multinational institutions as the United Nations.
Should they be?
Should the United States return to the path of isolationism that it left, supposedly forever, more than a half-century ago?
It should be said at once that "isolationism" has been a misleading term in American politics throughout the 20th century.
Some few, of whom Republican Senator Robert A. Taft of Ohio was representative, were genuinely in favor of political isolation from the rest of the world.
But not so the other so-called isolationists, who believed, as internationalists did, that the United States should play a major role on the world stage.


Tyson Starts Community Work
MIKE TYSON yesterday began the 400 hours of community service that he was ordered to perform after his 1992 conviction for raping a beauty pageant contestant.
Tyson, a former heavyweight champion, met with 15 troubled teen-agers at the Trumbull County Juvenile Justice Center in Warren, Ohio, in the first of more than a dozen sessions scheduled through March, said KEITH SMEDI, a psychologist.
Tyson has met with Smedi for the last six months as a condition of parole.


Teen-Age Brothers Charged In 5 Bias Attacks in Brooklyn
Two teen-age brothers were indicted yesterday on attempted murder charges stemming from five bias-related attacks in which a Hispanic man and four Asians were set upon in Bensonhurst, Brooklyn, all within a half-hour, four weeks ago.
A third suspect is still being sought.
Three of the victims were hospitalized after they were attacked on the morning of Sept. 2, including a 68-year-old man who remains in critical condition with a fractured skull, broken facial bones and permanent facial nerve damage.
He had been repeatedly stomped, officials said.


Settlers Protest in Hebron, Calling Israel Leaders Traitors
Denouncing Israeli leaders as traitors and murderers, hundreds of Jewish settlers and their supporters packed the heart of Hebron tonight in an angry protest against the agreement to expand Palestinian self-rule to most of the West Bank.
It was the most militant of a few demonstrations staged today by Israeli opponents of the accord, although the signing ceremony in Washington did not draw masses of Israelis or Palestinians into the streets in either protest or celebration.


Jury in Terror Trial Focuses on 2 Defendants
On their third full day of deliberations, jurors in the trial of 10 men charged with a terror-bombing and assassination conspiracy appeared to focus yesterday on the same two defendants they have seemingly concentrated on since deliberations began.
In notes to the judge, the jury in Federal District Court in Manhattan asked for testimony and a legal explanation involving the case of Ibrahim A. Elgabrowny and an exhibit involving El Sayyid A. Nosair.
They are two of the men charged with being participants in a conspiracy by a group of Muslim extremists that prosecutors say included plots to blow up buildings and transportation links in and around New York City and to kill those they considered their enemies.


The Joy, Jazz And Delicacy Under Those Mondrian Grids
YOU would have to be downright hardhearted, or simply allergic to abstract painting, not to be moved by the glorious Piet Mondrian retrospective that opens Sunday at the Museum of Modern Art.
If Mondrian conjures up in your mind the image of a prim technician, a maker of pictures as cerebral as they are austere, then this exhibition will set you straight once and for all.
The Mondrian who emerges here is an adventurer, a dreamer, a romantic, even, whose step-by-step evolution is one of the thrilling tales in the history of modern art.
The show tells this story with such lucidity and sensitivity that by the close of it, in the room of dizzying works Mondrian did in the 1940's, at the end of his life and in thrall to New York City and to jazz, you can feel exhilarated.
It is the feeling you have after completing a great journey, which in a real sense you have.
"Piet Mondrian: 1872-1944," the first major show in a generation to examine his career, is remarkable in several respects.
Retrospectives nowadays tend to be encyclopedic, often tediously so.
This one bucks that tide: not every daub Mondrian ever put to canvas is here, just the ones that count.
About half of his works are from the years before 1907, when he just started to come to grips with modernism, and though many of them are beautiful paintings, they beg the point.
The point of this show is his path to abstraction.
Which means it focuses overwhelmingly on the second part of Mondrian's life and leaves out all but a handful of related works from the first.
In any event, there are nearly 170 paintings and drawings in the show.


Commerce Official to Head Yale Management School
Jeffrey E. Garten, the Under Secretary of Commerce for international trade and one of the chief architects of the Clinton Administration's strategy on emerging markets, said yesterday that he was resigning to become dean of Yale University's School of Management.
In two years in his post, Mr.
Garten spearheaded the Administration's effort to use the country's political power to support American efforts to win contracts and business opportunities abroad.


From Clinton, Arafat and Rabin: Hope, Dreams and Now Peace
Following are excerpts from remarks by President Bill Clinton; Yasir Arafat, Chairman of the Palestinian Liberation Organization, and Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel at the signing of the peace accord at the White House, as transcribed by The Associated Press: PRESIDENT CLINTON
The agreement that now will be signed means that Israel's mothers and fathers need no longer worry that their sons will face the dangers of patrolling Nablus or confronting the hostile streets of Ramallah.
And it means that Palestinians will be able to decide for themselves what their schools teach, how their houses should be built, and who they will choose to govern. . . . .


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an obituary on Wednesday about Dorothy Dickson, a former musical comedy star, referred incompletely to one survivor.
She is the actress Jenny Quayle, a granddaughter.


Developers Bidding to Take Over Airport Cargo Systems
The Port Authority announced yesterday that it was considering proposals from 10 developers to undertake "one of the largest privatization initiatives" at any airport in the United States, a $150 million reconstruction of air cargo facilities at John F. Kennedy and Newark international airports.
"There is no reason for government to be doing what the private sector can do as well or better," said George J. Marlin, an advocate of privatization who was named executive director of the Port Authority by Gov.
George E. Pataki of New York in February.


The Provocative Work of an Abbreviated Life
The feeling of incompleteness that hangs over the retrospective of photographs by Jimmy DeSana, now at the Pat Hearn Gallery in Chelsea, is easy to explain.
DeSana, a leading figure in the East Village art scene in the 1970's and 80's, died of AIDS in 1990, at the age of 40.
But DeSana's work seems incomplete for other reasons as well.
In a career that lasted less than two decades, he produced pictures in a daunting variety of styles, announcing a flurry of provocative themes but never exploring any of them thoroughly.


Adorable Children Learn To Play Soccer, Poorly
Does a ragamuffin children's soccer team from a one-horse town stand a chance against a big-city outfit with a mean, high-powered coach?
That is the not-so-suspenseful question posed by "The Big Green," an innocuous family comedy about a crumbling Texas village that regains its self-respect through Little League soccer.
This being a Disney film involving sports, miracles are not merely possible, they are to be expected.
If the heavenly forces guiding the team that calls itself the Big Green aren't visible the way they were in "Angels in the Outfield," their presence is still palpable.


Diplomats May Talk Peace, But Bosnia Presses the War
The headlines may be filled with talk of peace.
But the impression here on the front lines, where Bosnian forces today battled their way toward the high ground overlooking Banja Luka, is quite different.
This morning heavy artillery, including tanks, hammered at Serbian positions surrounding the town of Mrkonjic Grad, about 40 miles from Banja Luka, Government troops said.


For an Outspoken Ewing, It's Back to Business
He misses Pat Riley, but he is prepared to move on.
He respects Don Nelson, but he cannot quite see the Knicks as a running team.
He wants Simon Gourdine to be fired and does not regret his prominent role in the union decertification movement.
With his laborious summer behind him, Patrick Ewing today candidly addressed the key issues surrounding his off season, including the pronouncement that he plans to continue playing after his contract expires in 1997.


Excerpts From the Defense's Closing Arguments in the Trial of O.J. Simpson
Following are closing arguments, excerpted by topic, by Johnnie L. Cochran Jr., the chief defense lawyer, and his associate Barry Scheck yesterday in Los Angeles in the trial of O. J. Simpson in the slayings of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman, as transcribed by The New York Times: MR.
COCHRAN Twins of Deception
We had started talking about the messages in this case.
We talked briefly about Vannatter and about all of his big lies.
His lies become very important because he's the co-lead investigator in this case.


In Schools Crisis, Union's Opportunity
Sandra Feldman, the canny and powerful president of the New York City teachers' union, has been complaining more than usual this fall: about Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's epic battle with the Board of Education over the choice of a new chancellor, about overcrowded classrooms, about having to negotiate a teachers' contract during the worst education budget cuts since 1975.
"This is a horrible, horrible situation," she said.


3 U.S.C. Players Suspended
Three starters for No. 5-ranked Southern Cal -- running back SHAWN WALTERS, linebacker ERICK HERRIN and defensive end ISRAEL IFEANYI -- were suspended for at least this weekend's game while the school investigates charges that they received money from an agent.
A U.S.C. spokesman, TIM TESSALONE, said there's no timetable for completing the investigation.
The first game the three players will miss is tomorrow's game against visiting Arizona State. (AP)


Stocks Gain, With Dow Up by 25.29
The stock market leaped forward yesterday, as buyers returned in force after Wednesday's early selloff and late rebound.
"Institutions did some end-of-the-quarter portfolio adjusting, and there was some program trading at the close," said Robert Ritter, chief technical analyst of Ladenburg Thalmann &amp; Company.
"That led to gains almost across the board."


Orchestra Defers Threatened Strike
After debating for 20 minutes past their own strike deadline, the musicians of the New York Philharmonic performed as scheduled at Avery Fisher Hall last night and said they would continue to weigh management's latest proposal for a new contract.
As the audience waited, unsure whether the orchestra would appear, the musicians met in a backstage conference room and, unable to agree, told the management that they would play and keep negotiating, as they did during their last contract talks in 1991.


Striving for Mile Worth of Cure
When they compete in the the Discover Card Mile on Fifth Avenue tomorrow, two previous winners will be trying to rebound from various ailments that had slowed them down.
In 1990, PattiSue Plumer set the women's record for the event (4:16.68), which starts at 82d Street and ends at 62d Street.
But in the last two years, she has had a baby (Jacqueline), got mononucleosis and suffered a permanent injury to her left hip.
In the last two years Plumer, 33, has not run a competitive race without physical problems.


Art in Review
Kerry James Marshall  Jack Shainman Gallery 560 Broadway (at Prince Street) SoHo Through Oct. 7
These four big paintings on unstretched canvas by Kerry James Marshall, a talented 39-year-old Chicago painter, are called "The Garden Project," a reference to public housing projects whose names include "garden." The works resemble collages: mixing words, drips, blotches and curlicues with images of the projects and their inhabitants.
One thinks of other artists doing multilayered images, like David Salle, Julian Schnabel, Robert Colescott and Julio Galan.
But Mr.
Marshall's sensibility, not to say subject, sets him somewhat apart.


Preseason Worry for Anderson
With training camp a week away, Kenny Anderson is concerned about Derrick Coleman's dissatisfaction with the Nets.
Coleman, the Nets' star forward, wants to be traded.
But Anderson, the Nets' star point guard, wants to play with Coleman, not against him.


Welfare Fingerprinting Finds Most People Are Telling Truth
In its first two months of operation, New York City's plan to root out fraud among city welfare recipients by fingerprinting them has found virtually no cases of duplicate claims -- fewer than one-third of 1 percent of all applicants.
Among the 148,502 Home Relief recipients checked in the city, the fingerprint screening system found 43 cases of double dipping.
In the other 35 counties in the state using the fingerprinting system, 17 cases of double dipping have been found among 24,593 clients.


No Headline
"The sight you see before you at this moment was impossible, was unthinkable just two years ago. Only poets dreamed of it, and to our great pain, soldiers and civilians went to their death to make this moment possible." -- YITZHAK RABIN, signing a treaty with the P.L.O.  [ A1:6. ] "Enough killing and enough killing of innocent people." -- YASIR ARAFAT.  [ A12:1. ]


Interviews With the Candidates: Voices of Two Who Would Be Chancellor
One candidate, Robert R. Spillane, would like the New York City schools to stop spending money on the distribution of condoms and instead use it to hire mathematics teachers.
Another, Daniel A. Domenech, would focus on bolstering the city's 50 worst schools, carrying forward the agenda of Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines -- only, he says, with a bit more political savvy and toughness.


2 Texas Utilities Seek a British Acquisition
Houston Industries and the Central and South West Corporation, seeking a stake in Britain's quickly consolidating electric-power industry, announced an agreement yesterday to acquire Norweb P.L.C. for $:1.7 billion, or $2.7 billion.
But a British water utility quickly topped their offer.
Norweb, which has been fighting a takeover attempt by the British company, North West Water P.L.C., accepted the bid by the American concerns, under which Norweb stockholders would receive $:10.50, or $16.60, for each of their shares.
But hours later, North West Water increased its offer to $:11.04 a share from $:9.75 a share.


Accounts
Gillette Co., Boston, to BBDO Marketing, Moscow, a unit of the Omnicom Group, to handle its account in Russia and other parts of the former Soviet Union, previously handled by McCann-Erickson Moscow, a unit of the Interpublic Group of Cos.
The billings were not disclosed.
BBDO will open an office in St.
Petersburg to serve the account.
Halo Advertising and Marketing Communications, Hauppauge, L.I., was awarded two accounts for which the billings were not disclosed: the Automobile Club of New York, Garden City, L.I., previously in-house, and the Long Island Aquarium, Bay Shore, L.I., as its first agency.


Good Twin and Bad Twin but Both Rich Twins
If anything could save the hackneyed story of good and bad twins -- one selfish, one selfless -- it might be the combination of Andy Garcia as the brothers and Andrew Davis, of "The Fugitive" and "Under Siege," as director.
Well, they are behind "Steal Big, Steal Little," and the stale result hints that the old plot must be irredeemable.
Ruben and Robby Martinez, orphaned as boys, were taken in by a wealthy couple who soon separated.
Ruben was raised by their adopted mother, Mona (Holland Taylor), a Martha Graham-style dancer who taught him to be generous and proud of his Latin American heritage.
She apparently also taught him to wear a scrunched-up, too-small brown hat at all times and to dress in oversized vests and baggy pants.
In this film's scheme of things, the clownish costume signals he must be a good person.


Buenos Aires Journal; Will Tofu Replace the T-Bone as a National Dish?
It is lunchtime at the downtown Yin Yang restaurant, and the owner, Perla Palacci de Jacobowitz, is carrying trays of microbiotic salads with tofu, vegetable-stuffed empanadas and fruit-sweetened breads to the tables of dozens of hungry customers.
"Opening a natural foods restaurant in a country of meat-eaters did not seem like the wisest thing to do, but it will pay off," Mrs.
Palacci said.
"People are more health-conscious these days, so there are more people coming in the doors."


International Briefs; French Rebate on Cars
Trying to improve auto sales, the French Government offered rebates yesterday of up to $1,400 for owners who trade in their aging vehicles for new models.
Owners can get the rebates for purchases in the next year if their old cars are at least eight years old.
French auto stocks jumped as much as 5 percent on the news.
The Minister of Industry, Yves Galland, said the measure was expected to generate sales of 150,000 new cars.
Auto sales have been in the doldrums since a similar program expired at the end of June. (AP)


House Medicare Plan Will Hurt All of Us
To the Editor:
"House G.O.P. Plan Doubles Premiums of Medicare Users" (front page, Sept. 22) lacks a clear statement of the fundamental, widely held complaint associated with that plan.
Imposing price controls on just Medicare and Medicaid will result in increased cost-shifting from public to private health plans.


Medicare Rivals Joust by Claiming Success
Democrats declared confidently today that they were winning the battle over Medicare, but Haley Barbour, chairman of the Republican National Committee, said they were "whistling past the graveyard."
The Senate Democratic leader, Tom Daschle of South Dakota, said moderate Republicans were now expressing doubts about the wisdom of cutting projected spending on Medicare and Medicaid by $452 billion, or 16 percent, over seven years, as demanded by the Republican leaders.


German Reunification, 5 Years After the Fact
The strains of German unification five years after the twain met are the subject of "The Germans: Portrait of a New Nation" on PBS tonight.
It appears that east is no longer east and west is not quite west.
Journalists, politicians, academics and just folks offer their feelings about the difficulties of reconciling a thriving, democratic West Germany with an East Germany that had been politically and economically polluted by decades of Communist rule.
Although the hourlong report does not quite live up to its title, it does explore the divisions that remain even without a dividing wall.


Market Place; A real estate investment trust for health care properties.
THE prices of many health care stocks have rebounded since the defeat of President Clinton's proposals to overhaul the medical insurance system.
But the Capstone Capital Corporation, formed in the midst of the 1994 medical care debate, is a health care real estate investment trust that appears to have been overlooked, some professional investors say.
Like any REIT, health care investment trusts own and finance properties, in this case medical properties.
Investors who are thinking about adding a REIT to their portfolios should seek one with a relatively high dividend yield and should have confidence in the security of the dividend, said Napoleon H. Overton, an analyst with Morgan Keegan &amp; Company, a Memphis securities firm.


International Briefs; Shares of Grand Met Surge on Speculation
The shares of Grand Metropolitan P.L.C. jumped in London yesterday on speculation that the company would spin off businesses or face a takeover bid valued at $:12 billion ($19 billion).
The stock rose as much as 39 pence, to 461.5 pence, before falling back to 443 pence, up 20.5 pence for the day.
About 32.9 million shares traded.


Ohio State Has Every Angle Covered
The low-key Heisman Trophy candidacy of Eddie George has developed an unforseen complication.
His average of 144.3 rushing yards is the seventh best in the nation.
From the first weekend of the season in late August, and his role in Ohio State's convincing Kickoff Classic victory over Boston College, George has continued the impact he made as a junior.
But as the Buckeyes prepare for their long-awaited game with Notre Dame tomorrow in Columbus, 59 years after the schools last met, George's Heisman credentials may not even be the most impressive on his team.
Terry Glenn, the leading receiver in the nation, has averaged 5 more yards a catch than George has with each run.


F.C.C. Given Clearance on Auction of Airwaves
A federal appellate court gave the Federal Communications Commission permission to proceed with its next big auction of radio frequencies for so-called personal communications services, abruptly lifting an injunction that had been imposed several months ago.
The decision means that the auction, which is to cover about 500 licenses reserved for small businesses and could generate billions of dollars in bids, might take place before the end of the year.


Findings Don't Account for Long Island's High Cancer Rate
The discovery that 1 percent of Jewish women whose ancestors lived in Eastern and Central Europe may carry a gene that predisposes them to breast cancer does not explain the high incidence of breast cancer in Nassau and Suffolk counties on Long Island, experts said.
The two counties have very high rates of breast cancer compared with the rest of New York State or New York City.
The New York State Health Department reports that from 1988 to 1992 the breast cancer incidence per 100,000 people was 112.6 in Nassau County and 108.6 in Suffolk County.
The incidence per 100,000 people in New York State was 99; in New York City it was 92.3.


AT&amp;T Chief Seeks to Calm Rank and File, Via Video
Hoping to calm tens of thousands of anxious employees, the chairman of AT&amp;T, Robert E. Allen, held a video teleconference yesterday during which he took questions from workers around the world about the company's plan to divide itself into three companies.
The questions were phrased in scores of ways, but most came down to one concern: who is likely to be laid off and when will the bad news come?


After Terrifying Ordeal, Finding the Courage to Go On
SLOWLY, Jeremy Brown is coming back to the house.
She loved it before.
It was her little retreat, an old beige country house with wide plank floors and a living room fireplace in a neighborhood of young families at the edge of the Hudson.
When she is here, the lights stay on, in and out, front and back.
The slightest night noises keep her up.
Usually, she ups and leaves.
Everyone says that's perfectly understandable, especially with Reginald McFadden still in the news.


Yankees' Wild-Card Goal: Clinch Before Sunday
The Yankees desperately want the chance to secure the wild-card berth by Friday night.
They would settle for Saturday afternoon.
But they do not want this competition to spill into Sunday because that could be dangerous.
If David Cone has to oppose the Blue Jays on three days' rest Sunday because the Yankees would have failed to eliminate the Angels by then, he will grab the baseball, probably wear Jimmy Key's uniform pants as he did on Wednesday and crank his bionic arm up again to pitch the most important game of the season.
It would be the Yankees' most important game since 1981.


Rockefeller Center Trust Gets New Plan
Gotham Partners L.P., an investment firm that holds a 5.6 percent stake in Rockefeller Center Properties Inc., proposed a plan yesterday to recapitalize the real estate investment trust as it prepares to take ownership of Rockefeller Center.
Gotham's proposal, which has the support of several of the trust's other large shareholders, would use a rights offering to raise at least $105 million and combine that with a senior loan of at least $350 million to replace some of the trust's high-cost debt and give it the financial wherewithal to operate the property.


French Premier Sees His Approval Rating Sink
As Prime Minister of France, Alain Juppe has been too considerate of other people's salaries, many economists say, showing a remarkable reluctance to squeeze the pay of civil servants to reduce a swollen deficit in the Government budget.
As Deputy Mayor of Paris in charge of the city's finances in early 1993, Mr.
Juppe was similarly solicitous -- of his son's ability to pay $1,400 a month rent for his city-owned apartment.


Chemical Wins Most Top Posts In Chase Merger
The chemistry seems to be just right for executives of the Chemical Banking Corporation in its forthcoming merger with the Chase Manhattan Corporation.
The two banking organizations released a list of top management appointments in the combined bank yesterday in which people from Chemical dominate with 32 of the 54 positions.


Corrections
A sports article on Wednesday about the female kicker on the Marlboro High School football team in New Jersey misidentified the magazine in which the volleyball star Gabriella Reece appeared as a cover subject.
It was Outside, not Outdoors.


Abroad at Home; On Another Planet?
Do the members of the Republican majority in Congress want to swim at beaches polluted by raw sewage?
Do they want to live in a country with forests stripped bare, birds disappearing, trout and salmon gone?
Do they want toxic wastes draining into sources of the water they drink?
Those would be some of the results of environmental legislation that the Republicans are pressing toward enactment.
And one has to wonder why they want to do such things to themselves.
For in this area, unlike others, they would be among the victims of their own policy -- unless they plan to live on another planet.


The Missing Man
With one conspicuous exception, the key players in the long, painful search for peace in the Middle East gathered yesterday in the White House East Room to celebrate the biggest and boldest step so far toward coexistence between Israel and the Palestinians.
This historic assemblage included President Clinton and, flanking him, Yitzhak Rabin, the Israeli Prime Minister; Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. chairman; President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, and King Hussein of Jordan.
They were the most prominent witnesses to the signing of a new agreement transferring essential military and political control over most Arab residents of the West Bank into Palestinian hands.
If this agreement works, it will lay the foundation for a settlement between the two peoples at the heart of the Middle East conflict.


Prosecutor Is Indicted On 33 Counts
A county prosecutor in New Jersey who has long cultivated an image as a hard-nosed crime-fighter was accused today of being just as crooked as some of the people he has put behind bars.
Federal officials charged that he had committed an array of misdeeds in his 13 years in office, from tax evasion to blackmail to forging documents so that his son could receive financial aid for college.
The Prosecutor, Nicholas L. Bissell Jr. of Somerset County, was named in a 33-count Federal indictment that portrayed him as a law enforcement official who abused his considerable authority and had little regard for the law in private dealings.
Two of the charges center on Mr.
Bissell's use of civil forfeiture laws to seize property from suspects, which he has done more often than other prosecutors in the state, sparking criticism and in one case a civil lawsuit.


Marshall Erdman, 72, Producer Of Prefabricated Structures, Dies
Marshall Erdman, a builder whose first big project was a Frank Lloyd Wright church without a steeple, and who became a major producer of prefabricated structures, died on Sunday in a hospital in Madison, Wis., his hometown.
He was 72.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


COMPANY BRIEFS
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORP., Armonk, N.Y., said it planned to sell up to its entire 14.6 percent stake in Marcam Corp., Newton, Mass., a software maker.
The stake was worth about $25 million at yesterday's closing stock price.
MCDONNELL DOUGLAS CORP., St.
Louis, has received a $315 million Navy contract to begin work on 12 T-45 Goshawk training aircraft and support systems.


Hospital Adds Day of Care For Mothers
Alarmed by medical problems faced by newborns and their mothers when they are released 24 hours after birth, Greenwich Hospital in Connecticut announced yesterday that it would provide mothers and babies with an extra day of hospital care at no cost, even if insurance companies refused reimbursement.
Greenwich Hospital officials said they believed that theirs was the only hospital in the nation to make such an offer, and they estimated that the policy would cost the hospital several hundred thousand dollars a year.


Of a Girl and Her Goldfish
It is an hour and a half before a new year begins in Teheran (on March 21), and the city is poised for celebration.
A stern and adorable 7-year-old girl named Razieh (Aida Mohammadkhani) is pouting about not having the right goldfish for this occasion.
The fish at home are skinny.
She wants a fat one with better fins.
So she wheedles her mother into giving her money for this purchase, but then the money is accidentally lost.
Razieh enlists the help of several strangers to try retrieving it from beneath an iron grate.
And that's really all there is to "The White Balloon," a tiny, improbably charming Iranian film directed with lovely precision by Jafar Panahi.
Mr.
Panahi's methods are so effective, in fact, that there's reason to wish his film had more of a destination.
Appearing to escalate as Razieh follows her winding path to that goldfish, and as the story unfolds in real time until the dawn of the new year, the film finally loses momentum and falls back upon the open-ended, anecdotal manner of a short story.
Still, it's a short story that can be enjoyed intently all the way through.


Steinbrenner Lashes Out At Lack of Fans in Stands
As the Yankees approach what would be their first post-season appearance in 14 years, George Steinbrenner expressed concern that the surging team that miraculously altered the path of its season in the last month might not be sufficiently supported by the public if the playoffs descend upon Yankee Stadium next week.
Since Steinbrenner has often voiced his disdain for the Stadium's locale and is being courted to relocate the Yankees, his comments were surely politically motivated in part.
But the owner was clearly perturbed with the crowds during the last homestand and implored fans to support the Yankees if the post-season opens in the Bronx.


Sports of The Times; Seeking An Angel in The Outfield
ROGER ANGELL weeps not for the desperate California Angels fan.
Ken Burns spares no film on their staggering dive from atop the American League West.
The baseball romantics have more traditional engagements this fall.
They have Boston to worry about, and Cleveland, and Don Mattingly in New York.
Having just moved three thousand miles from home, far from those who would gladly share his pain, Tracy Tucker turned on the television set and prepared to suffer alone.


Egos and Outlaws: Like Attracts Like
PORTRAIT OF PICASSO AS A YOUNG MAN An Interpretive Biography  By Norman Mailer
400 pages. Atlantic Monthly Press. $35.
IT'S easy to understand why Norman Mailer would want to write a biography of Picasso.
The painter, after all, can be seen as a kind of artistic role model for Mr.
Mailer, something that helps explain much of what is wrong with this ham-handed, derivative and highly subjective new biography.


Claim Filed Against Officers
The companion of a man who was killed by the police after their car was pulled over on Monday night filed notice yesterday in Superior Court that he would make a claim against the city and the two officers involved in the fatal shooting.


Professor Denies Abuse Claim
The only tenured professor ever to be dismissed by Rutgers University denied in Federal District Court yesterday that he had abused and exploited laboratory technicians, as the university contended.
Joseph San Filippo, who was dismissed from the chemistry department in 1988, testified in his lawsuit against the university that he offered to pay for the yardwork the men did at his Highland Park home, but they would not take money from him.
His lawyer, Leon Friedman, said the professor was dismissed because he was a whistleblower who spoke out against unsafe laboratory conditions.


A Black Gumshoe Who's Also Noir
Easy Rawlins, the warmly charismatic hero of "Devil in a Blue Dress," takes his first detective work because he's jobless and needs money to make his mortgage payments.
But when Denzel Washington, who plays Easy, visits the office of a wealthy businessman, he looks as if he's stepped off the cover of a fashion magazine.
Anyone care to complain about that?
The role of Easy looks as tailor-made for Mr.
Washington as his suit, and it shows off the full effect of this actor's movie-star dazzle.
In a career dotted with generic roles and noble ones, he's never had a part that fit him better.


Art in Review
Allen Ginsberg 'Photographs'  Tibor de Nagy Gallery 41 West 57th Street Through Oct. 7
These black-and-white photographs by the poet Allen Ginsberg are a perfect warm-up for the Whitney's coming Beat Culture show, in which his work will appear.
Now almost 70, he has been taking pictures for more than 40 years, and his images of friends and lovers from the 1950's -- Neal Cassady and Jack Kerouac, Gary Snyder dressed as a Buddhist monk, Gregory Corso looking like a satyr -- have a glamorous iconic sheen.


Rehearing the Philip Glass Score for 'La Belle et la Bete"
In his reworking of the 1946 Jean Cocteau film "La Belle et la Bete," Philip Glass has, in effect, turned down the sound and replaced it with a soundtrack of his own.
Cocteau's magical pictures are intact: the gates that open by themselves, the candelabra held by human arms, the terra-cotta wall ornaments with eyes that move and the wrenching performances by Jean Marais, Josette Day and Raoul Marco are still there to capture the imagination.
So is Cocteau's script, which Mr.
Glass has set to music, also providing an accompaniment and underpinning that draws on his trademark vocabulary of arpeggiations, chromatic and modal scale figures and looping chord sequences.
When this version of the "Beauty and the Beast" fable had its New York premiere at the Brooklyn Academy of Music last season, its novelty may have overshadowed the chemistry between the music and the film.
Since then, a recording of the score, released by Nonesuch Records, proved that the music stands remarkably well on its own.
And now the piece is back for a second hearing, this time at the Kaye Playhouse at Hunter College (68th Street between Lexington and Park Avenues), where it opened on Wednesday evening and is to run through Oct. 7.


Lives Are at Stake; So Are Postal Services and Gas Tanks
The Israeli-Palestinian agreement signed today in Washington consists of 23 pages of articles followed by 284 pages of annexes and appendixes that decree, among innumerable other things, that Palestinian children will be vaccinated against measles at the age of 6, and specify how many adzuki beans the Palestinians will be allowed to import from Jordan.
Of course, appending lists and explanations is common practice.
But how many would include a pledge that the Israeli military will respect "the moral and physical dignity of the Palestinian people," or a provision that the police station in Jalqamus will have 45 police officers, 2 vehicles, 8 rifles and 15 pistols?


Budget Ax Misses in Swing at Sugar-Crop Aid
For decades, lobbyists and lawyers for the nation's sugar growers and refiners gathered behind closed doors at elegant hotels here to draft Federal laws keeping sugar prices high, then sent their deals to a pliant Congress for quick passage in the middle of the night.
This year, with Republicans eager to balance the budget and deregulate agriculture, the old-fashioned collaboration broke down for a time, and it seemed that the sugar program might actually be repealed.


Networks Bang the Drums For TV's New Fall Lineups
Could the marketing efforts for the 1995-96 television season outlast some of the shows being promoted?
Maybe that's an exaggeration, for no network has announced any cancellations -- yet.
But in a season so crowded with new prime-time series that no one can agree whether there are 42 or 43, the frenetic promotional ploys have reached record levels of extensiveness and intrusiveness, particularly those aimed at the demographically desirable audience of consumers ages 18 to 49.


J. B. Calhoun, 78, Researcher On Effects of Overpopulation
Dr.
John B. Calhoun, an ecologist who saw in the bleak effects of overpopulation on rats and mice a model for the future of the human race, died on Sept. 7 while on vacation in Hanover, N.H.
He was 78 and lived in Bethesda, Md.
The cause was a stroke after a mild heart attack, said Kathleen Kerr, a colleague who disclosed the death this week.


NATO Presents Plan to Expand Alliance
NATO today set out its vision of expansion for Central European and other countries eager to join the alliance, but was apparently unable to reassure Russia that expansion would not recreate the East-West divisions of the cold war.
"What we have seen so far is not enough for us to change our minds about the prospects of NATO enlargement," Vitaly I. Churkin, the Russian Ambassador to Belgium, said after receiving copies of a 28-page study and hearing a two-hour presentation at NATO headquarters.


Glenn Quietly Keeps the Giants' Defensive Backfield in the Swing of Things
He is in the Giants' locker room, practicing his golf swing with what looks like a 9-iron, when a camera crew approaches for an interview.
No offense, safety Vencie Glenn says, but he does not do interviews before a game.
He is polite and he smiles.
When the crew disappears, he goes back to working on his swing.
He may have only limited discussions with the news media, but so what, Glenn feels, he is not trying to get on Oprah.
Glenn, because of his veteran leadership and the respect he receives from the players, has become a major influence in the locker room.
Not necessarily because of what he says but because of his actions on the field and his intense study habits.


Corrections
A report in the Daily Briefing column in New Jersey copies yesterday referred incorrectly to the cost of a conference this week sponsored by the New Jersey State Council of the Arts.
It is $266,000 for the conference, plus two years of planning for the survival of arts organizations, according to Nina Stack, a council spokeswoman; it is not $266,000 for the conference alone.


Facing Widowhood, With Helpful Friends
Anyone who stays until the end of "Moonlight and Valentino" will be rewarded with a graveyard scene that takes the cake among recent movies in flaunting a hammy excess bordering on camp.
After nearly two hours of moping and bickering, the four main characters -- Rebecca (Elizabeth Perkins), her younger sister Lucy (Gwyneth Paltrow), her former stepmother Alberta (Kathleen Turner) and her best friend, Sylvie (Whoopi Goldberg) -- paint tribal symbols on their faces and troop into a cemetery at midnight to perform a bogus ritual at the gravestone of Rebecca's dead husband.
Once they have poured out their hearts and Rebecca has shouted a final desperate "I love you," the night sky miraculously brightens into daylight and the heavens respond with a celestial cloudburst, complete with thunder and lightning.
Looking like the three witches from "Macbeth" plus one, the women stand there in a state of sopping, bedraggled euphoria as the final credits begin to roll.


Anand Blunder Gives Kasparov Victory and 6-5 Lead in Match
A tranquil, roughly even game that seemed to be headed for an inevitable draw was shockingly interrupted yesterday when Viswanathan Anand made a devastating blunder and resigned on the spot.
It was the second consecutive loss for the 25-year-old Indian challenger, and for the first time tipped the world championship match in Gary Kasparov's favor, 6-5.
As the game was rocking along quietly, at Move 19, Kasparov offered a draw and Anand refused it.
He wanted to win.
Afterward, Kasparov said: "I did the same thing in one of my match games with Anatoly Karpov. He turned down my draw offer, too, and then I beat him."


Russia's Soul Lives On in Cathedral
To the Editor:
"Moscow Resurrecting Icon of Its Past Glory" (front page, Sept. 26) lacks the historical and religious perspective of what the Russian Orthodox Church means to Russia.
From A. D. 988 to 1917 the two were inextricably intertwined.
For good or ill, Russia was a "church-state" with a "third-Rome" messianic mission.


Corrections
An entry in the Addenda listing on the Media Business page yesterday, about William F. Bondlow joining McKinney &amp; Silver in Raleigh, N.C., misstated the status of Home magazine, where Mr.
Bondlow was once publisher.
Home is still publishing; it has not closed.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
4.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.25
6.45
4.77
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.26
5.24
4.55
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.35
5.35
5.21
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.26
6.26
7.61
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.59
6.57
7.84
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.53
7.57
8.69
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.13
6.15
6.57
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Restaurants
The entrance to Aquavit is a series of descents.
Steps outside lead to stairs inside.
These take you through a bar and down another set of steps.
After this journey downward, the soaring space of the dining room bursts upon you with almost physical force.
Looking up, you find yourself in an atrium where the ceiling seems to have disappeared.
Surrounded by glass and sky, Aquavit occupies a magical space filled with changing light and the gentle sound of falling water.
The restaurant has made its own perilous journey.
After an auspicious beginning, the restaurant descended to a lackluster period when the decor seemed to be the main attraction.
Then, things were looking up until the chef, Jan Sendel, died unexpectedly last winter, plunging the restaurant into turbulence.
But that has passed: now the waterfall has been restored, the staff has been spruced up and a new chef, Marcus Samuelsson, has taken over the kitchen.
Aquavit, judging by four recent visits, is living up to its early promise.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Tour Rookie Leads by a Shot
Bill Porter, a PGA Tour rookie, shot a seven-under-par 65 yesterday and held a one-shot lead after the first round of the Buick Challenge at Pine Mountain, Ga.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL REPORT
Hofstra
The Flying Dutchmen, ranked No. 19 among the nation's 117 Division I-AA teams, go for their fourth straight victory against Liberty tonight in the newly expanded Hofstra Stadium at Hempstead, L.I.


Anadarko Planning to Drill In Red Sea Salt Formations
Using advanced technology developed in the Gulf of Mexico, the Anadarko Petroleum Corporation said yesterday that it would begin searching for oil in the Red Sea, an area where few wells have been drilled but where formations have intrigued the industry.
Anadarko plans to invest as much as $28.5 million in the biblical area in the next seven years because salt structures in the Red Sea appear similar to those in the Gulf of Mexico.


Senate Panel Confirms a Judge
Stephen Orlofsky of Cherry Hill sailed through a confirmation hearing before the Senate Judiciary Committee yesterday on his nomination to the Federal District Court bench in Camden.
Mr.
Orlofsky, a former Federal magistrate, is a partner in the Cherry Hill office of a Philadelphia law firm.


For Children
'Working Waterfront Day'  Pier 62 at 23d Street Chelsea (212) 533-7275 Recommended for all ages Tomorrow
To draw more Manhattanites to the west coast of their island, the Hudson River Park Conservancy, the Chelsea Piers and the Chelsea Waterside Park Association have invited some ships to Pier 62.
Not just any old ships, but those that protect, clean and patrol New York waterways.
Children will be able to board the ships, which will be moored at the pier.


Bowie and Nails Mesh (Sometimes)
David Bowie and Nine Inch Nails are not just touring together but collaborating as well.
They shared the stage for a half hour during their show at the Brendan Byrne Arena on Wednesday night; while their two bands meshed, Mr.
Bowie and Nine Inch Nails's Trent Reznor traded verses on each other's songs.
For the 29-year-old Mr.
Reznor, it was a public homage: Mr.
Bowie's albums from the 1970's showed him ways to create edgy songs that blend pop melody, apocalyptic drama and strange noise.
And for the 48-year-old Mr.
Bowie, it was a canny tactic, a way to fill arenas again and reach younger listeners after a decade of commercial misfires.
But instead of using the current tour to remind listeners of his golden years, Mr.
Bowie is introducing a large portion of brand-new material, a quixotic step for his first arena tour in five years.


Could This Be You?
In the business of selling life insurance, death is making a comeback.
Since the 1980's, when talk about mortality was supplanted by charts showing high interest rates, insurers have focused their sales pitches on the value of policies as an investment that can grow without being taxed.


Girl, 16, Is Accused of Throwing Her Newborn Baby to Her Death
No one knew Geneva Dickerson, 16, was pregnant.
In fact, she told police investigators that she didn't know it herself.
Throughout the summer, she wore baggy clothes and hung with friends in the hallways and around the courtyard of their sprawling housing project in Queens.
But the word was out yesterday.


Lifting Winter Gas Requirement
The State Department of Environmental Protection announced yesterday that it was lifting the requirement that a controversial fuel additive be sold in New Jersey this winter.
Officials said they were responding to complaints from residents who said the additive makes them sick, The Associated Press reported.
Since 1992, the State Department of Environmental Protection has required gasoline dealers to sell fuel with higher oxygen content during the winter months to reduce carbon monoxide emissions.
As a result of yesterday's action, gas stations will sell reformulated gasoline, which contains about half as much of the additive, officials said.


Musical Revue For Keeping Yiddish Alive
"Too Jewish?," originally produced by Eric Krebs at the John Houseman Theater, has reopened at the Westside Downstairs, 407 West 43d Street, Manhattan.
Following are excerpts from Lawrence Van Gelder's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Jan. 28.
Avi Hoffman recalls that as early as 1808 someone was prophesying the death of Yiddish and the Yiddish theater.
Well, it hasn't happened yet.
And if Mr.
Hoffman has anything to say about it, it's not going to.


Leon Polk Smith Goes Beyond His Inspiration
Leon Polk Smith, whose austere, uneven, yet often inspiring retrospective is at the Brooklyn Museum, is one of a sprawling generation of American artists for whom geometry came naturally.
His original inspiration, as it was for some of the others, was the work of Piet Mondrian, which Mr.
Smith encountered shortly after arriving in New York from Oklahoma.
The year was 1936 and Mr.
Smith, a young art teacher, was just becoming aware that he wanted to be an artist.
By the late 40's, he had moved decisively beyond Mondrian into an unexplored terrain, where his fellow travelers included Myron Stout, Paul Feeley, Ellsworth Kelly and Alexander Liberman.
Untouched by the gathering momentum of Abstract Expressionism, which would propel American art onto the international map, each of these artists evolved a distinct way of distilling ideas and experiences into a vocabulary of seemingly pure geometric form.
Each helped pave the way for the abstract paintings and sculpture of the 1950's and 60's that would be gathered under the umbrella of Minimalism.


Shuttle Flight Postponed
A hydrogen fuel leak today forced a one-week postponement in the launching of the shuttle Columbia after a $37 million overhaul.
The leak, detected as propellants were being pumped into the shuttle a few hours before its scheduled liftoff, was traced to a valve in one of the three main engines.


INSIDE
Genetic Flaw Is Linked To Breast Cancer in Jews
In a discovery that aids scientific understanding, if not treatment, researchers say a genetic defect linked to cancer occurs with unusual frequency in Jews from Eastern and Central Europe.
Page A24.
Little Welfare Fraud Found
In its first two months of operation, New York City's plan to root out fraud among city welfare recipients by fingerprinting them has found virtually no cases of duplicate claims.
Page B1.
Peace No Obstacle in Bosnia
On the front lines, where Bosnian forces indulge in bravado and beer, peace is just talk, and the reality is that they are pressing on to surround Banja Luka, the largest Serbian stronghold.
Page A3.
Prosecutor Is Indicted
A prominent New Jersey prosecutor was indicted on 33 counts, from tax evasion to blackmail.
Page B5.
Orchestra Forgoes Strike
As a strike deadline passed, New York Philharmonic musicians said they would keep talking.
Page C3.


Workers Bustle As Papal Visit Approaches


Two Men on Tracks in Queens Are Killed by L.I.R.R. Train
Two men died and a third was critically injured when they were hit by a train on an elevated section of track near a Long Island Rail Road station in Queens last night, the authorities said.
As of 1 A.M., the authorities had not released the victims' identities and had few details of the accident, which occurred around 10:45 P.M. at 44th Avenue and 111th Street in Corona, just west Shea Stadium.


Mayor Comes Out Strongly For Goldstein as Chancellor
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, taking the final step to a full public endorsement of Leon M. Goldstein to be schools chancellor, said yesterday that in Mr.
Goldstein, he had found someone who agrees with his ideas for redirecting the school system.
Dismissing as "silly" a growing chorus of criticism of Mr.
Goldstein, the Mayor said Mr.
Goldstein had done an exemplary job as president of Kingsborough Community College in Brooklyn and would make an excellent schools chancellor.


Boston Tries To Minimize Racial Anger
In this city frequently polarized by racial incidents in recent years, law-enforcement officials and leading blacks worked today to minimize any racial reaction to the killing of Boston's leading prosecutor of street gangs.
As part of the effort to calm public anxiety, police officials were assuring residents that they would not be making sweeps into black neighborhoods for suspects.
At the same time, officials investigating the killing of the prosecutor, Paul R. McLaughlin, said they now had doubts that he had been shot in retaliation for his work.


METRO DIGEST
CLEARANCE DELAYED FOR SCHOOLS FINALIST
The investigative firm hired by New York City's Board of Education to conduct background checks of its three finalists for chancellor concluded that it could not yet clear Leon M. Goldstein, the Mayor's choice, because too many questions remain.
After several weeks of fact-finding, the report outlines at least 11 inconsistencies, misrepresentations and potential conflicts of interest.  [ Page A1. ] Mayor Giuliani took the final step to a full public endorsement of Leon M. Goldstein to be New York City schools chancellor.  [ B3. ] In the tumultuous search for the next leader of the New York City schools, the system's issues and problems have largely been overshadowed by political sparring.  [ B3. ] NEW YORK CITY  TEEN-AGER CHARGED IN BABY'S MURDER
A teen-ager was charged with second-degree murder after she was accused of throwing her four-hour-old baby girl out of her family's fourth-floor bathroom window in Far Rockaway, Queens.  [ B2. ] JUDGE HALTS SALE OF QUEENS HOSPITAL
A State Supreme Court justice in Manhattan has issued a temporary restraining order to prevent New York City from finalizing its plans to sell the Queens Hospital Center.  [ B4. ] 2 BROTHERS ARRESTED IN BIAS ATTACKS
Two teen-age brothers were indicted on attempted murder charges stemming from five bias-related attacks in which an Hispanic man and four Asians were set upon in Bensonhurst, Brooklyn, all within a half hour, four weeks ago.  [ B4. ] JURY IN TERROR TRIAL FOCUSES ON 2 MEN
On their third full day of deliberations, jurors in the trial of 10 men charged with a terror-bombing and assassination conspiracy appeared to focus on the same two defendants on whom they have seemingly concentrated since deliberations began.  [ B4. ] Kasparov won Game 11 of the world chess championship, taking a 6 to 5 lead.  [ B6. ] REGION  INDICTMENT OF A CRIME-FIGHTER
A county prosecutor in New Jersey, who has long cultivated an image as a hard-nosed crime-fighter, was accused of being as crooked as some of the people he has put behind bars.  [ B5. ] COURT REVIEWS SCHOOL DESEGREGATION
Much has changed since a lawsuit was filed in 1989 seeking to link Hartford's heavily minority schools with those in its largely white suburbs.
Across the country, cities under Federal desegregation orders have sued to be released from them.
Connecticut's efforts to promote voluntary integration have been rejected by most of the state.  [ B5. ] DEVELOPERS BID FOR AIR CARGO SYSTEM
The Port Authority announced that it was considering proposals from 10 developers to undertake a $150 million reconstruction of air cargo facilities at Kennedy and Newark international airports.  [ B6. ] Two armed men suspected of robbing shoppers outside three department stores on Long Island were arrested after another holdup.  [ B4. ] Our Towns by Evelyn Nieves B5  Chronicle B6


Black Flag Account To Young &amp; Rubicam
The Clorox Company in Oakland, Calif., has awarded the account of the Black Flag line of insecticides, which Clorox recently purchased from Reckitt &amp; Colman, to the San Francisco office of Young &amp; Rubicam Inc.
The billings were not disclosed; the Black Flag account has been inactive and there was no previous agency.


CHRONICLE
This morning Ms.
Cooney is being celebrated for her success: she will be presented with the Presidential Medal of Freedom by President Clinton at the White House.


CHRONICLE
Some months ago JOAN GANZ COONEY, a founder of the Children's Television Network and the originator of "Sesame Street," persuaded Inger McCabe Elliott, the producer of a series of panels called "Conversations at Sotheby's," to use the title "Women Warriors" for the program in which she will participate on Monday.
"And then I said to Lynn Sherr, 'What does it mean?' " Ms.
Cooney said the other day.


Art in Review
David Rabinowitch 'Box Trough Assemblages'  Peter Blum Gallery 99 Wooster Street SoHo Through Oct. 28
In Europe, the Canadian sculptor David Rabinowitch is regarded as a major Minimalist; in the United States, he is virtually unknown.
This show boldly attempts to establish his importance on the basis of a single 1963 work: an assemblage of 12 shallow steel troughs (each 60 inches long, 40 inches wide, and 4 inches high), arranged in a three-by-four grid.
Several of the troughs are covered by rectangular steel sheets resting on their vertical flanges.
Mr.
Rabinowitch's emphasis on mathematical order and on the use of gravity to "glue" his pieces together seems to anticipate the grids of Sol LeWitt and the metal "carpets" of Carl Andre.





Executive Changes
AUTOCLAVE ENGINEERS INC., Yorba Linda, Calif., appointed Michael J. Doyle, currently president and chief executive of Unit Instruments Inc., a subsidiary of the company, to the positions of president and chief executive, replacing William F. Schilling, who resigned from the company.
Gary N. Patten, chief financial officer of Unit Instruments, was named chief financial officer of Autoclave Engineers, replacing Thomas C. Guelcher, who also resigned.
CYBERONICS INC., Webster, Tex., named Robert P. Cummins, a director, to the positions of chief executive and president, replacing the founder, Reese S. Terry Jr., who will resume his duties as chairman and executive vice president.


On Stage, and Off
Star Songs
For Patti LuPone, it was a moment of high drama.
There she stood in May, waiting in the wings to step onto a New York City stage for the first time since the turmoil of "Sunset Boulevard" in London.
She was unsure how the audience would react -- or how she would react.
"Walter came up to me and said, 'You've got the gift, now give it away,' " Ms.
LuPone said, recalling the backstage advice from Walter Bobbie, artistic director of the "Encores" series, which was presenting "Pal Joey" in concert.


Canada Proposes Force to Help U.N. Respond Rapidly to Crises
As the United Nations rethinks peacekeeping after its erratic performance in the Balkans, Canada is proposing a new force that could respond faster and more efficiently to conflicts around the world.
Under Canada's plan, the United Nations would draw on a force of as many as 5,000 soldiers and civilians from participating countries.
They would be based at home, undergoing a common training regimen, until the Security Council voted to deploy them as lightly armed peacekeepers.


Let Them Lobby Without Taking Public Funds; Free Speech Threat
To the Editor:
The so-called Istook amendment that has passed the House of Representatives is perhaps the most serious threat to freedom of speech in a generation.
Almost as shocking as the adoption of such a measure is the relative quiet of advocates of free speech of all political views about this threat.
The Istook amendment in effect blacklists nonprofit organizations that spend more than 5 percent of their budgets in advocacy and lobbying -- that is, free speech -- by barring them from receiving any Federal funds for any reason.
This is not an attempt to prevent taxpayer money from being used for lobbying.
That is already illegal.


Let Them Lobby Without Taking Public Funds
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis (column, Sept. 22) appears to make an interesting point about the Istook amendment on government grants.
Mr.
Lewis writes:
"However small the grant, there would be tight limits on what the organization could spend on 'advocacy' from its own privately raised funds."


International Briefs; Earnings at Guinness Rose 6% in First Half
The British liquor company Guinness P.L.C. said yesterday that its profits rose 6 percent in the first half as strength in the world's growing economies offset weakness in consumer confidence in Europe.
Guinness said profit before taxes was $:340 million ($533 million), up from $:320 million in the corresponding period a year earlier.
Sales were up 4 percent, to $:2.04 billion ($3.20 billion).


Republicans Back Off Plan To Ease Polluters' Liability
House Republican leaders today backed away from plans to relieve big corporate polluters of the obligation, under the Superfund environmental law, to help pay to clean toxic waste dumps.
Republicans are working on an overhaul of the Superfund law, and the concession moved them nearer the Clinton Administration on an important aspect of the legislation: the requirement that companies pay for cleaning up pollution even if they were only partly responsible for it.


Open Space for a Crowded Megalopolis
Barely 20 miles from New York City, on the New York-New Jersey border, stands a privately owned woodland larger than Manhattan Island.
It is Sterling Forest, a hilly, rocky 17,500 acres that is vital both as a watershed in the nation's most densely populated region and as an extraordinary open space in the sprawl of metropolitan suburbia.
The owner is one of the world's largest insurance companies, the Zurich Insurance Group, which acquired it this year in taking over another insurance company.
The Swiss organization, understandably interested in turning a profit, is pursuing an earlier owner's plan to build a community of 13,000 homes, 3 golf courses, offices, factories and all the rest that goes with it.
The larger public interest says this land is immeasurably more valuable as is.


Central Harlem Gives the Lie to Stereotypes
To the Editor:
Many have long recognized Robert L. Woodson as one of the most distinguished conservative voices, and "The End of Racism? Hardly" (Op-Ed, Sept. 23) reconfirms that standing.
He is not willing to take unprincipled stances for the sake of expediency or to scapegoat some of society's most vulnerable targets.
Nowhere is Mr.
Woodson's voice more needed than in the mean-spirited debate about race.
The ad hominem attacks on inner-city America, and on the poor in particular, made by people like Dinesh D'Souza are pernicious.
The picture that Mr.
D'Souza paints in his book "The End of Racism" -- and that Mr.
Woodson rejects -- contradicts the realities of communities across this country.


International Briefs; Miller Draft in Brazil
The Miller Brewing Company, a unit of the Philip Morris Companies, has formed a joint venture with the Brazilian brewer Companhia Cervejaria Brahma to sell and distribute Miller Genuine Draft beer in Brazil, the companies said yesterday.
Initially, the brand will be imported and sold in the Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro markets.
Brahma is the seventh-largest brewer in the world. (Reuters)


Soulfully Speaking A Universal Language Felt by the Oppressed
OPENING night of this year's New York Film Festival should have been triumphant for the Chinese director Zhang Yimou, a film maker whose rare soulfulness and purity of vision have earned him a well-deserved place on the world stage.
Instead, overshadowed by China's refusal to allow Mr.
Zhang to appear here tonight, the event becomes a more Pyrrhic victory.
Although his new film, "Shanghai Triad," is narrowed by the same atmosphere of political repression that keeps Mr.
Zhang away this evening, it still speaks the stirring universal language of his bolder work.
The power of that artistry is a reproach to those who deny it free reign.
"Shanghai Triad" must be seen in its proper context, as a film that was shut down during production because of Mr.
Zhang's political problems over "To Live," which addressed itself to recent Chinese history with an openly critical tone. (The cancellation of his trip to New York had nothing to do with his own work.  Instead, this was retaliation against the festival for refusing to drop "The Gate of Heavenly Peace," an American documentary about the 1989 showdown in Tiananmen Square in Beijing.)


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan art shows:  "LINEAR ABSTRACTIONS," Charles Cowles Gallery, 420 West Broadway, at Prince Street, SoHo (through Oct. 7).
Inset squares by Frank Stella, stripes by Gene Davis, shaped canvases by David Novros, all created between 1966 and 1978.
Particularly interesting are Mr.
Novros's canvases with their earth-toned posts, lintels and buttresses, recalling the fashionable "brutalist" architecture of the late 1960's (Pepe Karmel).
MATTHEW McCASLIN, "Bloomer," Michael Klein Gallery, 40 Wooster Street, SoHo (through Oct 14).
Fourteen color televisions are stacked at random around the gallery, festooned with steel and rubber electric cables and showing time-lapse photographs of flowers (roses, irises, mums, daisies, crocuses, lilies, pansies, snapdragons) blooming and withering at high speed.
Lightbulbs in little yellow cages sprout like artificial blossoms.
It's nature in the 90's (Karmel).
SUSANNE DOREMUS, Bill Maynes Contemporary Art, 225 Lafayette Street (at Spring Street), SoHo (through Oct. 7).
The single painting, "Opera," in this Chicago's artist's show is good, but the works on paper are better.
With figures, paint strokes and pen-and-ink doodles and their general sense of frazzled concentration, they look like a tough semester's lecture notes from life (Holland Cotter).


Australian Executive Gets 18-Year Sentence in China
An Australian businessmen who was arrested at his hotel in Macao two years ago by the local police and taken into China was sentenced today on corruption and embezzlement charges to 18 years in prison and deportation.
It was not immediately clear whether he could be deported without having to serve the prison sentence.


Dreamer, Rebel and Icon, 40 Years Later
Some pop icons in American culture are more durable than others.
Marilyn Monroe is one, Elvis Presley certainly another.
And still one more, perhaps most mysteriously of all, is James Dean.
Tomorrow is the 40th anniversary of his death in a car accident at age 24.
The Disney Channel is marking the date with an hourlong documentary, "James Dean: A Portrait."
The biographical facts are reviewed, including the death of Dean's beloved mother at 29, when he was only 9 years old.
There are interviews with friends and fellow actors, a good many of whom resented his mumbling and his unpredictability ("I never read a line the same way twice," he once bragged).
Eli Wallach diplomatically recalls that he was "sometimes difficult." E. G. Marshall is said to have found him "impossible." Here are innumerable anecdotes and intriguing archival material.
But in the end, James Byron Dean continues to prove elusive.
Perhaps that's the secret of his survival as the essence of the adolescent dreamer and rebel.


Score One for Clinton
Foreign policy came calling at the White House again today.
Despite President Clinton's early inclination to shun it, it has been a frequent visitor, and lately an increasingly welcome one, not least because he has managed a series of visible accomplishments overseas.
Whether progress abroad will continue, whether the Administration will find ways to develop broader foreign-policy themes in place of improvisations, whether Mr.
Clinton will derive any political benefit in his re-election campaign -- those questions hung in the air this afternoon as he promised to press forward in the Middle East "until the circle of peace is closed."


Rising Church-State Tensions Threaten Mexico Talks
Tensions between the Mexican Government and the Roman Catholic Church are rising as the Government continues to crack down on priests who it says fan rebellion in the troubled southern state of Chiapas.
The clash could threaten peace talks, scheduled to resume Oct. 17, that are intended to bring calm to the state, which saw an armed rebellion by peasant-backed rebels of the Zapatista National Liberation Army 21 months ago.


The Mourners Of Centenarian Have Their Say
Bessie Delany, the North Carolina-born Harlem dentist and homespun philosopher who died on Monday at the age of 104, once attributed her longevity, and that of her 106-year-old sister, Sadie, to the fact that they "never had husbands to worry us to death."
What accounted for the longevity of Dr.
Delany's two-and-a-half-hour funeral at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine yesterday was that the two sisters, who lived together for more than a century, spent so much time helping and inspiring so many nieces, nephews and other admirers that quite a few of them insisted on having their say.


Scientists Say Raw Sewage Killed 40,000 Birds
In a surprising conclusion to an investigation into the deaths last winter of some 40,000 migratory birds at an irrigation reservoir in central Mexico, scientists have identified raw human sewage, not industrial pollutants, as the main killer.
The scientists said rivers of sewage flowing into the Silva Reservoir, 195 miles northwest of Mexico City, created a vast incubator for botulism bacteria, which poisoned the food eaten by the ducks, coots and other birds landing in the fetid waters after migrating from the United States and Canada.


11 Charged in Election Fraud
A former Newark School Board member and 10 other people were charged yesterday with rigging the board member's re-election by forging signatures of eligible voters.


Ballot Referendum Is Blocked
A Superior Court judge yesterday temporarily blocked Bergen County from printing ballots for the Nov. 7 election that would ask voters whether several school districts should be merged as a means of desegregating Englewood's Dwight Morrow High School.
The court order was granted at the request of the city of Englewood, which argued that the county freeholders exceeded their authority by approving the ballot question on the controversial issue.
Mitchell Rosenberg, an Englewood Councilman, said that the referendum would do "nothing but fan the flames of dissension out there."


Russian Series
"Celebrating Grigory Kozintsev," a film series devoted to the Russian director, will run from tomorrow through Thursday at the Walter Reade Theater, 165 West 65th Street, Manhattan.
Unless noted, films are in Russian, with English subtitles.
The series is presented by the Film Society of Lincoln Center as part of the New York Film Festival.
Tickets to each program are $7.50, $5 for members of the film society and $4 for the elderly for weekday matinees.
Information: (212) 875-5600.
Here is a schedule.
Tomorrow "HAMLET" (1965). 2 and 7:30 P.M.
"KING LEAR" (1970). 4:45 P.M.
Sunday "THE DEVIL'S WHEEL" (1926, silent) with "THE OVERCOAT" (1926, silent); both with piano accompaniment. 2 and 6:30 P.M.
"ALONE" (1931). 4:30 P.M.
"DON QUIXOTE" (1957). 8:45 P.M.
Monday "THE YOUTH OF MAKSIM" (1935); with "YOUNG FRITZ" (1942). 2 P.M.
"THE NEW BABYLON" (1929). 8 P.M.
Tuesday "ALONE" 2 and 6:30 P.M.
"THE YOUTH OF MAKSIM" with "YOUNG FRITZ" 4 and 8:15 P.M.
Wednesday "DON QUIXOTE" 2 and 7 P.M.
"HAMLET" 4:15 and 9:10 P.M.
Thursday "HAMLET" (1965). 2 and 8:45 P.M.
"KING LEAR" 6 P.M.


With Congress Slowed to a Crawl, G.O.P. Pushes Stopgap Spending
Conceding that the last four weeks have reflected a slower legislative pace than the hectic early days of the 104th Congress, Republicans hurried today to push stopgap spending into place so the lawmakers could leave for a 10-day recess.
The House passed the temporary spending bill without even a roll-call vote this morning.
There was no visible opposition anticipated in the Senate.
But the Senate leaders kept the bill on the shelf, waiting for a Friday vote.
They wanted to keep the senators in Washington to work on other legislation.


Defense Budget Games
The masters of financial prestidigitation on the Senate and House appropriations committees raised their game to new levels in recent days, manipulating the defense and intelligence budgets to pay for wasteful weapons programs.
The maneuvering was fierce, and hard for outsiders to follow.
The result is a $243 billion defense bill, nearly $9 billion more than the Pentagon requested, including money for more B-2 stealth bombers and other unneeded weapons.
The manipulation largely revolved around a raid on the budget of the National Reconnaissance Office, the agency responsible for designing, procuring, launching and managing spy satellites.
More than $1 billion was siphoned from that agency's budget to pay for the B-2 and other pork-barrel projects.


S.E.C. Settles With 7 Charged With Grumman Insider Trades
The Securities and Exchange Commission accused seven men yesterday of illegal insider trading, either by buying securities or by tipping others before the March 1994 announcement of a takeover offer by the Martin Marietta Corporation for the Grumman Corporation.
The seven settled the S.E.C. lawsuit without admitting or denying the allegations and agreed to pay penalties totaling nearly $300,000.


Bankers Trust Shift
In a management shift that follows the appointment of former Treasury undersecretary Frank Newman as senior vice chairman last week, the Bankers Trust New York Corporation said that Melvin A. Yellin would become its general counsel.
When Mr.
Newman was named, the bank said he would look after all of the administrative and control functions including the legal department.
James J. Baechle, who had been the bank's general counsel since 1971, reporting to the company chairman, Charles S. Sanford Jr, will now take on several "corporate strategic assignments" and continue to report to Mr.
Sanford.


Devils Demote Dean and McAlpine
Devils Coach Jacques Lemaire has demanded that his players gradually raise their level as training camp progresses and promised severe consequences for those who failed.
Kevin Dean and Chris McAlpine faced the consequences today as they were sent to the minors.
By sending the two defensemen to Albany in a surprising move this morning, Lemaire made clear his choice of defensemen to start the season.
With Scott Niedermayer re-signing his three-year contract after testing the free-agency market, Lemaire now has his eight defensemen for opening day.


LAST CHANCE
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in Manhattan that are to close soon:
Closing This Weekend
"TRAVELS WITH MY AUNT," Minetta Lane Theater, 18 Minetta Lane, Greenwich Village.
An adaptation by Giles Havergal of Graham Greene's novel about a retired banker and his elderly aunt; directed by Mr.
Havergal.
With Brian Murray, Martin Rayner, Tom Beckett and Larry Linville.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2:30 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $27.50 to $45.
Information: (212) 307-4100.


Congressman Is Sentenced


In America; Rescuing The Truth
Conrad Johnson, a law professor at Columbia, had a dentist's appointment.
This was last Friday morning.
He dropped his kids off at school on 114th Street and then walked south on Broadway.
As he crossed 109th Street he noticed an unmarked car with two uniformed police officers inside.
The cops were eating doughnuts.
The professor thought that was amusing.
"It was such a stereotype," he said.
In a few minutes he would be immersed in a more serious exercise in stereotyping.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a meeting between Secretary of State Warren Christopher and his Chinese counterpart misstated the date of China's crackdown on a democracy movement in some copies.
It was 1989, not 1979.


Judge Blocks Giuliani Plan To Sell Hospital in Queens
A State Supreme Court justice in Manhattan has issued a temporary restraining order to prevent New York City from finalizing its plans to sell the Queens Hospital Center, one of three public hospitals that were to be offered for sale next month.
The decision presents the first formal legal obstacle to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's goal of privatizing some or all of the city's public hospital system.
The Mayor's advisers have said they plan to begin the privatization effort with the release of a sales memorandum -- a first offering plan -- for three hospitals in mid-October.
That document is supposed to clarify potential sales terms for Queens Hospital Center, Elmhurst Hospital Center and Coney Island Hospital.


Minister in Fraud Suit
The Rev.
Rufus Jackson claimed that the Lord was his investment adviser and had directed him to gather $1,000 each from 1,000 people, invest the money in real estate and earn huge returns.
But Federal authorities said yesterday that Mr.
Jackson collected more than $300,000 from his working-class and retired parishioners at the Zoe Tabernacle Church in the Bronx and invested none of it.
Article, page B2.


The Evolution of a Very Confused Young Man
There is a reason the terms "sophomoric" and "sophomore slump" are so common; there is a lot of truth in them, as "Dead Presidents," the ambitious but naive second film by the wildly talented Hughes brothers, suggests.
Two years ago, Albert and Allen Hughes, twins who are now all of 24, directed their startling, sharp-eyed tale of street violence, "Menace II Society." Though the title "Dead Presidents" is slang for the dollars in a climactic robbery scheme, the story is far broader than that.
Ranging from 1968 to 1974, it concerns a young man named Anthony who goes from a black neighborhood in the Bronx to the Vietnam War and back again.
A period piece, a war story, a coming-of-age tale and an indictment of a society that is brutal on black men and veterans, "Dead Presidents" takes on much more than it can handle.
It offers a glaring example of what the Hugheses can do well.
With their cinematographer, Lisa Rinzler, they position the camera unobtrusively, for maximum effect.
They are experts at creating scenes of visceral, exciting action.
Yet the film also highlights what they need to learn fast: everything to do with character and dialogue.
"Dead Presidents" will be shown tomorrow night at 9 and Sunday afternoon at 1:30 P.M. as part of the New York Film Festival, and will open in New York theaters on Wednesday.


On My Mind; Listening To Arafat
The first time Yasir Arafat went to Washington to sign an agreement with Israel he made two speeches.
The first was the formal address, heard around the world.
The second was to the Palestinian people, broadcast through Jordanian TV and neither heard nor noted in the West.
In that second speech, he said that the Oslo declaration of peace principles, signed a few hours earlier, was the first step "in the 1974" plan.
Every Arab in the Mideast knew what that meant.
The Arab strategy drawn up in 1974 called for the "phased" destruction of Israel.


Corrections
An article on Aug. 19 about the growth of a community of Orthodox Jews in Lakewood, N.J., misidentified a professor of history at Georgian Court College, a Catholic women's school that adjoins a rabbinical college there.
She is Dr.
Claribel Young, not Claribel Williams.
The article also misstated the timing of a meeting of community leaders at Georgian Court with its president, Sister Barbara Williams, as moderator.
The meeting, which sought to ease tensions between ethnic groups in the community, was in June, not July.
A letter from the college dated Aug. 30 pointed out the errors.
This correction was delayed by an editing lapse.


Screams in Seattle May Be Too Late
He is the Ancient Mariner, the last of three original Seattle employees, present for all but about a dozen of the 1,659 losses (and 1,291 victories), a survivor of six last-place finishes and the dreary Kingdome.
"I've never suffered, never been depressed," said Dave Niehaus, who has called Mariners radio and TV games since the Angels' Frank Tanana and Nolan Ryan tossed consecutive shutouts to initiate Seattle into the American League in 1977.
"I expected this to be a .500 team within five years. It took 15."


International Briefs; Scottish Insurer's Deal
General Accident P.L.C. of Scotland, an international insurance company, said yesterday that it planned to acquire the Provident Mutual Life Assurance Association for $:170 million, or about $268 million.
Provident is a policyholder-owned life insurance and pension fund in England.
The agreement will go to its policyholders for a vote on Nov. 15.
General Accident said it planned to raise nearly $:135 million through a private sale of 22.7 million new shares to finance part of the acquisition. (Dow Jones)


From 'Shanghai' to 'Carrington'
The 33d New York Film Festival opens tonight with a screening of "Shanghai Triad," directed by Zhang Yimou, and closes on Oct. 15 with "Carrington," directed by Christopher Hampton.
The festival, presented by the Film Society of Lincoln Center, includes 28 programs representing 17 countries.
All films are shown at Alice Tully Hall with the exception of the late show tonight and "Carrington" on Oct. 15, which will be at Avery Fisher Hall, and "The Rossellini War Trilogy: 'Open City,' 'Paisan' and 'Germany Year Zero' " on Oct. 15, which will be at the Walter Reade Theater, 165 West 65th Street.
Also at the Walter Reade Theater from tomorrow through Thursday will be a tribute to the Russian director Grigory Kozintsev.
Many festival screenings are sold out, although a few returns may be available.
Tickets are $8 and $11 at the Alice Tully Hall box office, (212) 875-5050; tickets for opening and closing nights are $15 and $25; tickets for the Rossellini and Kozintsev series are $7.50 a film.
Unless otherwise noted, the films were made this year.
Here is the schedule.
Today "SHANGHAI TRIAD" (China/France), directed by Zhang Yimou. 8 P.M. at Alice Tully Hall; 9 P.M. at Avery Fisher Hall.
The early show is sold out; there are partial-view seats only for the 9 P.M. show.
Opens commercially in December.
Tomorrow "THE WHITE BALLOON" (Iran), directed by Jafar Panahi. 12:30 P.M.
Sold out.
Opens Jan. 19, 1996.
"DISCOVERING MAX LINDER" (France), directed by Maud Linder; a compilation of silent films from 1912 to 1916, with piano accompaniment by Jean-Marie Senia. 3:30 P.M.
Sold out.
"GEORGIA" (France/United States), directed by Ulu Grosbard. 6 P.M.
Sold out.
"DEAD PRESIDENTS" (United States), directed by Albert and Allen Hughes. 9 P.M.
Sold out.
Opens commercially Wednesdayin New York, Oct. 10 nationwide.
Sunday "DEAD PRESIDENTS," 1:30 P.M.
The screening is sold out.
"FLAMENCO" (Spain), directed by Carlos Saura. 4:30 P.M.
Sold out.
"THE WHITE BALLOON," 7:15 P.M.
Sold out.
"GEORGIA," 9:45 P.M.
Sold out.
Monday "SIXTEEN OH SIXTY" (Brazil), directed by Vinicius Mainardi. 6 P.M.
Sold out.
"THE NEON BIBLE" (Britain), directed by Terence Davies, 9 P.M.
Sold out.
Opens commercially in February 1996.
Tuesday "SIXTEEN OH SIXTY," 9 P.M.
Sold out.
"THE NEON BIBLE," 6 P.M.
Sold out.
Wednesday "KICKING AND SCREAMING" (United States), directed by Noah Baumbach, 6 P.M.
Limited seats.
Opens commercially Oct. 6 in New York.
"LAMERICA" (Italy), directed by Gianni Amelio, 9 P.M.
Opens Dec. 20 in New York.
Thursday "LAMERICA," 6 P.M.
"KICKING AND SCREAMING," 9 P.M.
Oct. 6 "FLIRT" (United States/Germany/Japan), directed by Hal Hartley, 6 P.M.
Sold out.
"LAND AND FREEDOM" (Britain/Spain), directed by Ken Loach, 9 P.M.
Sold out.
Opens commercially in spring 1996.
Oct. 7 "LAND AND FREEDOM," 11 A.M.
Sold out.
"GOOD MEN, GOOD WOMEN" (Taiwan), directed by Hou Hsiao-hsien, 2 P.M.
Sold out.
"GUIMBA" (Mali/Burkina Faso/France), directed by Cheick Oumar Sissoko, 5 P.M.
"STRANGE DAYS" (United States), directed by Kathryn Bigelow, 8 P.M.
Sold out.
Opens Oct. 8 in New York, Oct. 13 nationwide.
"FLIRT," 11:30 P.M.
Sold out.
Oct. 8 "GUIMBA," 6 P.M.
"STRANGE DAYS," 2 P.M.
Sold out.
"THE CONVENT" (Portugal/France), directed by Manoel de Oliveira, 9 P.M.
Sold out.
Oct. 9 FORTUNE SMILES, with "Le Franc" (Senegal/Switzerland), directed by Djibril Diop Mambety, and "Augustin" (France), directed by Anne Fontaine. 6 P.M.
"Augustin" opens commercially Oct. 13.
"THE SON OF GASCOGNE" (France), directed by Pascal Aubier, 9 P.M.
Sold out.
Oct. 10 "A CINEMA OF UNEASE" (New Zealand), directed by Sam Neill, and "CITIZEN LANGLOIS" (France), directed by Edgardo Cozarinsky, 9 P.M.
"THE SON OF GASCOGNE," 6 P.M.
Oct. 11 "AVANT-GARDE VISIONS:" "Alpsee" (Germany, 1994), directed by Matthias Muller; "Zone" (Japan), directed by Takashi Ito; and "River Colors" (Germany, 1994), directed by Christoph Janetzko, 6 P.M.
"FROM THE JOURNALS OF JEAN SEBERG" (United States), directed by Mark Rappaport, and "JOY STREET" (United States), directed by Suzan Pitt, 9 P.M.
Sold out.
Oct. 12 "CYCLO" (France/Vietnam), directed by Tran Anh Hung, 6 P.M.
Sold out.
"HATE" (France), directed by Mathieu Kassovitz, 9 P.M.
Opens commercially in 1996.
Oct. 13 "THE CELLULOID CLOSET" (United States), directed by Rob Epstein and Jeffrey Friedman, 6 P.M.
Sold out.
"THE FLOWER OF MY SECRET" (Spain), directed by Pedro Almodovar, 9 P.M.
Sold out.
Oct. 14 "THE FLOWER OF MY SECRET," 11 A.M.
Sold out.
"HATE," 2 P.M.
"CYCLO," 5 P.M.
Sold out.
"THE GATE OF HEAVENLY PEACE" (United States), directed by Carma Hinton and Richard Gordon, 8 P.M.
Sold out.
"THE CELLULOID CLOSET," midnight.
Oct. 15 THE ROSSELLINI WAR TRILOGY, directed by Roberto Rossellini.
"OPEN CITY" (1945), 2 P.M.; "PAISAN" (1946), 5 P.M.; and "GERMANY YEAR ZERO" (1947), 7:30 P.M.
These performances are sold out, but the films will play through Oct. 26 at the Walter Reade Theater.
"CARRINGTON" (Britain), directed by Christopher Hampton, 8:30 P.M.
Partial-view seats only.
Opens commercially Nov. 10 in New York.


On Route 66, a Barber's a Landmark
To the Editor:
Re "Driving, Buying, Reading and Remembering Route 66" (front page, Sept. 24): No story on Route 66 is complete without the town of Seligman, Ariz., and its only barber, Angel Delgadillo.
Mr.
Degadillo was born in 1926 when the "the Old Road" was completed, and he was still there when we visited him on the 66th anniversary of Route 66 in 1992 -- in the same barbershop in which his dad cut hair when Angel was born.
The only time Angel ever left Seligman was the two years he attended barber school in Pasadena, Calif.


International Briefs; Profit Up, Forte Seeks Sale or Merger for Unit
Forte P.L.C., the largest hotel operator in Britain, reported a 39 percent increase in first-half pretax profit yesterday and said it was seeking a sale or merger of a United States unit.
Forte reported pretax profit for the first half of $:75 million ($117.5 million), excluding an exceptional profit of $:30 million, resulting from the disposal of its remaining stake in the Gardner Merchant catering company.


Campaign Video Aims at Showing Softer Side of Dole
Seeking to humanize a candidate who is most familiar to voters as a hard-edged, deal-making pol, Senator Bob Dole's Presidential campaign has unveiled a video that emphasizes his humble roots and grueling rehabilitation from war injuries.
The 14-minute video features conventional scenes of the Kansas Republican giving speeches to rapt supporters, narrations from people like Mr.
Dole's wife, Elizabeth, and details of his childhood in Russell, Kan., in the Depression.


Jobless Data Push Down Bond Prices
Prices of Treasury securities fell yesterday, following a report that suggests the labor market is improving and provides more evidence that the Federal Reserve need not cut interest rates.
Weekly first-time jobless claims were down 31,000, to 335,000, from 366,000 the previous week.
The decline was much stronger than the expected drop of 7,000, to 358,000.
The four-week average, which is considered a better gauge, subject to less volatility, fell to 351,750 from a revised 355,000.


Market Rally Eases Gloom Of Mexicans
Mexico's peso and stock market rebounded slightly today after a four-day slide, but investors remained worried, expecting low third-quarter company earnings and fearing social unrest.
The main stock index here closed at 2,381.49, up 38.43 points, or 1.64 percent.
The peso held steady at 6.385 to the dollar, making one peso worth 15.66 cents.


For Mets, Starters Will Bloom In Spring
Now that Dallas Green will remain the Mets' manager next season, he can begin to envision his team for 1996.
The makeup of the club will not truly begin until spring training opens, but already one thing is for certain: Deciding on a starting rotation will not be an easy task.
It's not unusual for many clubs to go into spring having already decided on three or four of their starters, limiting competition to just one or two undecided spots.
But the Mets are loaded with young arms eager to earn a spot on the big-league roster.


Cardinals Let Coleman Go
The Arizona Cardinals waived offensive tackle BEN COLEMAN, the No. 32 pick in the 1993 draft.
Coleman cleaned out his locker after his release Tuesday night and could not be reached for comment.
Coach BUDDY RYAN yesterday said that Coleman, a 6-foot-6-inch, 335-pound former Wake Forest star, never played up to his potential.
Coleman, who went to training camp as the starting left tackle, had been demoted to third-string behind ERNEST DYE and JOE WOLF. (AP)


2 Are Held in Robbing Department Store Shoppers
Two armed men suspected of robbing shoppers outside three department stores on Long Island on Tuesday were arrested today after another holdup and led the police on a 10-mile hunt that ended in Queens, the police said.
One of the men is also a suspect in an attempted murder in New York City in July, the police said, but they refused to provide further details.


Chocolate Thunder Hits Town
DARRYL DAWKINS, that rim-quaking, quote-making, interstellar traveler, has landed in Boston.
And the man known as Chocolate Thunder might even stay awhile if he can lay off the chocolate.
He showed up at the Celtics camp yesterday, overweight, two days late, and determined to control his own fate as he seeks, at age 38, to return to the N.B.A.


New Toll Road Offers Glimpse at Future
After a gala celebration on Friday, the first privately financed toll road built in this century will open on Saturday here in northern Virginia, offering commuters a speedier link between rural surburbs and Washington.
But the new highway, the 14.1-mile Dulles Greenway, is viewed as more than a quicker alternative to a stuttering trip through a dozen traffic lights along nearby state roads.
It is, government officials and transportation experts say, a prime example of the way big public construction projects will be built in the future.


McCann-Erickson Consulting Unit
The McCann-Erickson Europe division of McCann-Erickson Worldwide in London is opening Magic Hat, a consulting unit that will advise marketers on fads and trends among young Europeans in fields like music, fashion and shopping.
Magic Hat will be headed by Simon Aboud, 30, as managing director; he was previously a vice president for international media at McCann Europe.
Two other executives of McCann Europe -- Edward Cotton, 31, and John Fillingham, 28 -- will join Magic Hat as partners.
McCann Worldwide is owned by the Interpublic Group of Companies.


Art in Review
Hanne Darboven 'South Korean Calendar, 1991'  Leo Castelli 420 West Broadway (near Spring Street) SoHo Through Oct. 7
For Hanne Darboven, who specializes in filling sheets of paper with repetitive penciled marks and notations, this is a sensual, almost decadent show.
This time, her markings accompany pages from a South Korean calendar, with the days of the month marked in big Roman numerals that occasionally turn from black to red or blue for no obvious reason.
The numerals are filled with a lacelike pattern of white dots and surrounded by a host of colorful details: little blue drawings of diamond rings and stainless-steel wristwatches, yin-yang signs, elegant Korean characters.


Angels Are Hanging On in the Race
Angels 4, Athletics 1
Pitcher Doug Johns's throwing error on a bunt single by Garret Anderson gave California two runs as the Angels defeated the visiting Oakland Athletics, 4-1, tonight to remain two games behind Seattle in the American League West race.


CHRONICLE
Emerging at the top of the heap in the merger of Time Warner and the Turner Broadcasting System is not the only momentous event this month in the life of GERALD M. LEVIN, Time Warner's chairman.
He and his wife, BARBARA RILEY LEVIN, an interior designer in New York, will renew their wedding vows tomorrow before 400 guests at the Pierre Hotel in a ceremony to be performed by the Rev.
Dr.
F.
Forrester Church and Gershon Kekst, the chairman of the Jewish Theological Seminary.


James Watt, 84, Former Chief of Heart Institute
Dr.
James Watt, a public health researcher and administrator who was the director of the National Heart Institute in the 1950's, died on Aug. 22 at Sentara Norfolk General Hospital in Norfolk, Va.
He was 84 and lived in Norfolk.
The cause was prostate cancer, said Dr.
Myron E. Wegman, a friend and colleague who recently reported the death.


Breast Cancer Gene in 1% of U.S. Jews
In a new insight into the genetic basis of breast cancer, biologists have discovered that a particular genetic defect is found with unusual frequency in American Jews whose ancestors lived in Eastern and Central Europe.
The discovery does not seem likely to lead immediately to any new treatment, but it could result in a better understanding of the incidence of breast cancer and might explain the apparent slight excess of breast cancer that some studies have found among Jewish women.


Sherrard's Ex-Team Could Be Next Team
When Mike Sherrard walks onto the field at 3Com Park in San Francisco, it will bring back some memories for him.
The Giants play the 49ers on Sunday.
The 49ers are his former team.
But could they also be his future team?
Sherrard signed with the 49ers under the defunct Plan B free-agent system in 1989 but missed most of the season with a leg injury.
He did play in the Super Bowl that year, however, and caught a 13-yard pass against the then-Dan Reeves-coached Denver Broncos.
He played with the 49ers until after the 1992 season, the year he had eight starts for the injured John Taylor.
He joined the Giants as an unrestricted free agent in 1992, signing a three-year deal that pays him an average of $1.5 million a season.


INSIDE
An I.R.S. Gift to Business
The Internal Revenue Service unexpectedly eased an irksome paperwork burden for business travelers, raising the level at which receipts are needed to $75 from $25.
Page 33.
Helms and Clinton Cut Deal
Senator Jesse Helms will allow votes on more than 30 Clinton appointees he has stalled as head of the Foreign Relations Committee.
Page 5.
Weighing Sheik's Case
As lawyers try to read their minds, the jurors in the terrorism trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and nine others are still deliberating.
Page 21.
Gift of $50 Million in Art
Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Mellon have presented 85 works of art, valued at more than $50 million, to the National Gallery of Art.
Page 13.


Gresser Emerges a Victor, But Won't Call It a Battle
For the better part of a week, Carol A. Gresser, the president of the Board of Education, has stood alone, the only one of the seven members to publicly declare her opposition to the Mayor's choice for chancellor of the New York City public schools.
But yesterday, she emerged from a five-hour school board meeting as an apparent winner when the board supported the candidate of her choice, in spite of vigorous opposition from Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
At 2:30 P.M., the Mayor's choice, Leon M. Goldstein, announced he was withdrawing from the contest and at 7:15 P.M. the board, in a 4-to-3 split, announced that it wanted to give the job to Daniel A. Domenech, the Superintendent of Schools for western Suffolk County on Long Island.


Joseph Gets Surprise Start At a Surprising Position
The Jets added another wrinkle to their quirky history today with the discovery that the rookie they hoped to start at cornerback Sunday against the Raiders, Carl Greenwood, hasn't been eating properly, is dehydrated and will give way to another first-time starter, Vance Joseph.
Joseph is not only a first-time starter, he is also a first-time defensive back.
In college, he was the backup quarterback and running back.
This will be his first game at cornerback.


Journal; The Circus Folds
No matter how many bloodied corpses are strewn across the stage, a true tragedy leaves us with purged emotions -- a catharsis -- at its final curtain.
The O. J. Simpson trial -- longer than most tragedies, and with a man the crime novelist Scott Turow this week called "the Othello of the 20th century" at its center -- is at long last reaching its final curtain.
But who seriously believes that a catharsis is in store?
Whatever the jury's verdict, this trial will leave only division and anger in its wake.
Should Mr.
Simpson walk, many Americans, myself among them, will be confirmed in their most cynical fear that those with enough money, celebrity or power can get away with anything in this country -- from the grand-scale looting of taxpayers to the most grisly double murder.


Panel Votes to Uphold Longer Drug Patents
The Senate Finance Committee today rejected an effort to close an unintended loophole in a trade treaty that extends the life of patents for some of the nation's largest drug companies.
The issue involves a relatively tiny amount of money to the Federal budget, but it means a fortune for the drug companies.
Generic drug companies could reap much of that fortune if the patents were not extended, and consumers would benefit from lower drug prices.
An international trade treaty ratified last year extended the patents of several major drugs.


Why Should Those Who Drive Pay for Others to Ride Trains?; King of the Rails
To the Editor:
In "Americans Would Never Trade Cars for Trains" (letter, Sept. 23), William Vandersteel claims that Americans no longer value mass transit because it limits their personal freedom.
Nothing could be further from the truth.


Appellate Court Rules in Favor of Players
In a decision that was long expected, an appellate court yesterday upheld the Federal court ruling six months ago that saved the baseball season.
A three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit found that Judge Sonia Sotomayor was correct when she ruled on March 31 that the owners acted improperly in unilaterally implementing new work rules last February.


Bratton Rescinds a Police Order To Catalogue Names of Russians
Police Commissioner William J. Bratton has rescinded a departmental order to glean Russian names from domestic-violence and accident reports as a way to combat Russian organized crime.
The reversal came as a stinging rebuke to Chief of Patrol Wilbur L. Chapman, the second-highest ranking uniformed officer, whose office sent a memo to his borough commanders on Sept. 13 ordering the cataloguing of Russian names.
Chief Chapman said yesterday that he was not the author of the memorandum, which he said was ordered by higher authorities without his consent or knowledge.


Officials Say Gang Broken By 21 Arrests
In two decades, the Seven Crowns built their neighborhood gang into a sophisticated, million-dollar-a-week drug enterprise that operated ruthlessly and flagrantly, recruiting from the youngest upstarts and selling to the youngest buyers in southeast Queens.
Those who crossed the line, authorities said, were killed.
The gang that sold at bars, houses, restaurants, bodegas and street corners had, in recent years, begun distributing their heroin and cocaine throughout the eastern and southeast United States, according to federal and state authorities.


Early Gains Fade for Dow And Broader Indexes Drop
Stock prices were mixed yesterday as the third quarter ended not with a bang, but a whimper.
The Dow Jones industrial average spent a good part of the day above its record closing high of 4,801.80, but it finished at 4,789.08, up just 1.44 points.
The blue-chip indicator gained 0.52 percent for the week and 5.2 percent for the third quarter, compared with gains of 9.4 percent in the year's second quarter and 8.5 percent in the first quarter.


Juror in Mob Trial Is Sentenced
A Union County woman who admitted lying to get on a jury in a 1990 mob trial was sentenced to six months in prison yesterday in United States District Court.
The woman, Dale J. Medvetz, 42, failed to disclose that her brother was in business with a relative of an admitted member of an organized crime family.
She then served as a juror in the trial of John M. Riggi, acting boss of the DeCavalcante crime family, who was ultimately convicted of extortion and labor corruption.


With His Own Man Almost In, Giuliani Ignores the Political Warning Signs
Suddenly, in a few whirlwind hours late yesterday, the city returned to the brink of political confrontation.
By a slim margin, the school board selected a chancellor deemed unacceptable by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
A day after coming quite close to installing his own candidate, the Mayor found himself fighting against significant odds to change the outcome.
Had he been willing to accept one of several compromises that were offered to him in the last month, Mr.
Giuliani might have been able to put at least a partial stamp on a new chancellor and emerge with enough momentum to seek the rest.


Withdrawal of His Candidacy Does Not Mean Goldstein's Troubles Are Over
Even though Leon M. Goldstein has withdrawn as a candidate to be New York City's next Schools Chancellor, his troubles may not be over.
Investigators with at least two city agencies yesterday began looking into several conflict-of-interest allegations that emerged from a routine background check of Mr.
Goldstein's presidency at Kingsborough Community College.


Kelly's Blast Drives Yanks Closer to Post-Season
No, it was not Bucky Dent. But it was close enough.
Perhaps someday, when this wild-card race is finally settled, Pat Kelly and Tony Castillo will find themselves inextricably linked in Yankee lore.
Perhaps in much the same way that Dent's name can scarcely be uttered without mentioning Mike Torrez.


Federal Cap Could Limit Oregon's Medicaid Test
For the last five years, Oregon has been trying to do just about everything that Congress now wants the other states to do with their Medicaid programs.
This state has been a laboratory of change, cutting the most expensive and least-used medical services while assuring health coverage for anyone below the Federal poverty level.
It would seem to epitomize the philosophy of Congressional Republicans that the states, left alone, can do the best job of running Medicaid, the state-Federal health program for poor people.


Puckett Is Forgiving
KIRBY PUCKETT said Cleveland pitcher DENNIS MARTINEZ, whose pitch hit the Twins' center fielder in the face Thursday and broke his upper jaw, was among about 200 people who called to wish him well.
"Dennis is a good friend and I know it wasn't intentional," Puckett said in a statement issued yesterday.
Puckett said he also talked to Cleveland's EDDIE MURRAY for about an hour. (AP)


A Singer's Jittery Sister Gets a Forum for Her Desperation
"Georgia," in which Jennifer Jason Leigh stunningly gives a piece of her heart to the main role of a ravaged, unsuccessful singer, isn't named for the character she plays.
Instead, Georgia (Mare Winningham) is the sister of Sadie Frost (Ms. Leigh), and Georgia is a country music star whose practiced nobility makes her well loved by her fans.
By contrast, Sadie is all jittery nerves and false optimism, pushy and needy and way too eager to please.
Whatever it is that makes Sadie so desperate, Georgia is at its core.
The love-hate bond between these sisters is explored fascinatingly in a film that, as directed with intuitive brilliance by Ulu Grosbard, gives Sadie the forum that the world has denied her.
With an exploratory style in the spirit of John Cassavetes, "Georgia" turns Sadie inside out without giving a neatly dramatic structure to her story.
The result is a film as maddening and unpredictable as the character herself, held together by a fierce, risk-taking performance and flashes of overwhelming honesty.
Sadie would be unbearable if she didn't feel so real.


To 'Wong Foo,' Thanks
The senior golfer CHI CHI RODRIGUEZ has settled his lawsuit over the use of his name by a drag queen in the movie "To Wong Foo, Thanks for Everything! Julie Newmar." Rodriguez filed suit against the movie's producers two weeks ago, charging the use of his name had damaged his reputation. (AP)


INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS: Barbarian Horses at the Gate; Japan Is Opening Race Tracks to Foreign Imports
The cool grass paddocks and tidy stables go on for mile after mile here on Japan's northern island of Hokkaido, home to this hyper-crowded country's most unlikely industry: horse breeding.
But the bucolic landscape masks a frantic economic struggle over foreign trade and Japan's national passion for horse racing.
After decades of protectionism, Japan is cautiously opening its race tracks -- and a good chunk of the $1 billion in annual prize money they hand out -- to foreign thoroughbreds.


To Palestinian Deportees, Peace Accord Brings Little Joy
High atop a barren plateau where the desert plunges into the sea, the main border crossing between Libya and Egypt brings a reminder that even as the Palestinians enter a new stage of peace with Israel, they remain caught in inter-Arab enmity.
Hundreds of Palestinians have already passed through this frontier in the last month, sent packing from Libya by Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi in his determination to show that while Yasir Arafat may claim to have fashioned a Palestinian homeland, the P.L.O. leader is wrong to believe that peace with Israel is possible.


Senators Seek Legal Inquiry On C.I.A. in Guatemala
The two ranking Senators overseeing the Central Intelligence Agency said today that they would ask the Justice Department to determine whether senior C.I.A. officials broke the law by not telling Congress that the agency's paid agents in the Guatemalan military were suspected of murder and torture.
Senator Arlen Specter, chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, and Senator Bob Kerrey, the vice chairman, said the agency had "knowingly misled" the committee about the depth of human rights abuses by the Guatemalan agents.


Clinton Declines to Free Israel Spy
In a meeting on Thursday, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel appealed to President Clinton to free Jonathan Pollard, the American who is serving a life sentence for spying for Israel, according to White House aides and Israeli officials.
But Mr.
Clinton said he did not have that option under the judicial process, according to the White House spokesman, Michael D. McCurry.
Until Mr.
Pollard becomes eligible for parole, Mr.
Clinton can only consider clemency recomendations from the Justice Department, and he said none had been presented.


A Resolute Anand Squeaks Through a Dangerous Endgame
During a hard endgame battle in Game 13 of the world chess championship, Viswanathan Anand survived yesterday thanks to some imperfect technique by Gary Kasparov.
The two players agreed to a draw after 3 hours and 13 minutes.
Thus, Kasparov retained his one-point lead, now at 6 1/2-5 1/2.
Afterward, Kasparov was surely disappointed that he could find no way to counter the inspired defensive moves that the challenger threw at him.
And some of the grandmasters present said that Kasparov should have won with correct play.
"His winning chances looked very good," said Ron Henley, a New Jersey grandmaster.


In the N.H.L.'s Future: Olympics, Labor Peace
Olympic participation in 1998, a World Cup tournament for next year and five seasons of uninterrupted labor peace appear to be on the immediate horizon for the National Hockey League.
An agreement between the league and the players' union that contained the formula for all three was approved yesterday at a meeting of the N.H.L.
Board of Governors at a midtown hotel.
The league will shut down its season for 16 days during February 1998 so that N.H.L. stars can represent at least six nations during the Nagano Olympics in Japan.
The regular season would remain 82 games.


Bridge
An expert will occasionally depart from the standard conventions of defensive card play because the prospect of deceiving the declarer is far greater than the danger of deceiving the other defender.
This arises frequently when the second defender is known to have negligible assets, so his understanding of the situation is unlikely to matter.
An excellent example occurred in the final of the Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championship in Phoenix in April.
North-South arrived in three no-trump, showing length in both red suits.
West was Michael Kamil of Teaneck, and he knew that he needed to develop spade tricks.
And since he held 14 high-card points, he knew that his partner held little or no high-card strength and would have little role to play.


Gruesome Serial Killings Bewilder South Africa
In a huge field in this Johannesburg suburb, whose distant borders are a prison and the slime dams of old gold mines, the bodies of 10 women -- some newly killed, some much decomposed -- were found recently by a rabbit-hunter.
The field was littered with mysterious trash: knives, crosses, mirrors, burned Bibles, bodies of birds stuck full of pins.
South Africa has entered the big time of modern crime.
It has a serial killer -- or several -- on the loose, and it has called in the American expert who coined the term to help -- a man who has never been to Africa before and does not think that makes a difference.


An Educator With Fire -- Daniel A. Domenech
In the words of his admirers and critics, and in his own words, Daniel A. Domenech sounds like a man suited for the pressures of politics as well as those of boardroom and classroom.
Anticipating the challenges he would face as chancellor, Dr.
Domenech echoed the catch-line about the Presidency of the United States: "This is not a job for anybody that doesn't have a fire in the pit of their stomach."


New Offerings Of Securities In Quarter Up 43% in Value
The value of new stock and bond offerings by securities firms grew 43 percent in the third quarter from the period a year ago, helped by a record level of corporate mergers and acquisitions, according to a report issued yesterday by the Securities Data Company.
The report is another sign that Wall Street is enjoying a banner year and recovering smartly from a lower level of profits and activity in 1994.
"The industry hit bottom about December of last year, and the third quarter is looking very solid, probably better than the second quarter," said Samuel G. Liss, a securities industry analyst at CS First Boston.


Boon for After-School Programs
The New Community Corporation, the largest nonprofit agency in the state, was awarded a grant of $200,000 yesterday by the Federal Department of Health and Human Services to run after-school and summer activities for children from poor families.
Msgr.
William J. Linder, the founder, said the money would be used this year at Newton Street School for arts programs and for museum trips.
"With this money, we will be able to do what the public schools don't have time for," he said.


Bakery Is Charged With Price-Fixing
Mrs.
Baird's Bakeries Inc. today became the first company charged in a nationwide investigation of possible price-fixing and bid-rigging in the wholesale bread industry.
A grand jury in Dallas indicted Mrs.
Baird's Bakeries and its former chief executive, Floyd Carroll Baird, on charges that the bakery company conspired with others for more than 15 years to keep bread prices high in Texas, the Justice Department said.


Man Convicted in 1980 Murder
It took 13 years to identify him and another two years to bring him to trial, but a jury needed just seven hours of deliberations to convict Paul Edmund Mackey, 36, of the 1980 murder and robbery of a Fairview music store owner.
Ralph Lilore, Bergen County's Assistant Prosecutor, said that the authorities did not even have a suspect until 1993, when fingerprints lifted from the murder scene were submitted to a new automated fingerprint identification system in New York.
They matched those of Mr.
Mackey, who had been convicted of robbery there in 1986.


Tensions Rise in Dallas After Racial Slurs by School Official
A tape recording of a white school board member using a string of racial slurs and obscenities to describe school administrators, students and teachers has touched off a firestorm of protests in this city where racial tensions were already running high after Louis Farrakhan had to move his speech from a local high school.
At a news conference this afternoon, the board member, Dan Peavy, apologized for racial slurs contained in a transcript anonymously mailed to board members on Thursday.
The transcript was read to the entire board at its Thursday night meeting.


Sports of The Times; Showalter Can Manage The Details
BUCK SHOWALTER knows something.
I'm not always sure what it is, but there's something.
Showalter has been looking composed in this wild-card race, and he looked like a methodical genius as the Yankees staged a stunning 4-3 victory against the Blue Jays last night.
Known for his support of his players, Showalter let Pat Kelly bat for himself, even with Kelly's ugly .238 looming on the Skydome scoreboard.
Kelly justified the manager's faith by whacking a two-run homer they will long remember -- "but only if," Showalter said.


Kerkorian Hires Activist On Rights of Shareholders
Kirk Kerkorian has added another deft strategist with ties to big institutional investors to the team he is assembling to take on the Chrysler Corporation, possibly in a proxy fight.
Mr.
Kerkorian has hired Ralph Whitworth, a Washington-based shareholder activist with a sharp eye for issues like executive compensation that excite shareholders and grab headlines.
He earned a reputation as a corporate giant-killer by successfully pushing for changes in the way directors are selected at companies as large as I.B.M. and Westinghouse.


Train Riders Help Design Car Interiors
With the slyly insistent help of a moderator, a young man in a business suit broke his silence and told a group of strangers what was in his heart.
Blue and green together, he said, "was subduing and peaceful," but surrounded by green alone, "I felt like a leprechaun."
In another room, another group watched on closed-circuit television, nodding sagely and scribbling down the wisdom of Everyman.


Observer; Coming Out of the Cave
I am turning over a new leaf.
Giving up my old stick-in-the-mud ways.
Kissing the past goodbye.
So long, you old past, you.
I am going modern.
Starting today I want to do nothing ever again that is not as up-to-date as the telemarketing call I just received.


Beliefs
There will be a lot of new faces on television next week.
Some will be perched above clerical collars.
Others will simply be introduced as heads of Roman Catholic organizations or professors at Catholic universities.
They will be to the visit of Pope John Paul II what the networks' legal commentators are to the O. J. Simpson trial, or what former skating and skiing champions are to broadcasts from the winter Olympics.
They are the papal experts, analysts and, in some cases, spin doctors.
Just as Scott Hamilton introduces ice skating fans to the finer points of triple axels and triple lutzes, these commentators will be there to lead viewers through a papal Mass, tell them what the Pope's white skull cap is called (a zucchetto) or compare this journey to America with his previous ones.


60 Years Later, an Ohio State-Notre Dame Reunion
They arrived by train the last time, six decades ago, when Notre Dame and Ohio State produced one of the most memorable games in the history of college football.
The last time the Fighting Irish and the Buckeyes filled Ohio Stadium, before the existence of the current polls, even before the marching band's invention of Script Ohio, Notre Dame's dramatic comeback for a last-minute 18-13 victory was considered the Game of the Century.
Sixty years later, it is difficult to challenge the label.
As the Irish arrived this afternoon after a brief flight, they found themselves in a position similar to that of the 1935 Notre Dame team.
Four weeks removed from the loss to Northwestern, the Irish will face an Ohio State team that may be the school's strongest since the 1979 Buckeyes took a No. 1 ranking to the Rose Bowl and lost a national championship by a point.


Still Fighting Over Food Vendors
Countless New Yorkers know what it is to snatch a bagel and coffee off a food cart on their way into the office.
They know what it is to find all the stools in the lunch counters in midtown taken -- and to settle for a hot dog, gyro or falafel from the corner vendor.
Sidewalk food vendors, then, are a welcome addition to the Manhattan landscape -- albeit not recognized as such by certain merchants' associations or City Hall.
In 1983 the Koch administration came up with a law that prohibited food vending, in order to relieve congestion, on more than 100 streets.
It was rarely enforced until Mayor Rudolph Giuliani pressed the police last year to do so, displeasing a public used to an inexpensive noonday nosh.


Excerpts From Final Rebuttal Arguments by Prosecutors in Simpson Case
Following are closing arguments, excerpted by topic, by Deputy District Attorneys Christopher A. Darden and Marcia Clark yesterday in Los Angeles in the trial of O. J. Simpson in the slayings of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman, as transcribed by The New York Times: MR.
DARDEN  No One Above the Law
The law is a tough thing to enforce in this town.
Not everybody, not everybody wants to live up to the law, or follow the law.
Not everybody thinks that the law applies to them.
I have been a prosecutor for almost 15 years and if there is one rule that I have lived by, if there's one rule that means a lot to me, it's this one: No one's above the law.
Not the police, not the rich, no one.
And I hope you agree with that.
I hope you agree with that rule; I hope you consider that motto, O.K.?
Simpson isn't above the law.  Everybody Knows
You can't send a message to Fuhrman, you can't send a message to the L.A.P.D., you can't eradicate racism within the L.A.P.D. or within the L.A. community or within the nation as a whole by delivering a verdict of not guilty in a case like this where it is clear, and you know it is clear, you feel it, you know it, you know it in your heart, you know it.


A Contagious Crankiness Inside the Capitol, and a Baroque Zoo Outside
Teased by a sunny day and the prospect of a recess to test the down-home politics of what they have been trying, members of both houses of Congress brandished a crankiness today that was contagious, with Republicans balking at critical votes on leadership bills.
A reduction to nonarticulation seemed to threaten the place as politicians bucked their traces.
Outside, hired actors in chicken, gorilla, horse and other costumes scampered about the Capitol grounds bearing simplistic messages about complexities like Medicare.


Race Cards and Rebuttals
With one egregious exception, the lawyers on both sides of the O. J. Simpson double-murder trial met high standards in their long-awaited closing arguments.
The exception was the claim by Johnnie Cochran that acquittal of his client was dictated not only by the evidence but also by the jury's need to stand up against a racist legal establishment with Hitlerian potential.
Mr.
Cochran, showing the knack for the theatrics that successful trial lawyers need, argued forcibly and fairly that the racism and perjury on the part of former Los Angeles detective Mark Fuhrman cast doubt on Mr.
Fuhrman's credibility and justified skepticism about some evidence.
But he crossed a line when he urged the jury to look beyond the specifics of the O. J. case and send a broader message that would help "police the police" everywhere and stop further misbehavior by racist cops.


Rebuff to Leaders
House Republicans, angry over the handling of issues as diverse as abortion and mining rights, rebuffed their leadership by joining with Democrats to defeat two major spending bills.
Article, page 9.


Terror at a School


Mixed Signals Over Status Of Iran Deal
The Chinese Foreign Minister asserted today that the sale of two Chinese nuclear reactors to Iran was merely suspended "for the time being" and not canceled as American officials reported two days ago.
On Wednesday, after Foreign Minister Qian Qichen met for nearly two hours with Secretary of State Warren Christopher, a senior American official told reporters that the pending sale of the 300-megawatt reactors, a key irritant in Chinese-American relations, had been terminated.


Devils Win Lemieux Case
After contemplating Claude Lemieux's case for nine days, the arbitrator George Nicolau yesterday ruled in favor of the Devils and against the most valuable player in the Stanley Cup playoffs last summer.
In a 2-day-17-hour hearing, Lemieux claimed that he was a free agent because the Devils had failed to properly execute his contract agreement of March 22, which called for $5.2 million over four years.
Lemieux, who signed his contract on fax paper on June 30, claimed that the Devils had also backdated the document.


When Community and Police Work Together
To the Editor:
A proposed referendum about the Newark Police Department (news article, Sept. 24) can only result in more alienation between the City Council, Police Department and the residents they serve.


French Police Kill Algerian Suspected In Bombings
The French police said today that they had shot and killed the most wanted man in France, a 24-year-old Algerian identified as the leading suspect in a wave of terrorist bombings.
They said the man, Khalid Kelkal, opened fire as the police tried to arrest him just before 8 P.M. at a bus stop in a village called The White House, near Lyons.
The police fired back, killing him.


Olajuwon-O'Neal Match Off
The $1 million one-on-one match between Hakeem Olajuwon and Shaquille O'Neal, planned for tonight in Atlantic City, was canceled yesterday.
Organizers said that Olajuwon had a recurrence of a lower back injury suffered last week in London.
Olajuwon appeared healthy and did not mention any back ailment at a news conference for the event Thursday in Manhattan.
But Leonard Armato, Olajuwon's agent, said his client's injury was not a convenient excuse to cancel the event, which was sponsored by Taco Bell.
"We were 100 percent optimistic about what we were going to do," he said.
Showtime Event Television had no early gauge of pay-per-view sales for the event.


Realist Painters Protest Whitney
Striking a defiant note, about 200 Realist painters gathered outside the Whitney Museum of American Art yesterday to register their grievance that the museum excludes work by artists working in a representational mode.
As speaker after speaker mounted a podium to denounce the museum as an academy of the hip and the trendy, museumgoers worked their way past the crowd and filed inside to see the exhibition on Edward Hopper, a Realist whose name was invoked repeatedly during the demonstration.
"The only good Realist is a dead Realist in this museum," said Sigmund Abeles, a painter.
Placards held aloft signaled the general mood.
"Get Real-ism," one read.
Another showed a sculpture by Gertrude Vanderbilt Whitney, with the words, "If Gertrude Vanderbilt Whitney were a sculptor today, her work would be rejected by the Whitney Museum." Whitney was the founder of the museum.
Another placard showed a Velazquez portrait with a cartoon bubble that read: "So, Realists aren't artists anymore?"


Perot Puts A New Face In Charge
Ross Perot has found a top former I.B.M. executive to help mind his computer services company while he's out forming a third party.
James A. Cannavino, who was I.B.M.'s chief strategist, will become the president and chief operating officer of the Perot Systems Corporation on Monday, industry sources said today.
Mr.
Cannavino's arrival offers further evidence of the revival of Perot Systems, dismissed for years as a mere Electronic Data Systems wannabe.
Earlier this month, the company announced a partnership with the Swiss Bank Corporation that will nearly double its revenues to about $600 million a year.


Forgery Jolts G.O.P. Effort To Limit Some Lobbying
Under pressure from House Democrats, Republicans in the House today apologized for faking a news release to end what they call "welfare for lobbyists." But in a sign of how contentious the lobbying issue has become, the apology was not accepted by the Democrats or by the organization whose letterhead was forged.
The apology came from Representative David M. McIntosh, an Indiana Republican who is co-sponsoring a measure that would limit the amount of private money that groups can spend on lobbying.
Democrats contend that the measure is intended to silence small nonprofit groups that have opposed budget cuts sought by Republicans.


Romulo Escobar Is Dead at 68; Helped Panama to Regain Canal
Romulo Escobar Bethancourt, Panama's chief negotiator in 1977 when the United States agreed to give up control of the Panama Canal, died on Thursday at a hospital in Panama City.
He was 68.
The cause was throat cancer, local news reports said.


Medicare-Medicaid Plans Pass A Hurdle, With Bow to New York
The Senate Finance Committee early this morning approved Republican plans to curb the growth of Medicare and Medicaid, the health programs for the elderly and the poor, endorsing changes that would significantly reduce the fiscal burden of Medicaid on high-income states like New York.
With today's vote, taken shortly after midnight Friday, the overall legislation cleared a major hurdle.
The vote, 11 to 9, followed party lines, with all the negative votes cast by Democrats.
The passage of the bill is one of the Republicans' top priorities for the 104th Congress, a crucial element of their plan to balance the budget by 2002.


Flamenco Hall of Fame Of Styles and Dancers
Against a luminescent field of color, the camera lingers on the sharply etched silhouettes of a group of dancers and musicians seated behind a table.
Slowly the lights rise, and stern, weather-beaten faces become visible.
At an unseen signal, a guitarist lashes into an austere flamenco refrain, and a dancer rises and whirls out onto the floor, heels clacking.
As the music gathers momentum, reinforced by claps and shouts, a furious compressed energy is released.
The claps and clacking heels fuse in cross-rhythms that accelerate and intersect with a blinding velocity as the dancer bends, twists and whirls in rigid, angular movements.
Every gesture and musical accent expresses a fierce, implacable hauteur, a harsh mixture of pain and pride, along with an erotic fire whose flame is barely contained.


G.O.P. in House Rebels On 2 Major Spending Bills
Two major spending bills endorsed by the Republican leadership were defeated in the House today as Republicans who are angry over issues like abortion and mining rights joined the Democrats in opposing them.
The House refused to pass House-Senate compromises on bills for the Defense and Interior Departments, which account for roughly a quarter of the budget.
Such compromises are usually adopted routinely; their defeat today was seen as a rebuff for the Republican leadership.
The votes reflected the increasing difficulty that Republicans have had with spending bills complicated by ideological overtones, troubles they will face again when Congress returns from next week's recess.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Stocks End Quarter Quietly; Treasury Yields Drop  The stock market ended the third quarter quietly, with the Dow industrials closing up 1.44 points, to 4,789.08.
The Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index closed at 584.41, down 1.46 points, and the Nasdaq composite index closed at 1,043.54, down 3.51 points.
For the week, the Dow rose 24.93.
In late New York trading, the dollar was at 1.4270 German marks, up from 1.4200; at 1.1560 Swiss francs, up from 1.1465, and at 99.70 Japanese yen, up from 99.22.  [ 32. ] G.D.P.
Up a Revised 1.3%  Gross domestic product grew at a revised 1.3 percent in the second quarter, up from the previous estimate of 1.1 percent, bolstering the picture of a safe and steady expansion.
Although the quarter was the weakest in more than two years, it kept alive an expansion that is four and a half years old.  [ 34. ] Kerkorian Adds to His Team  Kirk Kerkorian has hired Ralph Whitworth, a Washington-based shareholder activist, to the team he is assembling to take on Chrysler.
The hiring is further evidence that Mr.
Kerkorian is planning a drawn-out campaign to change the way Chrysler is run.  [ 35. ] Fed Rate Decision Was Unanimous  The Federal Open Market Committee voted 11-0 to hold the Federal funds rate for overnight bank loans at 5.75 percent at its Aug. 22 meeting, minutes showed.
A report showed that leftover wheat supplies were below traders' expectations and that exports were nearly 9 percent ahead of last year's pace.  [ 32. ] Near-record wheat prices and a sharp increase for lettuce raised the index of prices farmers received for their raw products by 2.9 percent from August to September.  [ 34. ] For-Sale Signs Over Britain  Britain seems caught up in a free-market frenzy, with everything from banks, to public buildings, to a slice of British Rail all up for sale.
The rush to the auction block began in the 1980's, when state-owned enterprises like airlines and telephone systems were for sale.
Now, services once performed by the Government are being farmed out to private entrepreneurs.  [ 2. ] Wall Street Raises Funds for Casino  The Mohegans, a Connecticut Indian tribe, announced that Bear, Stearns and Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette had helped them raise funds to open a casino 10 miles from the successful Foxwoods Resort Casino in eastern Connecticut.
The tribe expects to open a 150,000-square-foot casino with 3,000 slot machines and 180 table games.  [ 26. ]


WILSON, TRAILING IN VOTERS' POLLS, DROPS 1996 QUEST
His campaign coffers empty and his standing in the polls negligible, Gov.
Pete Wilson withdrew today from the 1996 Presidential race, the first in the 10-man Republican field to quit.
"My conscience tells me to go on would be unfair to all whose higher hopes simply will not be met," the 62-year-old Governor said in a brief lunch-hour resignation speech here to several hundred cheering supporters and campaign workers.
But come the year 2000, he added pointedly, he might try again.


Corrections
A television review on Monday about the PBS series "Rock-and-Roll" misstated the role of station WGBH in Boston.
WGBH is a co-producer of the series, along with the BBC.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about Palestinian reaction to the signing of the Israeli-P.L.O. agreement misstated the location of the Dahaishe refugee camp in the West Bank, where a fence was torn down.
It is outside Bethlehem, not in Hebron.


Mellons Donate 85 Works of Art
The National Gallery of Art in Washington has received a gift of 85 works of art valued at more than $50 million from the private collection of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Mellon.
The gift includes 14 Impressionist and Post-Impressionist paintings by such artists as Cezanne, Gauguin, Degas, Toulouse-Lautrec, Manet, Bonnard, Vuillard and Braque.
"This is the largest gift I've ever had the honor of accepting," Earl A. Powell 3d, the gallery's director, said yesterday.
"It's a pretty fabulous group of primarily French 19th-century masterpieces and will add depth to an already great collection."


Franco's Following Is Growing Again
Two months ago, John Franco looked like the unhappiest man in baseball.
The Mets had traded his two best friends, Bobby Bonilla and Bret Saberhagen, leaving him with a clubhouse of teammates barely above the drinking age.
Franco talked of being on an island, a castaway with not much hope for future good times.
Jump ahead to yesterday afternoon.
It was about 5 P.M., more than five hours before Franco would put the finishing touches on the Mets' 6-3 victory over the Atlanta Braves by collecting his 28th save.


Faithful Look for Pope to Light Way and Lighten the Load
Beneath the overpass in Washington Heights where Roberto Lopez makes a living selling roses, Pope John Paul II's visit to New York is seen as a sign.
His family's hard life will soften in the presence of the Holy Father.
He is sure of it.
"The greatest thing would be to see him," Mr.
Lopez said as he kept watch for police officers -- he does not have a license to peddle flowers -- and waved bouquets at passing cars.
"It would be a miracle."


Poet Lived to Record Prison Ship Horrors
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 23 news article about the Prison Ship Martyrs' Monument in Fort Greene Park in Brooklyn memorializing the 11,500 American heroes who died in New York Harbor during the Revolutionary War brings to mind one of our distinguished poets, Philip Freneau, who at the age of 28 barely survived six torrid weeks of barbarous detention on one of those prison ships and -- yet worse -- a hospital ship.


Weak Signs In Economy Help Bonds
Yields of Treasury securities hit a two-week low yesterday on weak economic data, which raised market expectations that the Fed might still have the opportunity to reduce interest rates this year.
The data released yesterday were August new-home sales, the final revision of second-quarter gross domestic product, the Chicago Purchasing Managers report and the University of Michigan sentiment survey.
All showed weaknesses in the economy and thus were seen as helping to justify higher bond prices.


CSX Will Pay Whistle-Blower $1.18 Million
When he told officials of the CSX Corporation's giant railroad subsidiary in 1991 about cost overruns on Government-financed programs, A. David Nelson said, he expected a pat on the back.
Instead, Mr.
Nelson contended last year in a Federal whistle-blower lawsuit, he was told by his bosses to keep his mouth shut or face being dismissed.
Yesterday, a Federal judge in Washington signed off on a settlement that would cost the company $5.9 million, of which about $1.18 million would go to Mr.
Nelson.
At issue were inflated labor and equipment charges for work done by CSX at highway railroad crossings in more than 10 states.


2 Presidents and a King Talk About Peace Talks
A day after the signing of an agreement on Palestinian self-rule, President Clinton met today with King Hussein of Jordan and President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt to try to advance the stalled peace efforts between Syria and Israel.
Despite the excitement over the Israeli-Palestinian agreement, no one was predicting that Syria would soon join the Middle East "circle of peace" that Mr.
Clinton called for on Thursday, since the differences between Syria and Israel remain so wide.


Corrections
An obituary on Aug. 31 about Fischer Black, a Wall Street economist, misidentified the professor who was instrumental in adding Mr.
Black to the faculty of the University of Chicago.
He was Merton H. Miller, not Robert C. Merton.
This correction was delayed by an editing lapse.


Midwestern Druids Did It
"Mommy, it's raining red, and it's warm!" cries a little boy dressed up in a Halloween angel costume and standing under a tree.
Moments later, a dripping corpse plops down from above, but the camera lingers barely long enough to take note of the body.
Such is the accelerating rate of carnage in "Halloween: The Curse of Michael Myers."
Talk about overkill, if you'll pardon the expression.
Easily the most inept episode of the "Halloween" series, "The Curse of Michael Myers," which opened yesterday, is so busy cramming half-baked supernatural rigmarole into its formula that it has forgotten how to be suspenseful.
In trying to explain the behavior of Michael Myers, the indestructible, white-masked serial killer who still haunts the northern Illinois town of Haddonfield, the movie resorts to talk of ancient Druid rites.


PRUDENTIAL INSURANCE TO SELL ALL OF REINSURANCE UNIT
The Prudential Insurance Company of America said yesterday said that it would sell all of its Prudential Reinsurance Holdings unit, not just 40 percent, as previously announced.
Goldman, Sachs, the lead underwriter, said the initial public offering would now include 44 million shares, not 20 million.
The deal is expected to be priced and begin trading on the New York Stock Exchange next week.
An additional 6 million shares could be offered for sale, depending on market conditions, the company said.
The offering price was estimated to be between $15 and $18 a share.


CHRONICLE
LEROY NEIMAN, the artist, has lived in New York for 35 years, but he had never been to Columbia University until about a year ago, and it took him by surprise.
"I couldn't believe the classic look of it sitting right in the middle of the city, with a very impressive campus, looking like the Vatican," he said this week.


Bowie Calling It Quits
SAM BOWIE, who was chosen before MICHAEL JORDAN in the 1984 draft, said yesterday that he was retiring after 11 injury-plagued years.
Bowie, 34, said he wanted to spend more time with his family.
Bowie played for Portland from 1984-89, then spent four seasons with the Nets and his final two years with the Lakers.
The 7-foot-1-inch center averaged 10.9 points and 7.5 rebounds. (AP)


Concert That Almost Wasn't
It only looked like a job action when a mere 20 members of the New York Philharmonic took the stage of Avery Fisher Hall at 8:30 on Thursday evening, a half-hour after the scheduled start of the concert.
In fact, the orchestra had decided moments before not to strike -- not yet, at least -- and the reduced complement onstage was the backup band for the three soloists in Bach's "Brandenburg" Concerto No. 5 that had been intended all along.
But not surprisingly, concentration seemed to come and go in the first half of the program, on the part of both restive audience and preoccupied players.
The Bach, loosely played to begin with, threatened to spin out of control in the harpsichord playing of Wolfgang Schonheit, the organist of the Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra. (Ah, for an orchestra with a decent organ, let alone an organist!) Mr.
Schonheit approached the extended cadenza with an improvisatory freedom that proved more quirky than rhapsodic, and he seemed in pounding bass chords to want a bigger instrument, preferably with pedals.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMERICAN EAGLE OUTFITTERS INC., Warrendale, Pa., announced it had signed a letter of intent to sell its 35 outlet stores to its vice chairman, Sam Forman, for as much a $16 million, depending on the value of the inventory.
EMERALD CAPITAL HOLDINGS INC., Pensacola, Fla., announced it had agreed in principle to acquire Sportade International Inc., a bottler and distributor of sport beverages, for an undisclosed amount INTERNATIONAL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT CORP., Mattawan, Mich., a safety evaluator of drugs and chemicals, has filed for Chapter 11 protection in U.S.
Bankruptcy Court in Wilmington, Del.
The company has listed liabilities of $26.7 million and assets of $27.7 million in its petition.
NORTH FORK BANCORP, Melville, L.I., announced it had agreed to purchase the 10 Long Island branches of First Nationwide Bank for $37.5 million in cash.
The branches have total deposits of about $590 million.


It's Boot Camp or the Judge
A squad of recruits is due to report to the Middlesex County Police Academy for the county's first session of boot camp for juvenile offenders this morning.
Completion of the 12-week series of Saturday morning sessions reduces probation by six months.
"The hammer we have over them is that if they violate any of the rules, they're immediately washed out of the program and they go back before the judge for sentencing," said the Middlesex County Prosecutor, Robert W. Gluck.
JOE SHARKEY


Judge Finds Need for Oversight of Shelter System
A State Supreme Court justice yesterday said that she may appoint an independent director to oversee the city's system for sheltering homeless families if officials do not improve conditions at the Bronx office that serves as the citywide intake center.
The justice, Helen E. Freedman, said that during a tour of the Emergency Assistance Unit office at 151 East 151st Street in Mott Haven yesterday, she found people with serious medical problems and women with weeks-old babies spending the night in the overcrowded center.


Witnesses' Claim Is Disputed
An autopsy of 24-year-old Robert Rodriguez, who was shot and killed during a struggle with the police on Monday night, found no scars or pressure marks that would indicate that he was handcuffed at the time, as some witnesses had claimed, officials said.
The autopsy also found a residue on the dead man's left hand which is given off when a gun is fired, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
Witnesses had said Mr.
Rodriguez was handcuffed when he was shot and killed.
The police said he was grappling over a gun with an officer when he was shot while trying to flee, after officers stopped his car for a traffic violation and found drugs.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  RABIN REBUKED JEWISH LEADERS  Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin on Thursday warned American Jewish leaders of a serious rift if they lobbied against the policies of the Israeli Government. 1


White House Front Is Getting New Look
The center of Pennsylvania Avenue in front of the White House is about to become a 40-foot-wide swath of green sod while plans go forward for building a new pedestrian plaza there, National Park Service officials said.
The park service announced its interim plans for beautifying the one-third-mile section of Pennsylvania Avenue, which has been closed to all but pedestrians for security reasons since May.
The plan, released on Thursday, calls for the concrete barricades and police cars that have been posted at the 15th and 17th Street intersections to be replaced with beige cast-concrete planters.


HIGH SCHOOL REPORT
Football
Lou Rettino, last year's national coach of the year, will be behind the bench again this afternoon when his team from Union, N.J., (1-0) plays host to Irvington (2-0).


The Art of Jury Reading; Lawyers in Terror Trial Study Every Tie
Since Sunday morning, the jurors in the terrorism trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and nine others have been locked in a heavily guarded room, wrestling with the prosecutors' assertion that the defendants plotted to wage "a war of urban terrorism" against America.
During eight months of testimony, lawyers on both sides have made an art of trying to read the jurors, who have been kept anonymous for their own security.
Like anthropologists studying a lost tribe, the lawyers have searched for clues to the jurors' thoughts in a roll of the eyes, a glassy stare, a wink, a sigh, an angry look.


Let Pakistan Have What It Bought
To the Editor:
To any informed observer "The Wrong Message to Pakistan" (editorial, Sept. 23) would be shocking as it echoes the argument of those who are least objective and rational on the issue, namely, the Indians.
You are wrong on at least five counts.


RESULTS PLUS
AUTO RACING  Irvan Gets Back Into Competition
Ernie Irvan, beginning his Winston Cup comeback, stole the spotlight from the pole-winner Ted Musgrave yesterday at North Wilkesboro Speedway in North Carolina.
Irvan, who sustained near-fatal injuries in a crash on Aug. 20, 1994, during a practice session at Michigan International Speedway, qualified seventh for tomorrow's Tyson Holly Farms 400 on the .625-mile oval.
Still bothered by double vision in his left eye, Irvan turned his lap of 117.641 miles an hour with a black patch fixed tightly over the damaged eye.


Somerset County Prosecutor Dismissed After Indictment
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman dismissed the Prosecutor of Somerset County today, a day after he was charged with several crimes in a Federal indictment that depicted him as a law-enforcement official with little regard for the law.
Governor Whitman instructed her Attorney General to take over the office of the Prosecutor, Nicholas L. Bissell Jr., and to appoint an acting prosecutor to serve until she chooses his successor.


Not So Quick on This Budget Elixir
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York believes he has uncovered a politician's dream: huge spending cuts and tax hikes that are too technical to understand or much notice.
Senator Moynihan proposes to adjust downward the Government's measure of inflation.
In one stroke, he could save the Treasury about $300 billion in inflation-adjusted payments over seven years -- enough to replace the G.O.P.'s Medicaid cuts without breaking a sweat.
The idea is promising, but Mr.
Moynihan's rush to grab these potentially large savings is premature.
The Government measures inflation by calculating changes in the Consumer Price Index -- the cost of a fixed bundle of consumer goods.
The inflation measure is used to adjust Government outlays and revenues.
For example, Social Security benefits are raised so that beneficiaries are insulated from rising prices.
Tax brackets are also raised so that taxpayers are not shoved into higher brackets merely because their incomes kept pace with prices.
The seductiveness of Mr.
Moynihan's suggestion is that few "victims" will know if a stealthy technical correction takes a bite out of money before it reaches their wallets.


Corrections
An article on Monday about a Republican conference in Michigan referred incorrectly to the employer of Morry Taylor, a candidate for the Republican Presidential nomination.
He is chief executive of a company that makes wheels and tires for heavy machinery and golf carts, not for automobiles.


Route 301 Journal; For Speeders in Florida, 20 Miles of Bad Road
In his 55 years behind the wheel, Paul Guyer had never known the anxiety of finding blue and red lights in his rear-view mirror -- until he made the mistake of speeding through this town of 700 people.
Capt.
Richard E. Cates of the Lawtey police was parked beneath a droopy weeping willow on the southbound side of U.S. 301 today when he clocked Mr.
Guyer's white Cutlass Ciera doing 50 in a 35 mile-per-hour zone.
After hearing the high-pitched squawk emitted by his radar gun, Captain Cates accelerated to more than 90 m.p.h. to catch Mr.
Guyer, a 71-year-old tourist from Altoona, Pa., and then handed him a ticket that carried a fine of $123.


Why Should Those Who Drive Pay for Others to Ride Trains?
To the Editor:
Re your Sept. 23 letters on Amtrak and the highways: Who should pay the costs to run a railroad?
The trust funds in the highway and airline industries are paid for by individuals who choose to drive or fly.
The Amtrak trust fund, as proposed by Amtrak, would not come from rail users, but directly from the pockets of people who use highways.


CHRONICLE
For social cachet in the rarefied world of science, it would be hard to top the group that assembled at the Temple of Dendur in the Metropolitan Museum of Art on Thursday evening.
Sixty-five past winners of the Albert Lasker Medical Research Awards were in the crowd of about 300 scientists, researchers and physicians there to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the awards. (The 1995 awards were presented at a luncheon yesterday in the Pierre Hotel.)


Surprise From the I.R.S.: Easier Business-Expense Filing
The Internal Revenue Service, after years of complaint from business, unexpectedly eased one of the most irksome paperwork burdens today and will no longer require receipts for business travel and entertainment unless the expense exceeds $75.
Since 1962, the threshold has been $25.


A Comical Frenchman of Long Ago
One of the unexpected treats of this year's New York Film Festival is nearly as old as movies themselves.
"Discovering Max Linder" is a program of seven shorts directed by and starring the French actor, who was one of the first great silent-film comedians.
The program may carry a whiff of the past, but it is one of the freshest and often funniest shows on screen.
"Discovering Max Linder" will be presented only once, this afternoon at 3:30, with piano accompaniment by Jean-Marie Senia and introductions to each film by Maud Linder, the actor's daughter.
Rarely seen and little known today, in his own era Linder was beloved around the world.
Charlie Chaplin acknowledged his debt to Linder's wry, graceful comic style, which also influenced Buster Keaton and Harold Lloyd.
The shorts collected here, made between 1912 and 1916, reveal why.
Linder's recurring character of Max is a self-assured man in top hat and tails, with a cane, who fumbles his way out of one jam after another while gently satirizing the bourgeoisie.
Linder set the standard for Chaplin and the others by creating slapstick situations that grew out of sticky social problems. (Usually a well-bred lady sets a task that Max fulfills in spite of himself.) Yet his style was so purely physical that these little stories are rarely broken by intertitles.


No Peace for Qaddafi
Hundreds of Palestinians have been evicted from Libya in an effort to show the P.L.O. that peace with Israel is impossible.
Page 4.


Ruling Puts Magazine Closer to Publishing
Business Week magazine appeared a step closer today to publishing an article based on sealed court documents in a lawsuit between the Procter &amp; Gamble Company and the Banker's Trust Company.
Since Sept. 12, Business Week has been barred from publishing information from the documents.
The Federal judge who issued that order, John Feikens, indicated in a hearing today that he would allow Procter &amp; Gamble to amend its suit in a way that would in effect open the documents, which include information that Bankers Trust prefers remain private.


Prosecution Wraps Up Its Case, And Simpson's Fate Goes to Jury
As the sound of Nicole Brown Simpson's anguished voice reverberated for perhaps the final time throughout the courtroom, and photographs of both her battered face and the bloody corpse of Ronald L. Goldman flashed on a screen, prosecutors completed their murder case against Orenthal James Simpson today, and Judge Lance A. Ito gave it to the jury.
After hours of minute and largely listless summation, Deputy District Attorney Marcia Clark brought the case back with a surge of emotion to the tangled and tortured relationship at its core.
She played a tape of one of Mrs.
Simpson's frantic calls to 911, in which she exclaimed: "He's back. He's O. J. Simpson. I think you know his record." It was a record, Ms.
Clark said, that led a healthy 30-year-old woman to draw up a will.


Painting Words of Welcome the Pope Won't See


Clyde Culbertson, 89, Medical Researcher
Clyde G. Culbertson, a medical educator and researcher who developed a process that enabled the Salk polio vaccine to be mass-produced, died on Wednesday at a nursing home in Columbus, Ind.
He was 89.
The cause was cancer, said Dr.
James W. Smith, a colleague at Indiana University, where Dr.
Culbertson was affiliated for 70 years.


Corrections
A headline yesterday about the indictment of the prosecutor of Somerset County, N.J., misstated the number of charges against him.
Thirty charges in the 33-count indictment involved the prosecutor, Nicholas R. Bissell Jr.; the other three involved his wife, Barbara.
Further developments are reported today on page 26.


Orchestra Players Set a Vote And a New Strike Deadline
After meeting to review the latest proposal by the New York Philharmonic's management, the players' committee representing the musicians announced yesterday that the full orchestra would vote on the proposal on Monday and Tuesday.
The committee also prepared a counterproposal, in case the management proposal fails.
And they have set a second strike deadline for next Thursday at 7 P.M., an hour before the orchestra's next concert in Avery Fisher Hall.
"I'm quite disappointed that they didn't come to a resolution," said Stephen Stamas, the chairman of the board.
"They have not come back to us with any kind of reaction to the proposal, so I don't know what it is that they find wanting. We have gone the extra mile, and I only hope that they ratify it on Monday, because I think a strike would be tragic."


Statements by Goldstein, Giuliani and Gresser on the Termination of a Candidacy
Before the announcement yesterday of the selection of Daniel A. Domenech as New York City Schools Chancellor, statements were issued by Leon M. Goldstein announcing that he was withdrawing as a candidate to be chancellor and by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
Carol A. Gresser, president of the Board of Education, responded to Mr.
Goldstein's statement with one of her own.
Following are excerpts of Mr.
Goldstein's and Mr.
Giuliani's statements and the full text of Ms.
Gresser's.
Leon M. Goldstein
Having spent the last 24 years as president of Kingsborough Community College, providing educational opportunities for our city's young people, I was most honored and excited to be selected as a finalist for the post of New York City schools chancellor.
I was honored to have earned the trust and support of Mayor Giuliani and other officials.
I was excited, because I knew that working with the Mayor, I could make real and lasting changes in our city's troubled public school system, changes that would enhance the lives of so many children.
I knew I would be an effective manager and an innovator, because I've been there, and proven myself time and time again. . . .
Despite this record of achievement, a campaign by one person -- Board of Education president Carol Gresser -- has made my candidacy untenable.
With a barrage of leaks, innuendo and unsubstantiated charges that show no sign of abating, I am left with no choice but to withdraw my name from consideration to become New York City's next schools chancellor.
I believe my record at Kingsborough Community College speaks for itself.
And that is why my critics resorted to malicious, personal attacks -- because there was nothing in my record as an educator to attack.
This is the most difficult decision I have ever made.
Walking away from a challenge -- walking away from our city's school children -- goes against everything in my nature.
But I must walk away from this process to protect my family and myself.
My attackers struck their lowest blow when they alleged that my wife, who holds an Ed.D. from Teacher's College at Columbia University and has spent 27 years as an educator, was hired in 1984 as a dean at John Jay College of Criminal Justice through my influence.
The charge is preposterous on its face and does a grave disservice to a dedicated educator and a wonderful wife and mother.
As it was reported to me, I am appalled at the way Ms.
Gresser has cynically manipulated the media to disseminate rumors and half truths.
I learned about an incomplete confidential report about me the same way the rest of the city did -- by reading the newspapers.
I never had a chance even to see the report and respond to the unsubstantiated charges beforehand, in confidence, and with dignity, as should have been the case.
Reasonable people may differ on my candidacy, but I am certain they would all agree that a process that attempts to personally discredit a candidate through the dissemination of incomplete reports and unsubstantiated accusation is intolerable.
This blatant manipulation of a critical selection process, this public trial by rumor, has been humiliating and grossly unfair to me, to my wife, to my friends and family.
But ultimately, this sad and troubling series of events has done the most harm to the children of our city, who are being held captive by a public school bureaucracy that will go to any lengths to preserve itself.
Mrs.
Gresser has emerged as the champion of the status quo, determined to destroy anyone who might reform the system.
Today, I withdraw my name from the chancellor selection process, having been victimized by unfair and unprincipled accusers.
But I cannot see myself as a victim.
I return to a job I love -- running one of the nation's finest community colleges.
Sadly, tragically, the real victims in this ongoing ordeal are the city's public school children and it is their future -- not mine -- that should be our most important concern.
Thank you. Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani
I learned that he was considering withdrawing this morning.
And I talked with him this morning and asked him to think it over and not make the decision immediately, because I thought he should stay in and I thought he would prevail if he did.
When I talked to him, he had made the decision with his wife that it was necessary to withdraw, because he felt that this hounding of his family would continue.
I think that a lot of this has to do with his family circumstance.
That leaves you in a position where you really can't put a lot of pressure on someone to stay in it, when it has to do with their families. . . .
The process has been seriously tainted.
Handing a confidential document that contains raw allegations that haven't been analyzed and haven't been investigated and haven't been proven, to hand that over to the press, when the document says all over it confidential, it taints the process.
It does more than taint the process.
It seriously damages it, because it says to lots of other people that this is not a process they can have confidence in.
It is insecure, it is unprofessional and it's one in which if you can't defeat a candidate in any other way, you'll defeat the candidate by attempting to destroy their character and reputation and by giving out confidential documents against any sense of ethics or decency.
They should move to appoint an interim chancellor to give themselves enough time to consider a broad range of candidates and also to let a little time pass.
I know some of the things that have been done to look into those allegations.
And I can't say that we've looked at every single one of them, I think most of them, and a number of them are untrue.
And a number of them are exaggerated and some of them are just flat out made up.
I have to note the following fact.
About a week ago when three candidates were finalists, Carrol Gresser said that all three of them were well qualified.
And had words of praise for all three.
All of a sudden, she became the devout enemy of one of those candidates, and the major change of circumstance was that I announced support for him.
So I think that I fully expected that, which is why I withheld announcing support until the end.
I fully expected that if I were to state which candidate I supported that you would see a reaction against that candidate.
Carol A. Gresser
I am genuinely sorry for the pain that Leon Goldstein and his family has felt during what must have been a difficult ordeal over the last few days.
But Mr.
Goldstein has it backwards: my concerns about him grew from the questions raised in the press, not the reverse.
I know it must be difficult for him to admit it and I hesitate to point it out, but if anything forced Mr.
Goldstein to withdraw, it was his own unwillingness to publicly and forthrightly address the questions raised.
This has no doubt been a painful period for Mr.
Goldstein, but I think it is unlikely that he truly believes that Carol Gresser was able to orchestrate a campaign of press scrutiny.
Such a claim vastly overestimates my influence, dramatically underestimates the perseverance and energy of the press corps, and completely ignores his own contributions to the questions that have surfaced about him.
Had I as much influence as he suggests, surely I would have used it long ago to try to minimize the drubbing that the school system and I routinely take in the press.
Clearly, I did publicly state my opposition to Mr.
Goldstein's candidacy and my reasons for it.
I thought it was important to do, because we were losing the point of the chancellor search process.
The chancellor selection process should be a search for excellence on behalf of the students, not a political compromise on something less.
We are a great city with a great school system, and we deserve nothing less.
While I think it will give him little comfort, I would like Mr.
Goldstein to know that The New York Times had a copy of the investigator's report long before I did.
Like he, I am none too happy about this.
And like he, I first learned about the contents of the report from press who first read about it in early editions of The Times.
I respect Mr.
Goldstein's decision and I wish him well.
Now I believe it is time for all of us to move forward.


METRO DIGEST
SCHOOL BOARD DECIDES ON CHANCELLOR
The Board of Education voted, 4 to 3, to select Daniel A. Domenech as Chancellor for New York City's public schools after a turbulent day that began when Leon M. Goldstein, Mayor Giuliani's choice, abruptly withdrew from consideration.
The Mayor said Dr.
Domenech was unacceptable to him.  [ Page 1. ]  Anticipating the challenges he would face as chancellor, Dr.
Domenech said in an interview, "This is not a job for anybody that doesn't have a fire in the pit of their stomach." [ 1. ]
By insisting on Mr.
Goldstein, whose principal qualification was his complete agreement with the Mayor's goal of City Hall control over the school system, Mr.
Giuliani lost the opportunity to find common ground with the Board of Education.
News Analysis.  [ 23. ]
For the better part of a week, Carol A. Gresser, the president of the Board of Education, stood alone as the only one of the seven members to publicly declare her opposition to the Mayor's choice for schools chancellor.
But yesterday the board narrowly voted for the candidate of her choice.  [ 22. ] ADELPHI PRESIDENT'S PAY RANKLES SOME
Adelphi University's enrollment has dropped 25 percent in a decade.
Dormitory rooms are vacant, course offerings are dwindling, copy paper is rationed, workers have been laid off.  and last month the campus radio station was abruptly closed.
But in the midst of all this cutting, the university's president has received $523,636 in salary and deferred bonuses, making him the second-highest-paid university president in the nation.  [ 1. ] NEW YORK CITY  SHELTER SYSTEM MAY GET OVERSEER
A State Supreme Court justice said she may appoint an independent director for the city's system that shelters homeless families if officials do not improve conditions at the Bronx office that is the citywide intake center.  [ 23. ] ANOTHER DRAW IN CHESS CHAMPIONSHIP
During a hard endgame battle in Game 13 of the world chess championship, Viswanathan Anand survived and the game ended in a draw, due to some imperfect technique by Kasparov.
He retained his lead, now at 6 1/2-5 1/2.  [ 24. ] REGION  2D CONNECTICUT CASINO ADVANCES
A Connecticut tribe, the Mohegans, have raised more than $150 million on Wall Street to open a casino 10 miles from Foxwoods.
By the fall of 1996, at a cost of $250 million, the Mohegans expect to open a 150,000-square-foot casino with 3,000 slot machines and 180 table games.  [ 26. ] TRAIN RIDERS DESIGN CAR INTERIORS
Focus groups have long been a tool of sellers of everything from soap to political candidates, but this month, for the first time, they are being used to help the Long Island Rail Road design trains, specifically a fleet of double-decker coaches for use on diesel lines.  [ 24. ] SOMERSET COUNTY PROSECUTOR DISMISSED
Governor Whitman dismissed the Prosecutor of Somerset County a day after he was charged with several crimes in a Federal indictment that depicted him as a law-enforcement official with little regard for the law.  [ 26. ] Chronicle 20


London Journal; For Sale (More or Less): Sceptered Isle, No Less
It may be that the ghost of Adam Smith is roaming the land, or that Karl Marx has finally settled into his grave at Highgate Cemetery, but suddenly Britain seems caught up in a free-market frenzy.
Everything that is anything is up for sale.
Would you like to buy a bank?
They are going fast, mostly to European buyers.
How about a slice of British Rail?
It can be arranged, though Paddington Station takes a bit more doing.
How about the Treasury Building on Parliament Square?
It's up for grabs.


States Can Lead Way On the Environment
To the Editor:
"Unfit Stewards" by Sam Schuchat (Op-Ed, Sept. 20) is a curious counterpoint to the growing trend of devolving authority for environmental programs to the states.
The states have had and continue to have a particularly important role in our national environmental progress -- a role that should be expanded if the United States is to advance its international leadership role.


President's Pay Rankles Some at Adelphi
On the eve of Adelphi University's centennial year, the quiet of the small, suburban campus should not be mistaken for serenity.
Enrollment has dropped 25 percent in a decade.
Dormitory rooms are vacant, course offerings are dwindling, copy paper is rationed, workers have been laid off and last month the campus radio station was abruptly closed.
The chief architect of these painful budget cuts is Adelphi's longtime president, Peter Diamandopoulos, 67, a Harvard-trained philosopher who preaches passionately to his faculty and students about the need for a "radical recasting of the academy" and the value of "frugal spending."


BOARD, DEFYING THE MAYOR, PICKS LONG ISLAND OFFICIAL TO HEAD THE CITY'S SCHOOLS
The Board of Education, over Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's vehement objections, announced last night that it had decided, 4 to 3, to select Daniel A. Domenech as Chancellor for New York City's public schools, after a turbulent day that began when Leon M. Goldstein, the Mayor's choice, abruptly withdrew from consideration.
Dr.
Domenech, the Superintendent of Schools for western Suffolk County on Long Island, would become the 23d Chancellor of the nation's largest school system -- one with more than one million students, a budget of $8 billion and nagging problems, from overcrowded classrooms to crumbling schoolhouses.


No Headline
"My conscience tells me to go on would be unfair to all whose higher hopes simply will not be met." -- GOV PETE WILSON, dropping out of the Presidential campaign.  [ 1:3. ]


M. A. Van Nostrand, Play Licenser, 84, Dies
M.
Abbott Van Nostrand, who for 38 years served as president and chief executive of Samuel French Inc., the largest licenser of plays in the English-speaking world, died on Wednesday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 84.
From 1952 until his retirement in 1990, Mr.
Van Nostrand presided over the agency, which publishes the works of many major playwrights and licenses the works of thousands more to professional theaters, amateur groups and high school drama clubs throughout the world.


Many of the Dying Qualify for Hospices
To the Editor:
Re Edward J. Halloran's Sept. 17 letter on hospice care:


Rabin Rebukes U.S. Jewish Groups on Lobbying
Just hours after he signed a peace agreement with Yasir Arafat, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel moved on to another battle.
In a meeting on Thursday with leaders of American Jewish groups, he sternly warned that lobbying against Israeli Government policies could cause a serious rift in Israel's relations with the Jewish community in the United States.


In Deal With Clinton, Helms Agrees to Move Ahead on Envoys
Senator Jesse Helms agreed today to allow the Senate to consider more than 30 ambassadorial appointees and other Presidential nominees after the Administration agreed to work with him on a bill to restructure its foreign policy bureaucracy.
As part of a two-month campaign to press the Administration to take him more seriously, Senator Helms, a North Carolina Republican, had also halted business meetings of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, which he chairs; blocked 400 State Department promotions, and refused to allow the Senate to ratify any treaties, including the nuclear nonproliferation treaty and the Chemical Weapons Convention.


Goodbye and Good Grief
It is always reassuring to watch the collapse of a campaign built on a particularly ugly message.
The thought is prompted by the withdrawal of Gov.
Pete Wilson of California from the Presidential race.
Many political professionals and commentators believed Mr.
Wilson would become a public favorite and a force in the campaign.
But he spent the past few months steadily disabusing his fans of any such hopes.
He did it with a distorted message about immigrants and with a late-blooming hostility to affirmative action.
It is possible to argue Mr.
Wilson's positions in a responsible way, but his approach seemed mean and heavy-handed, even to some influential New Yorkers who originally intended to support him.


Corrections
A chart yesterday describing what Congress must still do on the budget referred incorrectly to House action on Medicaid.
The House has not yet passed revisions in that program.


Clinton Woos Congressional Leaders on Sending Troops to Bosnia
President Clinton sought today to build support for his longstanding pledge to send American troops to help enforce a peace agreement in Bosnia, consulting with Congressional leaders who declined to embrace the idea without more details but were careful not to reject it, either.
"I believe the United States should be a part of implementing the peace process; I have said that for almost three years," Mr.
Clinton said before the hourlong meeting with Congressional leaders of both parties.
"I don't see how, as the leader of NATO and basically the leader of the West, we can walk away from that. And I think the American people, once I explain it to them, will go, will be supportive, and I believe the Congress will."


Verdict Favoring Singer's Estate Is Upheld
Extolling the reggae king Bob Marley as a messenger of "peace, brotherhood, African unity and international morality," a Federal appeals court yesterday upheld a verdict that Marley's lawyer and accountant schemed to defraud his estate of millions of dollars.
Mr.
Marley, an international superstar who sold millions of records, died of brain cancer at 36 in 1981.
In its decision, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit said that for five years after Mr.
Marley's death, his lawyer, David J. Steinberg, and his accountant, Marvin Zolt, "developed and implemented numerous schemes that allegedly diverted foreign music assets and royalty income from Marley's estate to themselves."


Charles Simon, 83, Investment Banker
Charles J. Simon, a retired general partner at Salomon Brothers investment bank and a philanthropist, died on Wednesday at home in Manhattan.
He was 83.
He had been in failing health with varied ailments, said Steve Loeb, his lawyer.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
4.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.00
6.05
5.44
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.24
5.26
4.64
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.32
5.35
5.20
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.17
6.26
7.60
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.50
6.59
7.81
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.45
7.53
8.66
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.07
6.13
6.58
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


To Lower Voting Cost
To the Editor:
The New York State Legislature could help localities save tens of thousands of dollars by amending the state election laws for primary elections.


Sabonis Is a Blazer
Nine years after drafting him, the Portland Trail Blazers signed the 7-foot-3-inch Lithuanian ARVYDAS SABONIS to a contract yesterday.
Sabonis, 30, said he wanted to be known as "Sabos," his nickname in Europe, and he said he was excited about going against "the greatest players in the world."


A New Mood Outside the Courthouse
The autograph hounds, T-shirt vendors, street preachers and paparazzi who have crowded in front of the courthouse for months received a surprise this morning.
The police had blocked off the building's Temple Street entrance, herding the hawkers and banner-toting zealots to distant corners.
The move reflects a change in the mood here as the O.J.
Simpson trial nears an end.
Gone is the sometimes euphoric spirit of the early days.
In its place is a somber, more rancorous and, to some, even slightly dangerous atmosphere.


Policy Review at Arts Center
The newly named private operators of the Garden State Arts Center are reviewing longstanding policies that give state employees and subscription members first crack at concert tickets and often keep reserved seats unavailable to the general public, Rodney Eckerman, president of Pace Facilities Group, said yesterday.
Pace Facilities is part of the new management partnership designated on Thursday to operate and expand the arena.
Under the center's current policies, the 10 top officials of the Highway Authority receive four free reserved tickets to each concert.


Mariners Are on Verge Of Winning First Title
Mariners 4, Rangers 3
The Seattle Mariners clinched a tie for the American League West title last night with a come-from-behind, 4-3 victory over the host Texas Rangers.


Trolley Line Is Under Way
A shovelful of dirt for the Hudson-Bergen Light Rail Transit System was hoisted yesterday by Frank J. Wilson, Commissioner of the State Department of Transportation at the future site of the park-and-ride lot just west of the Liberty Science Center.
New Jersey Transit expects the Bayonne-Jersey City-Hoboken portion of the $1.3 billion trolley line to be in operation by 1999.


Second Tribe to Open a Casino, This One With Wall St. Money
Four years ago, when the Mashantucket Pequot Indians needed $55 million to build the Foxwoods casino in eastern Connecticut, no bank in the nation would touch the deal.
They had to go to Malaysia to borrow the money.
Today, another Connecticut tribe, the Mohegans, announced that they had raised triple that amount on Wall Street to open a casino 10 miles from Foxwoods.
Two of the nation's pre-eminent investment banking houses, Bear, Stearns &amp; Company and the Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Securities Corporation, handled the $175 million bond issue.


